 Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward a 'Third Way' Cass R. Sunstein Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward a 'Third Way'" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 65, 1999). Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes toward a “Third Way” Cass R. Sunstein This paper can be downloaded without charge at: The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Publications/Working/index.html The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/paper.taf?abstract_id=143174 Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes toward a “Third Way” Cass R. Sunstein* I. Introduction The so-called communications revolution has been driven by technological change. The rise of cable television, the Internet, satellite television, “direcTV,” and digital television has confounded ordinary understandings of “television.”1 Before long, digital television may enable viewers to choose among over a thousand programs.2 The possible combination of television and the Internet—a combination now in its early stages—may prove an equally dramatic development.3 Law has responded to these developments in fits and starts, largely by attempting to engraft legal requirements designed for the old environment onto an altogether new communications market. The result is a high degree of anachronism, misfit, and drift, and in the view of many observers, a series of constitutional violations.4 * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science.  From 1997 to 1998, the author served on the Advisory Committee on the Public Service Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters, which produced a report in December 1998. See Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Public Interest Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters, Charting the Digital Broadcasting Future (1998). The author is grateful to other members of the Advisory Committee for many helpful discussions of these problems, and in particular to the two co-chairs of the Committee, Norman Ornstein and Leslie Moonves. The Committee’s Final Report has influenced the treatment here, not least when there are disagreements. He is also grateful to Douglas Lichtman, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner for valuable comments. 1 See Bruce Owen, The Internet Challenge to Television 311-26 (1999) (discussing this possibility with some skepticism about its feasibility, but also dealing with other dramatic technological developments). 2 See Lawrie Mifflin, As Band of Channels Grows, Niche Programs Will Boom, N. Y. Times, Dec. 28, 1998, at A1. 3 See Owen, supra note 1, at 311-26. 4 See Thomas Krattenmaker and L.A. Powe, Converging First Amendment Principles for Converging Communications Media, 104 Yale L.J. 1719, 1725 Chicago Law and Economics Working Paper Most of the modern debate involves a vigorous but increasingly tired contest between those defending the old regulatory order5 and those urging rapid movement toward “simple rules” for government control of television, above all well-defined property rights and freedom of contract.6 My aim in this Article is to discuss a small but important part of the intersection between the emerging communications market and law: public interest obligations imposed on television broadcasters. Since the initial rise of broadcasting in the United States, government has treated the license as a kind of “grant” that is legitimately accompanied by duties.7 Congress and the FCC have required broadcasters to follow a range of requirements—a form of old-style “command-and-control” regulation, growing out of an understanding that there would be three, and only three, private broadcasting stations. Much, though far from all, of this regulation was eliminated in the 1980s.8 A large question is the extent to which public interest requirements continue to make sense, or even to in an entirely different survive constitutional scrutiny, communications market. (1995); Mark Fowler and Daniel Brenner, A Marketplace Approach to Broadcast Regulation, 60 Tex. L. Rev. 207, 210 (1982); the various contributions to Rationales and Rationalizations: Regulating the Electronic Media (Richard CornRevere ed. 1997). 5 This is the general thrust of Lee C. Bollinger, Images of a Free Press (1991); Owen M. Fiss, The Irony of Free Speech (1996). 6 See Rationales and Rationalizations, supra (offering a number of essays challenging any role for governmnent aside from the definition and enforcement of property rights); Richard A. Epstein, Simple Rules for a Complex World 275-306 (1996) (discussing environmental protection, and a general account of the role of government, in a way that is easily adapted to the area of communications). 7 See below. 8 See below. 9 The Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104, 110 Stat. 56 (codified in scattered sections of 47 U.S.C. §§ 151-613 and amending the Communications Act of 1934). Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) Should the licenses be sold, or auctioned, or given outright to existing broadcasters? Second, what public interest obligations—if any—should attach to the ownership of a right to broadcast digital television? The Act squarely answered the first question but was silent on the second. 10 In an extremely controversial step, Congress did not sell or auction the right to broadcast digital television, but basically gave the right to existing broadcasters for free.11 This has sometimes been described as a “$70 billion giveaway.”12 At the same time, Congress refused to eliminate public interest obligations and delegated to the FCC the power to decide whether such obligations should be imposed on digital television broadcasters, and if so in what form.13 The FCC has not yet made that decision or even commenced formal proceedings. issues and able to make judgments on the basis of reasons. Educational programming, and programming that deals with civic questions, can promote that aspiration; reliance on an unregulated market may not. There are also legitimate grounds for encouraging broadcasters to make programming accessible to people with disabilities, above all the deaf. I emphasize in this connection some special characteristics of the broadcasting market, characteristics that make it hazardous to rely on the ideal of “consumer sovereignty” as the exclusive basis for regulatory policy. 15 A question not addressed here is the content of any minimal requirements; I emphasize the more flexible alternatives as the instruments of choice, without denying the need for some minima as a “backstop.”  In the current system, for example, it may well make sense to require a degree of children’s programming and also free air time for candidates. See Final Report, supra note *. The precise extent of mandatory programming is beyond the scope of the present discussion, though I do refer to mandates at several points below.. 16 See generally Neil Cunningham and Peter Grabosky, Smart Regulation: Designing Environmental Policy 422-48 (1999); Anthony Ogus, Regulation 121149, 245-56 (1998); National Academy of Public Administration, The Environment Goes To Market 12-55 (1994). 17 The principal exception can be found in an illuminating symposium issue in an Australian law review, see Symposium, Industry Self-Regulation, 19 Law & Policy 363 (1997). Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) Through requiring broadcasters to disclose information about their public interest activities, government may be able to enlist public pressure and social norms so as to create a kind of competition to do more and better. This is the simplest and least intrusive of regulatory instruments. By allowing broadcasters to buy their way out of certain public interest obligations, government should be able to ensure that those with an incentive to produce good programming are actually doing so, and also to produce lowest-cost means of promoting public interest programming. And through encouraging (not mandating) voluntary self-regulation, government can help broadcasters to overcome a kind of prisoner’s dilemma faced by participants in a “winner-take-all” market,18 a prisoner’s dilemma that contributes to a range of social problems, often stemming from a kind of “race to the bottom” with respect to programming quality. disclose goods and bads, independent of any regulatory requirements; of relaxing the antitrust laws so as to permit cooperation designed to reduce some of problems associated with both “winner-take-all” markets and “races to the bottom”; of distinguishing between market-suppressing and marketsupplementing remedies; of building on emerging developments in environmental protection so as to allow far more imaginative “trades” among producers of social goods and bads; and of greatly expanding the repertoire of regulatory tools to be used by officials concerned with market failures (or market successes that disserve social goals). In short, it is time to move beyond the view that market ordering and content regulation are the two possibilities for communications law. There are many alternatives, and real progress can come only from exploring the choice among them. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) II. History, Puzzles, Problems A. A Brief Historical Overview20 Broadcast licenses have never been treated like ordinary property rights, open for sale on the free market. Since the initial enactment of the Communications Act of 1934, the government has awarded licenses to broadcasters in accordance with the “public interest, convenience, and necessity.”21 The Federal Radio Commission early described the system as one in which broadcasters “must be operated as if owned by the public. . . . It is as if a community should own a station and turn it over to the best man in sight with this injunction: ‘Manage this station in our interest . . . .”22 Under this “public trustee” standard, the FCC has imposed a range of obligations on broadcasters. Often this kind of guidance operated as a general plea, with little systematic enforcement. In 1960, however, the FCC went so far as to outline fourteen of the “major elements usually necessary to the public interest.”25 These included religious programming; program for children; political broadcasts; news programs; sports programs; weather and market services, and development and use of local talent. The FCC eventually specified its general guidelines, which were intended merely as “indicia of the types and areas of” appropriate service. The specifications included minimum amounts for news, public affairs, and other non-entertainment programming, including the controversial “fairness doctrine,” and also access rules for prime-time.26 Broadcasters were required to limit advertising time, maintain program logs, and ascertain local community needs.27 Substantial changes occurred in the 1980s, a period of significant deregulation. The head of the FCC, Mark Fowler, declared that television is “just another appliance,” a “toaster with pictures.”28 The fairness doctrine was largely eliminated, and many of the more particular public interest requirements were removed.29 Nonetheless, a number of such requirements remain. For example, the FCC continues to say that if a broadcaster sells airtime to one candidate, it must sell similar time to opposing candidates as well. Congress itself has codified a right of this kind.30 A longstanding statutory provision requires that if a broadcaster offers to sell time, it must do so at the “lowest unit rate of the station” during the 45 days before a primary election and during the 60 days before a general or special election.31 Recent years have seen special attention to children’s programming and to deaf people’s access to television. In 1990, Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) Congress enacted the Children’s Programming Act of 1990,32 which requires broadcasters to provide three hours of educational programming per week, and which also limits the advertising on children’s programming (12 minutes per hour during weekdays and 10/5 minutes per weekends).33 A statute enacted in 1990 requires new television sets to have special decoder chips, allowing them to display closed captioned television transmissions.34 The Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires use of “v-chip” technology, designed to facilitate parental control over what enters the home; it also contains ancillary requirements intended to ensure “ratings” of programming content.35 Turn now to the present, or at least to the recent past. From 1997 to 1998, a presidential advisory committee met to discuss the public interest obligation of television broadcasters.36 Several of the broadcasters on the Committee were quite skeptical about governmental mandates, but highly receptive to the idea of adopting some kind of broadcasting “code,” akin to the kind approved and administered by the National Association of Broadcasters between 1928 and 1979. The Committee eventually moved toward endorsing the notion of a code, and the idea received considerable attention, mid-deliberations, in the trade press. officials are smiling when they discuss the possibility that certain action would be found unlawful. C. Identifying the Problem To evaluate particular proposals, it is necessary to have a concrete sense of why some people think that even well-functioning television markets are inadequate. Consider the following possibilities, each of which has produced public concern in the last decade37: 1. There may be insufficient educational programming for children. The existing fare may be insufficient because there is too little simply in terms of amount, or because children do not watch the stations on which it is available, or because the quality is too low. 37 For different angles, see, e.g., Final Report, supra note; Hamilton, supra note, at 3-50 (discussing violence); Newton Minow and Craig LaMay, Abandoned in the Wasteland: Children, Television, and the First Amendment 10-45 (1995) (discussing children) Danny Schechter, The More You Watch, The Less You Know (1997) (discussing content of news). 38 See Hamilton, supra, at 20-30, for evidence. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) 3. Programming may not be sufficiently accessible to people who are deaf or hard of hearing; this may be a particular problem if citizens are unable to find out about emergencies.39 4. There may be too little coverage of serious issues, especially during political campaigns. The relevant coverage may involve sensationalism and “sound bites,” or attention to who is ahead (“horserace issues”) rather than who thinks what and why. The result may be an insufficiently informed citizenry.40 5. There may be too much violent programming in general, with adverse consequences for adults, not only children.41 The adverse consequences may include an increase in violence (because of changes in social norms or “copycat” effects42), general demoralization and fear, or a misperception of reality. 7. At least on the major networks, programming may be too homogenous, in a form of “blind leading the blind” programming. Since a significant percentage of Americans do not receive cable television, and depend on broadcasters, the result may be insufficient variety in programming.44 8. There may be too little substantive diversity of view—too little debate among people with genuinely different perspectives about issues of policy and fact. Here too, the result may be an insufficiently informed citizenry.45 9. The problem may be not homogeneity but heterogeneity, which may result in a highly balkanized viewing public, in which many or most people lack shared viewing experiences, or in which people view programming that largely reinforces their own convictions and prejudices. It has increasingly been urged that any objections to existing television are elitist or outmoded.47 On one view, public interest obligations have no place in modern law, particularly in light of the Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) decline of the “scarcity” rationale for regulation; it has even been urged that the FCC no longer has any appropriate role.48 A conceptual point first: Though many people claim to argue for “deregulation,” that route is not in fact an option, or at least not a reasonable one. What “deregulation” really means is a shift from the status quo to a system of different but emphatically legal regulation, more specifically one of property and contract rights, in which government does not impose specific public interest obligations but instead sets up initial entitlements and then permits trades among owners and producers. This is a regulatory system as much as any other. If it seems close to the current system for newspapers and magazines, it is no less a regulatory system for that; a great deal of law (inevitably) governs the rights and duties of newspapers and magazines. The only real form of deregulation is anarchy, and that is not an option. The issue is thus not whether to “deregulate,” but whether one or another regulatory system is better than imaginable alternatives. A. Three Market Failures51 A well-functioning television market would promote the ideal of consumer sovereignty. People would be able to choose from a range of options, and suppliers would cater to their tastes. To a considerable extent, of course, the existing system approaches this reality. But there are three serious problems, each suggesting that consumer sovereignty is not served by free markets in programming. This phenomenon introduces some serious distortions, at least if we understand an ideal broadcasting market as one in which viewers receive want they want. From the standpoint of consumer sovereignty, and taking viewers as consumers, the role of advertisers creates market failures. Of course broadcasters seek, other things being equal, to deliver more rather than fewer viewers, because advertisers seek, other things being equal, more rather than fewer viewers. To this extent the broadcasting market may well provide many or most viewers with what they “want.” But advertisers have issues and agendas of their own, and the interests of advertisers can push broadcasters in, or away from, directions that viewers, or substantial numbers of them, would actually like. 51 These are market failures if it is assumed that the purpose of a well-functioning television market is to ensure that programming is well-matched to viewer preferences. 52 See C. Edwin Baker, Advertising and A Democratic Press 25-87 (1994). Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) attract groups that are likely to purchase the relevant products, and this affects programming content.53 Advertisers do not want programming that draws product safety into question, at least not if it is their own products, and sometimes more generally.54 In addition, advertisers want programming that will put viewers in a receptive purchasing mood, and hence not be too “depressing.”55 Advertisers also tend to dislike programming that is highly controversial or that is too serious, and hence avoid sponsoring shows that take stands on public issues.56 In these ways, the fact that broadcasters are delivering viewers to advertisers—this is largely their charge, under existing arrangements—can produce offerings that diverge considerably from what would emerge if viewers were paying directly for programming. To this extent the notion of consumer sovereignty is seriously compromised. signals provided by the words and deeds of others.59 The result can be to produce cascade effects, as B follows A, and C follows A and B, and D, as a rational agent, follows the collected wisdom embodied in the actions of A, B, and C. Informational cascades can produce unfortunate outcomes, in fact outcomes far worse than those that would result if individuals accumulated information on their own. Sometimes, moreover, people use the “availability” heuristic, by which an event is measured as more probable if an instance of its occurrence can be brought to mind.60 Using the availability heuristic, broadcasters might reason that if one show or another has attracted substantial viewers in the past, they should copy it. The result would be “fads” and “fashions” in programming.61 In theory, then, broadcasters might be building on the programming judgments of other broadcasters, often, perhaps, reacting to the “availability” of salient recent instances in which a particular program was especially popular (dealing, let us suppose, with the O.J. Simpson trial) or especially unpopular (dealing, let us suppose, with South Africa). If this is true, private decisions by b r o a d c a s t e r s  m a y a n d homogeneity—mistakes in the form of programming unlike what viewers want, and homogeneity in the form of the “blind leading the blind.”62 Recent evidence suggests that the theoretical account has considerable truth. A careful study shows that there is a good deal of simple imitation, as networks provide a certain kind of programming simply by imitating whatever other networks are doing.63 Recently 59 In a related vein, see Andrew Caplin and John Leahy, Miracle on Seventh Avenue: Information Externalities and Search, 108 Econ. J. 60 (1998). 60 See Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan. L. Rev. 163 (1999). 61 See note supra. 62 See David Hirshleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and Informational Cascades, in The New Economics of Human Behavior 188 (Mariano Tommasi & Kathryn Ierulli eds., 1995). 63 See Sushil Bikchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others, 12 J. Econ. Persp. 151. 164 (1998); Robert E. Kennedy, Strategy Fads and Competitive Convergence: An Empirical Test for Herd Behavior in Prime-Time Television Broadcasting (Harvard Business School, January 1998). Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) popular shows tend to create cascade effects. This imitative behavior is not in the interest of viewers. On the contrary, it creates a kind of homogeneity and uniformity in the broadcasting market, and thus makes for problems in terms of providing what viewers “want.”64 This is not a conventional market failure, but it suggests that existing decisions are unlikely to promote consumer sovereignty. Most generally, there are multiple external effects in the broadcasting area; some of these are positive, but unlikely to be generated sufficiently by individual choices, while others are negative, and likely to be excessively produced by individual choices. Consider a decision to watch violent programming.69 In short, the effects of broadcasting depend on social interactions, and broadcasting produces a range of collective goods and collective bads. Many of the resulting problems are connected with democratic ideals. Thus, for example, a culture in which each person sees a high degree of serious programming may well lead to better political judgments; media portrayals of violence can produce harm to others; greater knowledge on the part of one person often leads to more knowledge on the part of others with whom she interacts.70 Perhaps most important, a degree of serious attention to public issues can lead to improved governance through deterring abuses and encouraging governmental response to serious problems. In these various ways, public interest programming can produce social benefits that will not be adequately captured by the individual choices of individual citizens; the same is true for programming that produces social costs, including increased criminal activity.71 B. Problems on Non-Market Criteria: Children, Deliberative Democracy, and Related Issues Many people object to purely market approaches to television.72 Perhaps television is not best understood as an ordinary commodity, subject to the forces of supply and demand. There are several reasons why this might be so. The unifying theme is that the American political tradition is committed to the ideal of deliberative democracy,73 an ideal that has animated first amendment doctrine and media regulation in general.74 Even if the media market were well-functioning from the economic point of view, there would be room for measures designed to promote a well-functioning system of Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) democratic deliberation, especially in view of the importance of television to people’s judgments about what issues are important, and about what it is reasonable to think.75 1. Children and the hearing-impaired A well-functioning market may fail to serve certain categories of viewers. Of these the most obvious is children, who may be poorly served by an absence of educational programming76 or adversely affected by violent programming.77 It is possible to treat the resulting problems as “externalities,” but the more natural conclusion is that the television market is creating difficulties even in the absence of a market failure. Because television has a significant role as an educational instrument, the failure to serve children is a significant problem.78 A well-functioning market may also disserve people who are hard of hearing, if they are deprived of access to television by the existing use of technology, a particular problem if they are unable to watch the news or to understand descriptions of emergency conditions. Here too there is potential room for a regulatory response, partly in order to include deaf people in civic activities by informing them of electoral issues and news in general. broadcasters are providing a good deal of public interest programming, dealing with serious issues in a serious way, many members of the public will cultivate a taste for that kind of programming. This effect would promote democratic ideals by fostering information and helping to increase deliberation.80 In an era in which broadcasters are carrying sensationalistic or violent material, members of the public may well cultivate a taste for more of the same. “Free marketeers have little to cheer about if all they can claim is that the market is efficient at filling desires that the market itself generates. . . . Just as culture affects preferences, so also do markets influence culture. ”81 If this is so, the ideal of consumer sovereignty is placed under some pressure; market activities cannot easily be justified by reference to tastes that they themselves generate. This point should not be overstated. Undoubtedly broadcasters have limited power to push tastes very dramatically in one direction or another. At a minimum, the idea that viewers’ tastes are endogenous to existing fare should be taken as a cautionary note about treating consumption choices as decisive for purposes of policy. Combined with the point to follow, it suggests that there is nothing illegitimate about policies that depart from consumption choices in favor of widely held social aspirations. But there is reason for broader concern about the adverse effects of certain kinds of programming—including a failure to cover serious issues in a serious way—on democratic judgments.82 3. Citizens, consumers, and precommitment strategies There is a difference between what people want in their capacity as viewers (or “consumers of broadcasting”) and what they want in their capacity as citizens.83 Both preferences and values are a function of the setting in which people find themselves; they are emphatically a product of social role. In these circumstances, it would be wrong to Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) think that the choices of individual viewers are definitive, or definitional, with respect to the question of individual preference of value. On the contrary, a democratic public, engaged in deliberation about the world of telecommunications, may legitimately seek regulations embodying aspirations that diverge from their consumption choices. Participants in politics may be attempting to promote their meta-preferences, or their preferences about their own preferences; they may be attempting to carry out a precommitment strategy of some kind; they may be more altruistic or other-regarding in their capacity as citizens, perhaps because of the nature of the goods involved; they may be more optimistic about the prospects for change when acting collectively.84 When participants in democracy attempt to make things better, and do not simply track their consumption choices, it is not helpful to disparage their efforts as “paternalism” or as “meddling.” Consumers should not be confused with citizens; this is a form of democracy in action.85 Thus it is entirely appropriate for government to respond to people’s aspirations and commitments as expressed in the public realm. This is especially so when a democratic polity is itself attempting to ensure more in the way of democratic deliberation. These points suggest that there is good reason, in principle, for some kind of regulatory response to existing markets in television. But nothing said thus far argues for any particular governmental initiative. There is no simple “match” between the identifiable market and nonmarket failures and public interest requirements in general. For example, it is hard to imagine a legitimate governmental response to the problem of excessive homogeneity on the major networks. Any such response is likely to correct only a piece of the problem, as through, for example, efforts to encourage more serious coverage of political campaigns. We have also seen that existing public interest obligations are extremely varied; each of them must be assessed on its own. At first glance, policies that attempt to promote better programming for children are most securely supported by the arguments made thus far (as a response to what is reasonably classified as a market failure, and also as a way of increasing positive externalities and of promoting social aspirations). Efforts to ensure that deaf people are able to enjoy television, through closed captioning, are justifiable on similar grounds. There is room also for efforts to ensure better coverage of electoral campaigns—perhaps through a requirement of free air time for candidates, perhaps through a private “code” designed to ensure more substantive discussion. Disclosure requirements, allowing the public to have a general sense of broadcaster performance, seem to be justified as a non-intrusive method for allowing civic aspirations to help influence future programming. As a response to possibly unfortunate effects on advertiser pressures, and also as a way of ensuring against a destructive “race to the bottom” with respect to programming content, a general code of broadcaster behavior seems appealing (see Part VII below). Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) In view of the great diversity of the broadcasting market, a “one size fits all” approach may be far more costly, and less effective, than creative alternatives. The arguments offered thus far have not specifically addressed the new market in communications. An especially important question is whether emerging changes in television technology strengthen the case for satisfaction with market outcomes. have access to five or six stations.89 This means that about two-thirds of viewers have access to between fifty and one hundred stations., including the all-news stations C-Span and CNN, and a range of “soft news” stations such as MSNBC. By itself this is an extremely significant change, and the shift from this situation to one in which most people have access to (say) 500 stations may be only one of degree. More dramatic innovations are coming in the future, with the possible ultimate “convergence” of various television sources, including digital television and the Internet.90 If a “television set” becomes akin to a computer monitor that provides access to the full range of American magazines, would not the case for public interest regulation be substantially weakened? The foregoing discussion offers an ambivalent answer. Some of the problems with the market status quo would dissipate, but others would remain. Let us explore these questions in more detail. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) than other providers, but are decreasingly distinctive in terms of either the size or nature of their audience. More people will have access to cable or other options, and many of those who rely on broadcasting will be able to have more options too. But broadcasters will continue to be seen by a disproportionate number of people, if only because a shrinking but still substantial percentage of viewers will continue to have access only to broadcasters; this significant subgroup is important partly because of its sheer size (unlikely to drop below 20% for at least a decade) and partly because it includes an especially high percentage of people, including children, who are poor and poorly educated. In this stage, broadcasters will in some ways be akin to Newsweek, Time, and US News and World Report, in the sense that they will have a relatively dominant role in terms of sheer numbers. But they will have to compete with other programmers, some general, some specialized, with analogues (most of them now in place) to Sports Illustrated, The Economist, Dog Fancy, National Review, National Geographic, the New Republic, Consumer Reports, Playboy, and many more. This third stage will be marked by the rise of digital television, which is allowing broadcasters to “multiplex,” that is, to provide two, three, four, or even five programs where they could previously provide only one. The result may be to make broadcasters themselves more specialized.91 It is hard to predict the future here, but the best prediction is that a situation of this kind will prevail for the next decade and more. 91 See note supra. 92 This shrinkage may or may not occur as a result of convergence. For discussion, see Owen, supra, at 312 (“Whether convergence is inevitable, or even likely, is still unclear”). the analogy to Time or Newsweek, they will be have a somewhat larger and more general audience than most of their competitors. Perhaps they will not be distinctive at all. The most extreme version of this final stage would be akin to the market for books, where people make individual choices, not filtered by some intermediary offering packages.93 2. Regulatory options and technological change Each of the arguments offered here makes sense for old regime and the transitional state. They also seem to make sense for the emerging third stage of multiple options; recall that even here, a substantial segment of the public will depend on broadcasters only, and people with access to cable and other alternatives continue, statistically speaking, to watch a disproportionate amount of broadcast fare. But arguments for public interest obligations would be less sensible as applied to a market in which broadcasters occupy no special role, partly because some of the relevant problems would be diminished, partly because in such a market, it seems peculiar to impose on broadcasters, and no one else, a special duty to protect public interest goals. In that market, perhaps everyone should be faced with some of the requirements discussed below (in particular the disclosure requirement). But the case for others (such as uniform mandates, a broadcaster-only code, or pay or play) would be weakened, not least since it would seem arbitrary to single out broadcasters for such requirements. 93 I put to one side the complexities introduced by Amazon.com and various book clubs. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) than they now do. Thus two of the arguments made above—involving the market failures from advertiser pressures and from informational cascades—are significantly weakened. Of course these changes should not be overstated. Recall that 32% of American households with televisions do not have cable television, and that a substantial number of Americans are likely to depend on over-the-air programming for the not-too-distant future; hence the increasing heterogeneity is not quite as dramatic as it might seem. Chicago Law and Economics Working Paper abstract; everything turns on the particular regulatory proposal, and instrument, that is at issue. The question of adaptation will arise at several points below. For now let us observe only that in the extreme situation—when broadcasters are not in any sense distinctive—the case for regulation limited to broadcasting would be very weak, and alternative strategies, involving funding of public interest programming , would be better. Thus my emphasis here—on disclosure, economic incentives, and voluntary self-regulation—is designed for a (likely not inconsiderable) period in which broadcasters continue to occupy a special role. To simplify a complex story, the very long-term may call for a combination of public subsidies for high-quality programming and disclosure requirements for general-interest stations. But in the shorter term, there is a great deal more to consider. Consider a simple proposal: Broadcasters should be required to disclose, in some detail and on a quarterly basis, all of their public service and public interest activities. The disclosure might include an accounting of any free air time provided to candidates, educational programming, charitable activities, programming designed for traditionally under-served communities, closed captioning for the hearing impaired, local programming, and public service announcements.94 The hope, vindicated by experience with similar approaches in environmental law,95 is that a disclosure requirement will by itself trigger improved performance, by creating a kind of competition to do better, and by enlisting various social pressures in the direction of improved performance. A requirement of this sort would be part of a general trend in federal regulation, one with considerable promise.96 Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) A. Precursors Many statutes and regulations now require the disclosure of information. Some of these are designed to assist consumers in making informed choices; such statutes are meant to be marketenhancing. By contrast, others are designed to trigger political rather than market safeguards; such statutes are meant to enhance democratic processes. The most famous of these is NEPA. Enacted in 1972, the principal goal of NEPA is to require government to compile and disclose environmentally-related information before government goes forward with any projects having a major effect on the environment.97 NEPA does not require government to give environmental effects any particular weight, nor is there judicial review of the substance of agency decisions.98 The purpose of disclosure is principally to trigger political safeguards, coming from the government’s own judgments or from external pressure.99 Hence any governmental indifference to adverse environmental effects is perfectly acceptable under NEPA: the idea behind the statute is that if the public is not indifferent, the government will have to give some weight to environmental effects. Chicago Law and Economics Working Paper over 20,000 facilities.101 This has been an exceptional success story, one that has well exceeded expectations at the time of enactment.102 A detailed report suggests that EPCRA has had important beneficial effects, spurring innovative, cost-effective programs from the EPA and from state and local government.103 Many other statutes involving health, safety, and the environment fall in this general category. The Animal Welfare Act is designed partly to ensure publicity about the treatment of animals; thus covered laboratories are required to file reports with the government about their conduct,104 with the apparent thought that the reports will deter noncompliance and also allow continuing monitoring. In addition to its various command-and-control provisions, the Clean Air Act requires companies to create and disclose “risk management plans” involving accidental releases of chemicals; the plans must include a worse case scenario.105 The Safe Drinking Water Act was amended in 1996 to require annual “consumer confidence reports,” to be developed and disseminated by community water suppliers.106 Statutes governing discrimination and medical care also seem committed partly to the idea that “sunlight is the best of disinfectants”107; thus they require covered institutions to compile reports about their conduct and compliance with applicable law. The Federal Election Campaign Act requires political committees to disclose a great deal of information about their activities. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) Of course there is an overlap between informational regulation designed to assist consumers and informational regulation designed to trigger political checks. A statute that requires companies to place “eco-labels” on their products may produce little in the way of consumer response, but shareholders and participants in the democratic process may attempt to sanction those whose labels reveal environmentally destructive behavior. Companies will know this in advance, with likely behavioral consequences. The risk of sanctions from shareholders and state legislatures may well produce environmental improvement even without regulation.108 A great deal of recent attention has been given to informational regulation in the particular context of the communications industry. As an alternative to direct regulation, which raises especially severe first amendment problems, government might attempt to increase information instead. Thus the mandatory “v-chip” is intended to permit parents to block programming that people want to exclude from their homes; the v-chip is supposed to work hand-in-hand with a ratings system.109 Similarly, a provision of the 1996 Telecommunications Act requires television manufacturers to include technology capable of reading a program rating mechanism; requires the FCC to create a ratings methodology if the industry does not produce an acceptable ratings plan within a year; and requires that broadcasters include a rating in their signals if the relevant program is rated.110 Spurred by this statute, the networks have generated a system for television ratings, which is now in place.111 The question is whether disclosure requirements might be enlisted more generally. Why has information disclosure become such a popular regulatory tool? There are several answers. For various reasons, a market failure may come in the form of an inadequate supply of information.112 Because information is generally113 a public good—something that if provided to one is also provided to all or many—workers and consumers may attempt to free ride on the efforts of others, with the result that too little information is provided. For this reason, compulsory disclosure of information can provide the simplest and most direct response to the relevant market failure. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) From the democratic point of view, informational regulation also has substantial advantages. A well-functioning system of deliberative democracy requires a certain degree of information, so that citizens can engage in their monitoring and deliberative tasks. Subject as they are to parochial pressures, segments of government may have insufficient incentive to disclose information on their own; consider FOIA or FECA, where the self-interest of government or private groups may press in the direction of too little disclosure. Thus a good way to enable citizens to oversee private or public action, and also to assess the need for less, more, or different regulation, is to inform them of both private and public activity. The very fact that the public will be in a position to engage in general monitoring may well be a spur to desirable outcomes. disclosure is an effective alternative to other forms of regulation, it is necessary to have a concrete understanding of the circumstances in which disclosure will fulfill its intended goals. Undoubtedly the most successful cases involve well-organized groups able to impose reputational and financial harm on firms engaged in harmful activity.118 C. The Minimal Proposal We are now in a position to discuss a disclosure requirement for public interest programming in somewhat more detail. On a quarterly basis, every broadcaster should be required to make public the full range of public interest and public service activities in which it engages in every year. The relevant activities might involve free air time for candidates, educational programming, public service announcements, access for disabled viewers (as through closed captioning or video descriptions), charitable activities, emergency warnings and services, and the like. The FCC should require a completion of a relatively simple form to ensure accurate and uniform accounting, and FCC staff should take steps to sanction those stations that have failed to disclose, or that have done so inaccurately. A special advantage of disclosure requirements is that they appear to fit well with the emerging communications market insofar as they allow maximum flexibility and do not impose requirements that may be rapidly outrun by changing technologies. Even in a period in which broadcasters are akin to Time and Newsweek, such requirements would make a good deal of sense as a means of creating some democratic pressure for improvement.119 Of 118 See Gunningham and Grabosky, supra note, at 296-300. 119 An obvious question is whether, if the case for disclosure has been made out, similar requirements ought to be imposed on magazines and even newspapers. Indeed, the same question might be asked about economic incentives and voluntary self-regulation, as discussed below. I do not discuss those questions here. For those who believe that there is increasingly little difference between television and print media, it might seem that if requirements of this sort are not desirable for the latter, they are also undesirable for the former. The best response to this argument is in Bollinger, supra note, with the suggestion that the different regulatory regimes for the broadcast and print media are well-suited to two different images of press freedom, one image involving democratic selfgovernment, the other involving a form of economic laissez-faire. Bollinger Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) course it is reasonable to think that as the market evolves, disclosure requirements should be placed on all programmers, and not limited to broadcasters. The hope would be that such requirements would produce a kind of “race,” at least in some markets, to do more and better. believes that the existing of two parallel regulatory regimes makes appropriate space for each of these images, and that if one regulatory regime goes wrong (through, for example, excessive regulation of television, or an excessive “race to the bottom” in magazines), the other can serve as a corrective. This Article is in the general spirit of Bollinger’s approach, but it attempts to develop more flexible tools for implementing it, tools that are better adapted to the emerging television market. 120 See note supra. 121 See Madhu Khanna et al., Toxics Release Information: A Policy Tool for Environmental Protection, 36 J. Env. Ec. And Management 243 (1998); Gunningham and Grabosky, supra, at 296-300. monitors may include public interest groups seeking to “shame” badly performing broadcasters; they may include rivals, who seek to create a kind of “race to the top.” From the disclosures, it should be clear which broadcasters are doing least to promote the public interest, and perhaps those broadcasters will be specially targeted by private groups and competitors. The ultimate effect cannot be known a priori. Much depends on the possibility of private monitors. If public interest organizations, and viewers who favor certain programming, are able to mobilize, perhaps in concert with certain members of the mass media, substantial behavioral effects might be expected. It is even possible that a disclosure requirement would help create its own monitors. On the other hand, it is possible that toxic releases are such a salient and easily quantified public “bad” that a political response is quite likely; perhaps a failure to provide public interest programming is a far less salient “bad.” It is even possible that diverse conceptions of what counts as a “bad” would lead to inappropriate (but successful) pressures, if (for example) politically controversial programming, or programming that challenges popular convictions, receives public opprobrium. In this section I explore the possibility that broadcasters might meet their public interest responsibilities, not through a set of uniform requirements, but through economic incentives. As we will see, the most creative and promising approach, modeled on recent environmental reforms, involves “play or pay,” in which broadcasters are given a choice between complying with public interest Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) requirements or paying someone else to put public interest programming on the air. I begin with a discussion of “play or pay,” and then move to a more ambitious discussion of the alternatives, growing out of the law of tort and posing a debate between marketsuppressing and market-supplementing approaches. Ronald Coase’s work on efficiency, free trades, and transactions costs originated in the area of communications, and in particular in an attack on the FCC; but it has been most influential in the environmental arena.122 In that area, there has been a great deal of dissatisfaction with rigid governmental commands, and there has also been an unmistakable movement in the direction of more flexible economic instruments, which are likely to be far more efficient.123 A command might say, for example, that every coal-fired power plant must reduce its sulfur dioxide emissions by 50%, or that it must use technology of a governmentally specified kind. With respect to environmental protection, incentives typically come in two different forms: pollution fees, imposed on those who impose environmental harm, and tradeable pollution rights or “licenses,” given to those who produce pollution. For example, government might say that companies must pay a certain amount per unit of sulfur dioxide emission. Alternatively, government might say that each company is permitted to emit a certain specified amount of sulfur dioxide, but that its permission, or right, can be bought and sold on the free market. On the pollution fee model, it pays to reduce pollution simply in order to reduce the level of the tax. On the tradeable pollution right model, it also pays to reduce pollution, because the reduction can be used to engage in more of the relevant activity or in order to obtain money from another who cannot reduce so cheaply. Fees or tradeable licenses should create good dynamic incentives for pollution reduction, and also move environmental protection in the direction of greater cost-effectiveness.124 There is a complex literature on the choice between pollution fees and tradeable emission rights.125 The solution depends largely on an inquiry into what government knows and does not know.126 In general, a fee is better if the government is able to calculate the damage done per unit of pollution, but has difficulty in calculating the appropriate aggregate pollution level. In those circumstances, a fee is better because the government is unlikely to err by setting it, whereas a system of tradeable permits will produce mistakes. By contrast, a tradeable permit is better if the government knows the appropriate aggregate level, but is unable to calculate the damage done per unit of pollution. In either case, government can take advantage of the informational advantage held by private businesses participating in pollution control, so as to allow them to decide on the most effective, least-cost method of achieving any particular pollution reduction. If it is extremely expensive for company A to reduce its current level, it may choose to pay a high tax. Or—if the system is one of tradeable pollution rights—it may simply pay someone else, capable of reducing pollution more cheaply, to produce the relevant reduction instead. For any desired level of reduction, a system of economic incentives should produce the right result at a lower cost, by allocating burdens to those most able to bear them. Although the FCC has experimented with allocating communications rights via auction, little thought has been given to the possibility of using economic incentives to promote public interest goals in the communications market. In principle, however, both the “fees” approach and the license approach may well be preferable to government commands. At least this is so if we think of public interest programming as a “good,” which people should pay Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) for failing to produce, just as pollution is a “bad,” which people should pay for producing. Consider educational programming and free time for presidential elections. Suppose, for example, that ABC is in an especially good position to produce high-quality programming for children, whereas CBS is in an especially good position to promote high-quality programming involving presidential elections. Rather than requiring both ABC and CBS to produce educational programming and programming involving presidential elections, the government might allow each to pay a fee if it is to be relieved of the requirement of providing one or the other. This is the “tax” model of public interest programming. Alternatively, it might adapt the emission fee model, and allow CBS to sell ABC its obligation with respect to educational programming, while permitting ABC to sell CBS its obligation with respect to presidential elections. regulation,130 a system in which those who do not provide public interest programming must pay a kind of “fee” has an important advantage, because it is so much more flexible than one in which the government imposes uniform obligations on everyone. In this respect, a system of “pay or play” seems to be the most cost-effective means of promoting public interest goals, just as emissions trading are the most cost-effective means of reducing pollution. For those who dislike it, a public interest obligation can be treated as a kind of “hot potato”; fortunately, from their point of view, it is one that they can transfer to others, as a gift accompanied by cash. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) ensure that this does not happen. In the communications context, the problem will arise if all of the widely viewed broadcasters end up selling their obligations to a single station or set of stations. This is undesirable if it results in a kind of “ghettoization” of public interest programming and if it is believed—as seems quite sensible—that all or most viewers ought to have access to some public interest programming. What is the relationship between economic incentives and the first amendment? A direct tax on undesirable programming, or on the failure to provide desirable programming, would raise very constitutional questions. This is because they would be a regulation of speech on the basis of content. Whether such a regulation would be unconstitutional should turn on many of the questions raised in debates over the legitimacy of the “fairness doctrine,” designed to compel coverage of serious issues and an opportunity to speak for Chicago Law and Economics Working Paper opposing views.132 Many people have argued that with decreasing scarcity, the fairness doctrine is no longer legitimate if is ever was.133 If this objection is correct, an economic incentive in the form of a tax would be questionable too. The advantage of a tax over the fairness doctrine is that the former is far more flexible; hence if the fairness doctrine would be constitutional under current conditions, the same should be true of the proposed tax. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) D. Expanding the Viewscreen: A Glance at the Cathedral Thus far I have been exploring economic incentives by contrasting taxes and tradeable rights with command-and-control regulation. But if we wanted a more complete picture, we would widen the viewscreen a bit. In a classic Article, Guido Calabresi and A. Douglas Melamed proposed four “rules” that courts might adopt for nuisance suits.136 Two of the rules come from a situation in which either the plaintiff or the defendant is given the relevant entitlement, and it is protected via a “property rule,” in which case the entitlement could be reallocated only through a trade. The other two rules come from a situation in which either is given an entitlement protected by a “liability rule,” in which case the entitlement could be reallocated through a legally forced exchange, at a price determined through the legal system (assumed to be the market price). Calabresi and Melamed also discuss “inalienability rules,” in which no exchanges are permitted, either voluntarily or through the legal system. interest programming; no bargaining is allowed. Comment: This is the traditional model, with the debate being about its scope; thus the number of obligations was sharply introduced in the 1980s, but without rethinking the basic model. Under this system, the public’s interest in the relevant programming137 is protected by an inalienable property rule. The entitlement is granted to the government, and it is entitled to mandate broadcaster performance. Thus broadcasters have a kind of “split” property right; they own the right to broadcast as they choose (in general), but the public has a kind of lien on the property, giving it ownership rights over certain areas. Those who like the traditional approach appear to think that it has good social consequences, by ensuring that public interest programming is not relegated to unpopular times and channels, and also that it has desirable “expressive” effects, by affirming the status of broadcasters as public trustees. As we have seen, it also has several possible problems; its rigidity is likely to lead to inefficiency, and it may well produce unintended adverse consequences, as in the case of the fairness doctrine. 137 I am so describing it for convenience, without making any normative judgment. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) obligations (accompanied by money) to others, at a market-determined rate. As compared with Rule 1, a potential problem with this approach is that some people may avoid the stations that “play” and may not see the relevant programming at all. On the other hand, the empirical question remains whether under Rule 1, most members of the viewing audience will see and benefit from the mandated programming. interest broadcasting on broadcast networks each year (for example, six hours of free air time for candidates, 150 hours of educational programming for children), assigns initial, pro rate obligations to each broadcaster, and then permits broadcasters to trade the obligations at market-determined prices. 138 This is the acid deposition program under the Clean Air Acr, 42 U.S.C.7651 et seq. 139 These are brief notes on a complex issue. For details in the environmental context, see Jonathan Baert Wiener, Global Environmental Regulation: Instrument Choice in the Legal Context, 108 Yale LJ 677, 706-35 (1999). additional difficulty, as discussed above, is that broadcasting hours are not fungible. An hour of children’s programming at 3 am on Monday morning is a lot less valuable than at 9 am on Saturday. government-determined rates) to provide public interest programming. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) and advertiser and viewer demand will result in a nontrivial amount of public interest programming.140 But if government proposes to pay broadcasters for whatever public interest programming they provide, voluntary service may be substantially reduced. This is a pervasive problem with paying people to do good, or not to do bad; the payment may induce less of the good or more of the bad.141 The question for rule 3 is whether it is possible to generate a “baseline production” level from which any subsidy could be calculated. public interest programming, at market-determined rates Comment: This is a variation on 3a in the sense that it transforms the broadcasters’ entitlement into one protected by a property rule. It is akin to a system of markets in broadcasting, but with two qualifications: broadcasters are not required to pay for their entitlement in the first instance, and government stands ready to compete with others who seek to obtain access to viewers. One advantage of 3b over 3a is that it operates on the basis of marketdetermined prices; no one has to calculate a special government rate. But if one believes that existing fare is unproblematic, the government’s purchases will be wasteful. And those committed to public interest programming may object that government will not purchase enough (unless this is specified in some way in advance); they may also object that so long as licenses are being given for free, other rules, not given a “windfall” to broadcasters, are better. choose, including none at all. Rule 5a. Broadcasters must buy, via auction, the right to broadcast, and once they do that, they can provide such public interest broadcasting as they choose, including none at all. entitlement, as compared with Rule 5a. This is a pay or play version of Rules 5a and 5b. The problem here lies in determining the level of any such “damage award.” This approach is in one sense a cousin of Rule 2a, as pay or play systems. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) A full understanding of these possibilities would much facilitate both conceptual and empirical inquiry. Undoubtedly a choice among the various options should depend partly on the particular public interest obligation involved; a requirement of emergency warnings might take the form of Rule 1, whereas a requirement of free air time for candidates might be some combination of Rules 1, 2b, and 5b. The analysis thus far suggests that Rules 2b and 5b have special advantages over the alternatives. Rule 2b, the basic pay or play system, seems well-suited to the current period, as a kind of interim improvement over the regulatory status quo. In some areas, Rule 5b may well be better in the longer term, as broadcasters come to resemble general-interest magazines. Movement in the direction of selling the spectrum, rather than giving it away to preselected owners, would also be highly desirable. Chicago Law and Economics Working Paper undesirable cartelization or instead as protection against an undesirable “race to the bottom.” I suggest that a code might do a great deal of good, partly because of the likely existence of external monitors, partly because of a code’s capacity to help develop a kind of internal morality likely to affect many of its signatories. A general lesson is that the antitrust laws ought not to be invoked too readily to prevent producers from undertaking cooperative action in circumstances in which competition is producing palpable social harms. In such contexts, a “code” can provide some of advantages of government regulation, but do so in a more flexible and betterinformed fashion. Thus it is hazardous to invoke the antitrust laws to prevent an industry to provide the kinds of benefits that might be provided, more crudely and expensively, by direct regulation.142 A. The Problem and A Recently Emerging Strategy Notwithstanding the qualifications described above, competitive pressures often can do a great deal in providing programming that people would like to see. In an era of cable television, and an increasingly large range of options, competitive pressures will be especially in producing “niche” programming for people who have a particular interest in serious programming. The communications market increasingly resembles the market for magazines; recall the possibility, in a digital market, of over one thousand stations. But those competitive pressures also have a downside. They can lead to sensationalistic, prurient, or violent programming, and to a failure to provide sufficient attention to educational values, or to the kind of programming that is indispensable to a well-functioning democracy.143 This is so especially in light of the fact that a small relative advantage can led to huge increases in viewers, a fact that presses television in tabloid-like directions. As Robert Frank and Philip Cook have suggested, “[I]ncreasingly impoverished political debate is yet another cost of our current cultural trajectory. Complex modern societies generate complex economic and social problems, and the task of choosing the best course is difficult under the best of Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) circumstances. And yet, as in-depth analysis and commentary give way to sound bites in which rival journalists and politicians mercilessly ravage one another, we become an increasingly illinformed and ill-tempered electorate.”144 It would be possible to respond to the harmful effects of competitive pressures in various ways. Probably the simplest response would take the form of voluntary self-regulation, through some kind of “code” of good programming; this approach is specifically designed to respond to the problems that can be introduced by market pressures. In various nations, including the United States, cooperative action has played a constructive role in situations of this kind.145 Though it has yet to receive much academic commentary,146 voluntary self-regulation via industry agreements is emerging as a regulatory strategy of choice, especially in the environmental arena.147 The EPA, for example, has encouraged companies that produce pesticides to agree on pesticide reduction strategies, and here the fact of broad agreement is crucial.148 California has attempted to deal with the problem of workplace accidents via a “cooperative compliance program” involving self-enforced safety plans on large construction projects. The result has been to produce significant drops in accident rates.149 Self-regulating agreements are now in place in Canada’s system for forest management; in the Responsible Care program of the chemical industry, now operating in more than forty countries; in national regulation of nuclear power plants.150 What accounts for the increasing popularity of industry selfregulation, as part of the general project of “reinventing government”151? From the industry’s standpoint, self-regulation allows far more flexibility than government mandates. From the standpoint of government itself, a special advantage of codes is that they avoid the kind of informational overload that comes from government prescriptions; it is partly for this reason that voluntary agreements among companies have had good effects in the area of occupational safety and health.152 In a point of special relevance to television, codes also have been found to have the “ability to influence community attitudes,” in a way that tends to contribute to the “development of a custodial ethic.”153 Thus codes have helped to develop “an effective institutional morality that brings the behavior of industry members within a normative framework.”154 Such cooperative action often makes people concerned about antitrust violations and self-interested profit-seeking under a publicspirited guise. This is of course a risk, but the antitrust law can go wrong when it prevents certain cooperative action that overcomes palpably adverse effects of market pressures. Indeed, the International Standards Organization is designed specifically to ensure a form of cooperation designed to overcome those adverse effects155; the question is whether that experience has communications analogues. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) My emphasis here is on allowing programmers and journalists to do what, in an important sense, they would actually prefer to do. It is worth underlining this point. Many journalists in the world of broadcasting would very much like to do better156; competitive pressures are the problem, not the solution, and a voluntary code could help them and the public as well. development over time:157 The idea of a broadcasting code is nothing new. Consider its 1. Origins and precursors: The spectrum and Roosevelt The idea of a broadcasting “code” has a long history. The NAB was founded in 1923, and it first attempted to produce a degree of self-regulation in 1926, as a response to the “chaos” widely perceived to have been produced by interference and piracy. Some progress was made, but ultimately the agreement broke down; hence legislation was necessary, in the form of the Radio Act of 1927. union rights, discrimination, discipline, working hours, and pay. . . . As the name SA8000 suggests, it is the first to be modelled on existing and widely accepted commercial standards such as IS09000, drawn up by the International Standards Organization in Geneva, which is used to determine whether companies have the management systems to meet required product quality.  But the real strength of the new approach is commercial sanctions. A company which adopts the code also agrees to be independently inspected to see whether it is abiding by the conditions laid down. It will be able to attract customers and gain a competitive advantage by advertising the fact that its factories and suppliers meet the standard.” 156 See Schechter, supra note. 157 I draw here on Mark M. MacCarthy, Broadcast Self-Regulation: The NAB Codes, Family Viewing Hour, and Television Violence, 13 Cardozo Arts & Ent. L.J. 667 (1995). code, together with the lack of an effective enforcement mechanism, made it something of limited usefulness. 3. Television. All of these steps involved radio, but the 1938 code was the unmistakable precursor of the eventual television code. In its first period, television witnessed a pattern that generally characterized the past debates over radio and late twentieth century debates over Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) television: legislative concern, proposed legislation, steps toward selfregulation, and little or no legislation or regulation. not be shown between 7 pm and 9 pm eastern standard time. This was a distinctive form of self-regulation. But the Writers Guild of America challenged the policy on first amendment grounds (see below), arguing that the policy was not voluntary self-regulation but was in fact a produce of government coercion. The FCC ruled in 1983 that there had been no government coercion and that the NAB had adopted the family viewing policy voluntarily. In its key passage the FCC wrote, “[v]oluntary industry action is often preferable to governmental solutions, and an industry frequently addresses a problem in order to forestall regulation by the Government; conversely, it is not unusual for a regulatory body to forego enacting rules when the regulated industry voluntarily adopts standards which deal with a perceived problem.”162 In June 1979, however, the Justice Department filed the antitrust suit described in detail below, resulting in the demise of the television code. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) the amount of violence on television.163 But there was considerable doubt about whether an explicit exemption was necessary; a 1993 opinion from the Department of Justice said that the industry could cooperate to reduce television violence without offense to the law of antitrust.164 In June 1990 the NAB issued new, quite tepid “voluntary programming principles” to cover violence, indecency and obscenity, drugs and substance abuse, and violence. The new standards were reaffirmed in June 1991, and in 1992, ABC, NBC, and CBS issued and agreed to adhere to a set of new standards, although without an enforcement mechanism. Thus in the 1990s self-regulation can be found in various places: the advance parental advisory system, joint advisory guidelines issued by the four networks, NAB principles, and an annual public assessment, by the four networks, of television violence. The question is whether it might be possible to adopt a new code for broadcasting, specifically designed for the new communications market. Such a code might update the old NAB code, and help overcome current problems, without having the degree of tepidness of the existing “standards.” A code might even promote some of the goals associated with deliberative democracy. Consider the following possible code provisions,166 simply for the sake of illustration: 1. Each broadcaster shall provide three hours of free air time for candidates during the two month period preceding the election. In return for free air time, candidates shall discuss substantive issues in a substantive way, and must provide something other than short “soundbites.” 2. Each broadcaster shall provide one hour of educational programming for children each day. Broadcasters shall attempt to ensure that children are not exposed to excessively violent programming or programming that is otherwise harmful to or inappropriate for children. Broadcasters shall avoid programming that encourages criminal or self-destructive behavior; they should also be sensitive in presenting sexual material that children might encounter. 166 These provisions are adapted but substantially revised from the more detailed Code suggested by the Report of the Advisory Committee, supra note. I believe that the provisions described there are too vague and tepid to be useful; for reasons discussed in the text, vague and tepid provisons create a high probability of futility and ineffectiveness. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) devote enough time to public issues to permit genuine understanding of problems and disagreements. D. A Code: Problems and Prospects Such a code would of course raise many questions. The first would involve the problem of enforcement. Without an enforcement mechanism, a code might have no effect at all, indeed it might be a form of public deception.167 167 See John Braithwaite, Responsive Business Regulatory Institutions, in Business, Ethics, and Law 91 (C. Cody and C. Sampford eds. 1993). There are several obvious possibilities. The simplest would be for the NAB to undertake enforcement on its own, just as it did under the old code. It might, for example, give a seal of approval to those who are shown to comply with its provisions, and deny a seal of approval to those who have been shown not to have complied. The NAB might also give special public recognition to those stations that have compiled an excellent public service record in the past year. Such recognition may be awarded for, among other things, meeting the needs of children in a sustained and creative way, offering substantive and extended coverage of elections, including interviews, free air time, and debates, offering substantive and extended coverage of public issues, and providing opportunities for discussion of problems facing the local community. At the time of license renewal, a notation might be given to the FCC that there has been compliance or continuing or egregious noncompliance with the code. If the NAB is unwilling to enforce a code of this kind, perhaps a private group could take the initiative, both promulgating the code and publicizing and in that (modest) sense sanctioning violations.168 A special problem here is that in light of increasing competition from non-broadcast programming sources, a code would not be in the economic interest of broadcasters even if generally adopted, and this is an unpromising fact for a code’s effectiveness.169 Perhaps supplemental enforcement will come from rivals of those who defect from the agreement and violate the code; this is a reasonable prediction in theory, and something similar has been found in analogous areas.170 Any enforcement by the NAB or even a private monitoring group would be most likely to succeed if accompanied by external pressures of one sort or another. As in the case of disclosure requirements, the most promising possibilities include public interest groups able to mobilize relevant social norms and to focus media 168 This approach would have special advantages in light of the fact that some stations are not members of the NAB. For NAB stations that must compete with non-member stations, a code creates an obvious competitive risk, and there is a continuing question whether it is possible to design strategies, public or private, to combat this risk. 169 See Gunningham and Grabosky, supra note, at 53-54. 170 See Gunningham and Rees, supra note, at 403. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) attention on derelict actors.171 Perhaps such activity would be accompanied by market pressures of various sorts, as consumer action has had significant effects on code enforcement in related areas.172 A degree of FCC interest in the existence of code violations would also help. E. Notes on Antitrust Law and the First Amendment A code for television broadcasters might be thought to raise issues of both constitutional and antitrust law. The constitutional issues are relatively straightforward; the antitrust issues are a bit more complex. I offer a brief discussion here. There is essentially no risk that a code of the sort suggested here would create serious first amendment problems. By itself, a code is a private set of guidelines, and private guidelines by themselves raise no first amendment issue. If a private group decides to impose restrictions on the speech of its members, and government is not involved, the first amendment is irrelevant Of course things would be different if government mandated any such code.175 Nor would provisions like those described above be likely to violate the antitrust laws. The Department of Justice has so concluded,176 and in two important cases, aspects of previous codes were upheld against private antitrust attack. A district court refused to issue an injunction against code standards forbidding cigarette advertising, despite a claim that these standards were inconsistent with the antitrust laws.177 A lower court also upheld the provisions involving standards for advertising for children.178 In these cases, the 175 See Flagg Bros., Inc. v. Brooks, 436 U.S. 149 (1978) (private contract raises no first amendment issue); San Francisco Arts & Athletics, Inc. v. United States Olympic Comm., 483 U.S. 522 (1987); Rendell-Baker v. Kohn, 457 U.S. 830 (1982). If a code is a product of government threat, and is effectively required by government, the first amendment comes into play. See Writers Guild of America, supra. There can be no question that a governmentally mandated code, not voluntary but taking the form that we have outlined, would raise legitimate constitutional problems. This does not necessarily mean that the first amendment would be violated; but it does mean that the code would have to be tested for compliance with first amendment principles, including constitutional limits on content regulation. 176 See note supra. 177 See American Brands, Inc. v. National Ass'n of Broadcasters, 308 F. Supp. 1166 (D.D.C. 1969).  The court concluded that the plaintiff was not likely to prevail on the merits.  The court referred in particular to the dangers posed by cigarette smoking and claimed that the standards and guidelines in the code serve the “public interest.” Id. at 1169. 178 See American Fed’n of Television & Radio Artists v. National Ass’n of Broadcasters, 407 F. Supp. 900 (S.D.N.Y. 1976) The rule at issue there said that children’s program hosts or primary cartoon characters “shall not be utilized to deliver commercial messages within or adjacent to the programs which feature such hosts or cartoon characters.” The provision applied as well “to lead-ins to commercials when such lead-ins contain sell copy or imply endorsement of the product by program host or primary cartoon character.” The plaintiff attacked the restrictions, claiming that it restricted the ability of hosts and actors to obtain free employment for delivery of commercials. The court said, “There is not the Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) court basically concluded that the restrictions were reasonable and in the public interest. slightest indication of any anti-competitive purpose in the creation of the rule,” especially since there was no evidence of a motive ““to benefit one class of performers competitively over another class of performers.” Id. at 902. The court found it relevant that the rule “resulted from a bona fide concern on the part of various groups, and the FCC, regarding fair and ethical methods to be used in television advertising directed to children.” Id. This was “a reasonable rule of conduct regarding good practice by its members in the public interest and is not in violation of the antitrust laws.” Id. at 903. 179The district court held that the time and product interruption standards were not invalid per se. In the court’s view, the distinctive characteristics of the broadcasting industry argued against a per se rule of invalidity. Because broadcast frequencies are scarce, because the whole area is subject to regulation, and because of the fact that there are only sixty minutes in an hour (!), no simple solution would be sensible. On these two issues, the court also denied summary judgment for the government under the rule of reason, concluding that there were material issues of fact. By contrast, the court held that the multiproduct standard was per se unlawful. In its view, this rule was akin to a standardization agreement by which food manufacturers set a standard for the ingredients that would be used in their products. This form of standardization was per se illegitimate. Thus the court actually invalidated only one provision of the code, on the theory that it was analytically akin to a system for price-fixing. At the same time, the court denied summary judgment for the NAB. An important question was whether the time standards would have the effect of raising or stabilizing the price of commercial Chicago Law and Economics Working Paper the district After the court’s ruling, the NAB suspended enforcement of all code provisions.180 Doubtless the NAB did this partly for reasons of economic self-interest, and not only because it was fearful of a legal challenge. Nonetheless, court’s narrow decision—untested in any court of appeals—has loomed over the debate about codes. But in its most recent analysis of the problem, the Department of Justice suggested that networks could agree to guidelines and principles to reduce unnecessary violence on television.181 Indeed, this is not an ordinary form of collusion. It is not as if broadcasters are saying that advertisers must pay a minimum of $X per advertisement. It is possible that the restrictions under discussion would have little or no adverse effect on competition; they may even have good effects on competition.182 Even with a code, programmers would compete over a great many things, including the kinds of programming regulated by a code. The code might in a sense be procompetitive, because it would ensure television coverage of materials in which there is a substantial public interest and which might otherwise not be provided. This is so especially in light of the time (this was the antitrust problem); it was possible, the court said, that any such effect would be trivial in light of the importance of other factors. If this was true, the code would not violate the Sherman Act. This is because there is no antitrust violation without a significant adverse effect on competition. See, e.g., United States v. Arnold, Schwinn, & Co., 388 U.S. 365, 375 (1967), overruled on other grounds by Continental T.V., Inc. v. GTE Sylvania, Inc. 433 U.S. 36 (1977); Neeld v. National Hockey League, 594 F.2d 1297 (9th Cir. 1979). 180 In public it claimed that it would seek an appeal, but a consent judgment was issued, in which the NAB agreed, for ten years, to cease monitoring and enforcement of the three disputed code provisions. 181 See Letter Of Sheila Anthony, Assistant Attorney General, supra. The Department of Justice concluded that “the conduct that was at issue in the NAB case differs significantly from that covered by” an agreement on televised violence. Id. at 3. In the NAB case, the problem was raising “the price of time,” to “the detriment of both advertisers and the ultimate consumers of the products promoted on the air.” Id. By contrast, an agreement covering violence should “be liked to traditional industry standard-setting efforts that do not necessarily restrain competition and may have significant procompetitive benefits.” Id. In the view of the Department of Justice, “efforts to develop and disseminate voluntary guidelines to reduce the negative impact of television violence should fare well under the appropriate rule-of-reason antitrist analysis.” Id. at 4. 182 Compare Smith v. Pro Football, Inc., 593 F.2d 1173, 1183 (D.C. Cir. 1978). Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) fact that stations would compete for viewers with respect to the kinds of programming covered by the code.183 In light of the distinctive nature of the television market, a code of the sort under discussion would likely survive a “rule of reason” inquiry. Any restrictions, such as they are, could be defended as a means of promoting competition and also various public interest goals, such as education of children, access for the handicapped, and democratic and civic functions.184 F. Less Puzzling Puzzles We are now in a position to disentangle the two puzzles discussed in Part II. The broadcasters on the Committee favored a code partly because they thought it a good idea in principle and partly because they had little to lose from it. Though generally “winners,” they were selected for the Committee because of their commitment, through both words and deeds, to moderating some of the adverse effects of competition. They were vulnerable to “winner take all” effects insofar as they were reluctant to engage in certain competitive practices. In this way, a code might even help them. But the NAB would not like a code at all. The broadcasting industry as a whole would be hurt by such a code, especially because cable television would not be bound by it. Why should broadcasters, in an intensely competitive market, give a significant edge to cable? Especially if the result would be that cable could take, if not all, a lot more of the viewing audience than it now does? It is not surprising if 183 It is not entirely clear that any plaintiff would have an antitrust injury. The self-regulation that we are discussing would allow a wide range of choices and options for consumers and producers. Perhaps some producer of some marginal programming could claim that he was unable to sell his product because of (for example) free air time for candidates; but this would be an extremely speculative injury. Perhaps viewers could argue that they were deprived of certain programming that they would like; but in view of the wide range of options available to viewers, this too is speculative. Perhaps some stations or programmers could contend that a code limited their freedom; but it is not clear that this would count as an antitrust injury, especially in light of the fact that the code is voluntary. 184 This idea is bolstered by the line of cases analyzing restrictions by trade associations and similar entities. See, e.g., NCAA v. Board of Regents, 468 U.S. 85 (1984); Allied Tube & Conduit Corp. v. Indian Head, 486 U.S. 492 (1988). broadcasters who supply a large degree of public interest programming believe that they would be net winners with a code—and if the broadcasting industry as a whole believes that it would be a net loser. Such an industry, cautious about invoking its own economic interest alone, is all too likely to invoke the antitrust laws (or the first amendment) for purely strategic and self-interested reasons. The best defense of a code of the sort I have discussed is that it would produce “winner-take-less” outcomes, in a way that would provide significant benefits for the public by diminishing some of the adverse effects of market competition, and by strengthening broadcaster norms in favor of obligations to children and to democratic values. And if this is so, it provides a general lesson about how voluntary private action might sometimes handle problems 185 With the qualification involving hot spots and cold spots, discussed above. Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) usually dealt with by direct regulation—and a lesson about the reflexive use of the antitrust laws to prevent producer cooperation. The discussion has ranged over a number of regulatory tools, and it may be helpful, by way of summary, to discuss them all briefly and at once. We have seen that both disclosure and codes have the advantage of ensuring a minimal government role, in a way that reduces constitutional concerns and also allows a high degree of flexibility. The danger is that these remedies will have little effect; here the key question is whether there are good external monitors, able to impose reputational or other costs on those who do poorly. We have also seen that “taxes” on programming that does not serve public interest goals, and subsidies to programming that does serve such goals, can have similar effects. A principal problem with subsidies is that they create an incentive not to provide such programming voluntarily. The table that follows seems to capture the basic territory. As I have emphasized, these recommendations are designed for the current stage of telecommunications technology; they are also likely to make sense for the near term. For the next decade, the key question is whether initiatives designed for broadcasters should be applied to cable programmers as well (especially disclosure and compliance with a code). Potential virtues Potential problems Effectiveness; simplicity Fairness doctrine; mandatory three hours of childrens’ educational programming; Clean Air Act and Clean Water Act “technology” approaches Toxic Release Inventory; warning labels for foods and drugs; television ratings system “green taxes”; polluters pay 2. Disclosure 3. Economic incentive— “tax” Rigidity; high expense; futility (if viewers fail to watch,), even counterproductive (if producers are able to circumvent the system and to do worse than they would have done) Futility (if disclosure does no good), a particular problem in the event of market failure Difficulty of calculating the relevant amount; putting good broadcasters at a competitive disadvantage Most appropriate context and overall evaluation Three or four broadcasters and no other television sources; generally ill-suited to current situation, except as “backstops” against egregious behavior Some external monitoring by private groups; well-suited to the likely future Ability to calculate the tax along with market failure or use of nonmarket criteria; well-suited to the short term at least Flexibility, low administrative costs Efficiency and hence a good programming “mix”; correction of any market failure and serving nonmarket goals 4. Economic incentive— subsidy 5. Voluntary selfregulation 6. Market ordering Public Broadcasting System; National Endowment for the Arts; “cash for clunkers” in environmental policy Old National Association of Broadcasters Code; Current” Responsible Care” program for chemical industry; International Standards Organization Ordinary commodities Flexibility, use of industry knowledge, and effectiveness; creation of a kind of “trustee culture” Efficiency; consumer sovereignty Difficulty of calculating the subsidy; harmful secondary effects, as in a decrease in voluntay provision of public interest programming (why play when you can be paid?) Lack of enforcement; a charade designed to fend off regulation; an effort by some producers to prevent competition from others Ability to calculate the subsidy along with market failure or use of nonmarket criteria; also wellsuited to the short term, in the form of subsidies to PBS External monitoring and/or industry bona fides and/or threat of mandates if this approach fails; sensible until the distinction crumbles between broadcasters and others Market failure, e.g., externalities, public good problems; use of noneconomic criteria, e.g., democratic ideals Brave new world (where broadcasters have no special role); perhaps appropriate, probably alongside subsidies and perhaps disclosure, in the very long term Private Broadcasters and Public Interest (revised 04/99) In the very long term, when broadcasters occupy no special role, it may be best to impose disclosure requirements on general-interest stations, and also to subsidize high-quality programming of various sorts. It is too soon to know whether the very long-term will come in the next decade or long thereafter.187 Dramatic changes in the emerging communications market do not provide a sufficient reason to abandon the traditional goal of ensuring a certain level of public interest programming. To some extent this conclusion depends on conventional market failures. Thus I have emphasized the external benefits that come from public interest programming and also the peculiar characteristics of the broadcasting market, where viewers, or eyeballs, are a commodity provided to advertisers. To some extent this conclusion view turns on a rejection of economic principles as the foundation for interest communications policy. With respect to public programming, viewers’ tastes may be a product of an undesirable set of communications options, and in their capacity as citizens, they may well want to make things better rather than worse. Especially in light of the role of the communications media in the production of culture—and hence both preferences and values—it is entirely legitimate for a democratic government to refuse to make “consumption choices” the exclusive basis for policy design. Thus I have emphasized that a public committed to deliberative democracy might support initiatives designed to provide better programming for children and better coverage of public issues. This is so especially in light of the fact that a significant minority of Americans lack cable or other alternatives, and hence continue to depend on broadcasters for television. 187 See Owen, supra, at 311-26 (predicting that convergence will take a long time, with the suggestion that the Internet may never become an important means of delivering television). 188 In the long-term, when broadcasters have little or no distinctive role, it may be best to rely on government subsidies for high-quality broadcasting and on disclosure requirements for general-interest programmers. See above. however, the policy instruments of choice should not involve rigid dictates or commands, which are expensive and potentially counterproductive, and in any case ill-suited to an era of rapidly changing technology. Thus I have suggested a strong preference for the less intrusive options of disclosure, economic incentives, and voluntary self-regulation. Disclosure has been a surprisingly successful, low-cost strategy in other areas of regulatory law. If certain broadcasting is seen as a public good, analogous to clean air, economic incentives may be able to accomplish a good deal, and to do so at relatively low cost. Because competitive pressures are frequently the engine behind poor broadcaster performance, voluntary self-regulation may turn out to be a desirable kind of “cartel,” helping to counteract short-term interests. Through this route it may be possible to develop an intermediate system of controls, responding to the market and non-market failures of current markets, but without introducing the rigidity and inefficiencies of command-and-control regulation.