 Timur Kuran* and Cass R. Sunstein** An availability cascade is a self-reinforcing process of collective belief formation by which an expressed perception triggers a chain reaction that gives the perception increasing plausibility through its rising availability in public discourse. The driving mechanism involves a combination of informational and reputational motives: Individuals endorse the perception partly by learning from the apparent beliefs of others and partly by distorting their public responses in the interest of maintaining social acceptance. Availability entrepreneurs-activists who manipulate the content of public discourse-strive to trigger availability cascades likely to advance their agendas. Their availability campaigns may yield social benefits, but sometimes they bring harm, which suggests a need for safeguards. Focusing on the role of mass pressures in the regulation of risks associated with production, consumption, and the environment, Professors Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein analyze availability cascades and suggest reforms to alleviate their potential hazards. Their proposals include new governmental structures designed to give civil servants better insulation against mass demands for regulatory change and an easily accessible scientific database to reduce people's dependence on popular (mis)perceptions. sity of Southern California. We are grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Nicholas Argyres, Ian Ayres, Mary Anne Case, Tyler Cowen, Richard Epstein, Jack Goldsmith, David Hirshleifer, Saul Levmore, Jane Mansbridge, Bentley Macleod, Vai-Lam Mui, Martha Nussbaum, Linwood Pendleton, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, and Roberta Romano for helpful comments, and to Julie Hupton, Tolga K6ker, Brian Lehman, and Margaret Peterlin for research assistance. We also received valuable help from participants in legal theory workshops at the Washington University School of Law and Yale Law School, and at economics workshops at George Mason University and the University of Southern California. through The mechanisms presented below are mediated by the availability heuristic, a pervasive mental shortcut whereby the perceived likelihood of any given event is tied to the ease with which its occurrence can be brought to mind. Cognitive psychologists consider the availability heuristic to be a key determinant of individual judgment and perception. They have demonstrated that the probability assessments we make as individuals are frequently based on the ease with which we can think of relevant examples.' Our principal claim here is that this heuristic interacts with identifiable social mechanisms to generate availability cascades-social cascades, or simply cascades, through which expressed perceptions trigger chains of individual responses that make these perceptions appear increasingly plausible through their rising availability in public discourse. Availability cascades may be accompanied by counter-mechanisms that keep perceptions consistent with the relevant facts. Under certain circumstances, however, they generate persistent social availability errors-widespread mistaken beliefs grounded in interactions between the availability heuristic and the social mechanisms we describe.2 The resulting mass delusions may last indefinitely, and they may produce wasteful or even detrimental laws and policies. cascade occurs when people with incomplete personal information on a particular matter base their own beliefs on the apparent beliefs of others. To be more specific, suppose that the words and deeds of certain individuals give the impression that they accept a particular belief. In response to their communications, other individuals, who lack reliable information, may accept that belief simply by virtue of its acceptance by others. As long as members of the relevant group are heterogeneous along one or more dimensions (e.g., initial personal information, willingness to rely on others for information, timing of social contacts), the transformation of the distribution of beliefs can take the form of a cascade, known also as a bandwagon or snowballing process.4 Not every member of a society experiencing an informational cascade need be influenced; those with considerable private information may remain unswayed. Under the right conditions, however, many or most of the society's members, potentially even all, will end up with essentially identical beliefs, which may well be fanciful. dani et al., Learning from Others]; Sushil Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer & Ivo Welch, A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades, 100 J. POL. ECON. 992 (1992) [hereinafter Bikhchandani et al., A Theory of Fads]; and Vai-Lam Mui, Information, Civil Liberties, and the Political Economy of Witch-hunts, 15 J.L. ECON. & ORG. (forthcoming July 1999). they view as the dominant belief. Everyone has had the experience of modifying public statements or actions in order to win praise or avoid censure. If a particular perception of an event somehow appears to have become the social norm, people seeking to build or protect their reputations will begin endorsing it through their words and deeds, regardless of their actual thoughts. As in the informational case, the outcome may be the cleansing of deviant perceptions, arguments, and actions from public discourse. And just as informational cascades may be limited in their reach, there may exist local reputational cascades-self-reinforcing processes that reshape the public pronouncements of particular subgroups without affecting those of the broader group. Social agents who understand the dynamics of availability cascades and seek to exploit their insights may be characterized as availability entrepreneurs. Located anywhere in the social system, including the government, the media, nonprofit organizations, the business sector, and even households, these entrepreneurs attempt to trigger availability cascades likely to advance their own agendas. 7 They do so by fixing people's attention on specific problems, interpreting phenomena in particular ways, and attempting to raise the salience of certain information. For example, availability entrepreneurs acting on behalf of corporations focus on cases of strikingly large punitive damages awards as a means of building support for tort reform. Likewise, environmental organizations draw attention to apparent disasters (e.g., Love Such availability campaigns often produce social benefits by overcoming public torpor and fueling debates on long-festering though rarely articulated problems. These desirable effects can arise in domains as diverse as economic regulation, identity politics, and social customs. At the same time, availability campaigns sometimes do great harm by producing widespread availability errors.10 This danger points to the need for institutional safeguards to ensure better priority-setting and fuller use of scientific knowledge. Proper safeguards, which need not entail either "more" regulation or "less" regulation, can save both lives and dollars. 9. See text accompanying notes 19-93 infra. 10. Availability errors are mistakes produced by the use of the availability heuristic. See text accompanying note 2 supra. the burning of black churches; the spread of ethnic and religious separatism across the world; the persistence and sudden fall of communism; the global turn toward market-friendly government policies; campaigns for safe sex; the enforcement of Megan's Law, designed to inform a community when a convicted sex offender moves in; and finally, the emergence of the Federalist Society at American law schools. 12 Legal scholars are now devoting considerable attention to the virtues and vices of rational actor models, including those of models that accommodate social influences. 13 It will therefore be useful to specify at this juncture how our approach bears on various claims in the existing literature that, for all its diversity, falls under the rubric of "rational choice." There is nothing irrational about participating in an informational cascade. Often people have little information about the magnitude of a risk or the seriousness of an alleged social problem. They stand to gain from tuning into, and letting themselves be guided by, the signals of others. Although informational cascades may cause false beliefs to spread and strengthen, they are nonetheless consistent with individual rationality as the concept is generally understood. Indeed, models of this phenomenon are expressly based on the rational actor framework. They treat individuals as utility maximizers who weigh all their options.14 Nor is there anything irrational about being concerned with one's reputation or anything rational about being unconcerned. To lack an interest in protecting and improving one's reputation is not an indicator of rationality; rather, it is a mark of sociopathy. Models of reputational cascades depart from the conventional economic model merely by recognizing that reputation is an ingredient of individual utility functions. 12. The histories of communism and affirmative action are discussed in KURAN, supra note 5, at 118-27, 137-54, 205-43, 261-88 and Kuran, Now Out of Never, supra note 3. Modem ethnic separatism is interpreted in Kuran, Ethnic Norms, supra note 3. For pertinent insights into some of the other transformations, see Bikhchandani et al., Learning from Others, supra note 3 (discussing observational learning in crime, politics, and medicine); Mui, supra note 3 (discussing McCarthyism and other witch-hunts); and the Conclusion infra. 15. See, e.g., RICHARD H. THALER, QUASI-RATIONAL ECONOMICS 152-53, 242 (1991) (endorsing the work of Herbert Simon, which suggested that humans use heuristics because of their limited ability to process information); Tversky & Kahneman, supra note 1, at 3-20 (describing the use of heuristics in thepresence of uncertainty). heuristic and how it leads to errors). We now present three examples of availability errors, which will form a background for the subsequent analysis. The first, which is the most detailed, will be particularly valuable in demonstrating the significance of availability cascades, including their potentially lasting influence on law and policy.', Between 1942 and 1953, the Hooker Chemical Company filled Love Canal, an abandoned waterway that feeds into the Niagara River in New York State, with more than 21,000 tons of chemical waste. 19 It then covered the waste with dirt and sold Love Canal to the Niagara Falls Board of Education for $1.20 The local government developed the area, turning it into a neighborhood of more than 200 houses.21 The neighborhood was settled in 1957, and the site of the old canal, which many of the new homes bordered, became a school and a playground. 18. Perceptive readers may sense that in trying to convince them of the availability heuristic's significance we will be exploiting their own reliance on this heuristic. We plead guilty! In June 1978, frightening stories in the Niagara Falls Gazette came to the attention of Lois Marie Gibbs, a housewife living in the area.2 8 Gibbs, who became president of the Love Canal Homeowners Association, played a key role in reinforcing fears of adverse health effects and mobilizing public attention. 29 Indeed, she would eventually appear on national television programs and receive invitations to the state capitol and even the White House ° In brief, she served as a leading availability entrepreneur of the episode, which culminated in the passage of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), generally known as the Superfund statute.3' Angered by claims in the Gazette, Gibbs organized a petition drive and started going door-to-door to mobilize protests, eventually developing "a set speech. 3 2 Partly as a result of these efforts, the local residents held a meeting, and those who "hadn't attended the meeting heard what was going on by 23. See id. 24. See id. 25. See id. 26. See id. 27. Eventually, ninety-five percent of the residents settled for $20 million with Hooker's parent company, Occidental Petroleum. There have been ninety additional lawsuits by individuals who chose not to be a part of the class action, and two other major settlements. In the mid-1990s, Occidental settled with the State of New York for $98 million and with the federal government for $129 million. See Sarah Lubman, Occidental Settles Love Canal Waste Suit with New York for up to $123 Million, WALL ST. J., June 22, 1994, at A12. Responding to the outcry, New York State Health Commissioner Robert Whalen declared a public health emergency in the area in early August of 1978.3 3 Characterizing Love Canal as a "great and imminent peril," he urged area residents to stay out of their basements and to avoid eating anything from their gardens. 39 He also sought the temporary relocation of twenty-five pregnant women and children under two years old, whereupon residents whom the plan would leave behind inquired why their own health should be treated as less important. Gibbs, now a widely recognized activist on the issue, was furious. She and her associates treated technical explanations as just "a bunch of baloney."'41 They also instructed residents to report to doctors and local officials any and all suspected health abnormalities. "Tell them everything," Gibbs exhorted, "If you had three pimples this time last month, and this time you have five-tell them!" 42 Within a few days of Carter's declaration, scientists re-examining the evidence began signaling that the dangers were being overblown. Their findings prompted some government officials, including Carey, to tone down their statements.49 But fears would not dissipate. On the contrary, they intensified when certain new studies, presented before Congress in early 1979, pointed to sky-high rates of nervous breakdown, miscarriage, and various diseases of the urinary system in the Love Canal area.50 These data would be thoroughly discredited two years later;51 some of the effects were evidently fictitious, and others were undoubtedly produced by panic; but at the time the data were widely reported as scientifically sound.52 To call for caution in interpreting the data, even to question their validity, was to risk fierce and widespread criticism.53 Information that flowed rapidly among groups was heightening anxieties, and those who challenged the prevailing interpretations of Love Canal were being labeled as accessories to a heinous cover-up. In January 1980 the Justice Department commissioned a study that found chromosomal abnormalities in eleven of thirty-six Love Canal residents. The study would eventually be discredited as scientifically flawed, but it was leaked to the press before peer review at the EPA, and in May the New York Times promptly gave it front-page coverage. 57 The news media descended on Love Canal once again, painting the image of an ordinary American community mired in a swamp of carcinogenic wastes as the rest of the country just watched. A resident found to have chromosomal aberrations appeared on national television, sobbing that she "just wanted to be a housewife" as in the days before the poisons of Love Canal destroyed her idyllic life.5 8 In early 1980, at a time when Love Canal was prominently featured in network newscasts almost every day, Governor Carey established a blueribbon panel to review the scientific evidence. Remarkably, given the political climate, the panel endorsed none of the reports of serious health effects. However, its evaluation had no appreciable influence on subsequent events. In May of the same year, a group of Love Canal residents held two EPA officials hostage at the headquarters of the Homeowners Association.5 9 The next day President Carter ordered the relocation of an additional 700 families at a cost of at least $3 million.60 And soon thereafter, exploiting the President's need for his support in the Kennedy-Carter contest for that year's Democratic Presidential nomination, Carey obtained $15 million in federal assistance toward the purchase of new homes for the relocated residents. 61 The perceptual and attitudinal transformation that occurred between 1978 and 1980 has proved enduring. Since that period, Americans have consistently ranked waste sites among the country's top environmental problems. In a highly publicized 1987 study, the EPA found that Americans rank hazardous waste sitesfirst among all environmental problems-above pesticides, acid rain, indoor air pollution, radioactive waste, water pollution, exposure to work site chemicals, tap-water contamination, and thinning of the ozone layer, among many others.65 This preeminence was confirmed by public opinion polls in 1987 and 1988.66 To this date, moreover, American presidents and serious presidential candidates of both major parties invoke abandoned waste dumps as a leading environmental problem. Congress has continued to spend vast sums on clean-up campaigns. By 1994 it had allo Love Canal taught us that government will protect you from such poisoning only when you force it to. If you think you're safe, think again! And if you're ever in doubt about what a company is doing, or what government is telling you, talk with your neighbors, seek out the truth beyond the bland reassurances of the authorities, and don't be afraid to dig in your heels to protect your community. We are more organized now than ever before, and there is help available-just a phone call away. Our challenge here is to explain the dogged persistence of calls to preIn view of the billions spent on the Superfund vent "more Love Canals." program, the social significance of the analytical challenge should be clear. Had these resources been devoted to the prevention of other risks, there could have been major benefits as measured in, say, life-years saved. Approximately 400,000 Americans die each year as a result of tobacco use, 300,000 die from poor diet and insufficient exercise, and many thousands more die each year from other preventable causes.72 The scientific evidence is overwhelming that poor diet produces far more cancers than abandoned hazardous waste sites. Yet during the period of skyrocketing concern over Love Canal, poor diet and exercise received almost no attention as national problems, and cigarette smoking was addressed almost exclusively through In the interest of reaching the theoretical core of our argument expeditiously, our next two examples of availability cascades are more compressed than the foregoing account of the Love Canal episode. A salient phenomenon in American environmental politics is the "pollutant of the month" syndrome. The essence of this syndrome is that expressed concerns about a particular substance fuel growing anxieties, which then generate an irresistible demand for regulation. These anxieties remain in the headlines until they are bumped off by a new perceived hazard.73 In 1989, one such pollutant was Alar, a pesticide long used on apples. 74 About one percent of Alar is composed of UDMH, a carcinogen. Alar's manufacturer, the Uniroyal Company, embarked on a two-year study of its effects, reaching the half-point of the investigation in January 1989. 75 The preliminary results showed that in rats and mice exposed to moderate amounts of Alar, there is no change in the incidence of tumors.76 But they also indicated a greater incidence of tumors in rodents exposed to high levels of UDMH. On the basis of these tentative findings, the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) made a series of extrapolations, interpreting the results as implying that between 4700 and 6200 preschool children, or about one out of every 4200 exposed to Alar, will develop cancer by age six.77 A 73. WILDAVSKY, supra note 19, offers many illustrations. 74. This narrative is based on WILDAVSKY, supra note 19, and on independent research. We do not offer page references for every proposition, but most of the factual propositions can be found therein. See id. at 201-22. The television show 60 Minutes publicized the allegation, presenting its report against a background consisting of a red apple overlaid with a skull and crossbones.79 Ed Bradley, the program's host, began the report as follows: "The most potent cancer-causing chemical in our food supply is a substance sprayed on apples to keep them on the trees longer and make them look better."80 The story received wide coverage in newspapers, magazines, talk shows, and television news programs. It also instigated a public outcry, complete with protests from many celebrities, including actress Meryl Streep, who founded an activist group called Mothers and Others for Pesticide Limits.81 The NRDC's self-conscious agenda was to create so many repetitions of [its] message that average American consumers (not just the policy elite in Washington) could not avoid hearing it-from many different media outlets within a short time. The idea was for the 'story' to achieve a life of its own, and continue for weeks and months to affect policy and consumer habits.82 The EPA reviewed the evidence and interpretations, concluding that the one in 111,000 rather than one in 4200.83 risk was vastly exaggerated: However, by the time the EPA made its announcement, the demand for apples had plummeted. Apples and apple products had been removed from stores and widely banned from school lunchrooms. Many people were treating apples as a highly toxic substance that one must handle with great care, and only when absolutely necessary. Moreover, doctors and poisoncontrol centers were facing a deluge of calls from frightened parents. One caller asked "whether it was safer to pour apple juice down the drain or to take it to a toxic waste dump. '8 4 In desperation, the nation's apple growers asked Uniroyal to withdraw Alar from the market. And before the year was out, but after the EPA announcement, Uniroyal agreed to stop domestic sales of Alar, evidently to avoid the costs of contested cancellation proceedings. 85 The EPA itself joined the alarmist bandwagon by announcing that it would 78. See WILDAVSKY, supra note 19, at 203. 79. Seeid. at201. 80. Id. at 201-02. 81. The intensity of the Alar scare might have stemmed, in part, from the resonance of a culturally very available text: the biblical story of the fall of Adam and Eve. This is speculation, to be sure, but many risk-related scares draw some of their intensity from links to pre-existing fears. Furious about the whole episode, the apple growers brought product defamation suits against the NRDC and 60 Minutes.87 But the expenses associated with this suit constitute only a small fraction of the social costs generated by the hysteria over Aar's hazards. In Washington State alone, the harm to the apple industry included at least $125 million in losses in the key six-month period. 88 The United States Department of Agriculture put aside $15 million to buy some of the surplus apples. 89 For all these costs, it is not even clear that the withdrawal of Alar resulted in a net benefit to children's health. A regulatory strategy that makes apples more expensive will lower their consumption, producing adverse health effects that may swamp any benefits from eliminating Alar. These observations suggest that Alar's withdrawal may not have survived any form of cost-benefit analysis. In any case, the EPA's initial risk estimate has turned out to be too high. According to its subsequent analyses, only one in 250,000 children exposed to Alar will develop cancer-doubtless a nontrivial risk, but less than half the initial EPA figure, and lower than that of the NRDC by a factor of sixty.90 Thus a 1991 editorial in Science argues that "a clearly dubious report about possible carcinogenicity by a special interest group was hyped by a news organization without the most simple checks on its reliability or documentation." 91 A United Nations panel, along with others who have investigated the data, found that even the EPA's revised figure is too high. Alar does not cause cancer in mice, it concluded, and it is not dangerous to people. 92 Words fail on Alar. The most charitable interpretation is that an environmental group ... decided to take matters into its own hands by writing a report and orchestrating its release to the media in so forceful a manner as to compel governmental action. The syndrome its report played out is by now distressingly familiar: a few suggestive tests involving tiny quantities raised way above the actual amount by extreme assumptions about children's eating habits, expanded further by statistical manipulation, extrapolated against huge populations to create row-upon-row of child cancer victims.93 Once Aar became identified as a threat to social welfare and, in particular, the lives of helpless children, it became risky to urge restraint in interpreting the figures. No official, and certainly no politician, wants to develop a reputation for softness on matters vital to children's health. Nor, in the face of reports of danger to children, is any official eager to tell worried parents that they should patiently wait for more scientific research. If some doubters and dissenters shade their views or mute their voices in response to such reservations, the relative content of the publicly available information will obviously get distorted. Specifically, information pointing to danger will become ever more available, raising its plausibility in the eyes of the many people who use availability as a criterion for evaluating the validity of such information. In the process, moreover, the burden of justifying one's beliefs will shift increasingly toward dissenters. Thus, as the Aar cascade took off, the proponents of banning Aar could increasingly take for granted that their safety concerns would be treated with respect. For their part, the opponents had to carry an increasingly heavy burden of being suspected of insensitivity to human suffering. There are indications that the relevant government officials did not believe that the crash resulted from terrorism; but with wild rumors circulating, and with denials of terrorist activity seeming callous or reckless, they simply pretended to take the claims seriously when expressing themselves publicly. A mere forty-five days after its creation, the White House Commission proposed extensive additional safeguards against terrorism. And within a month of this initial report, President Clinton signed most of the Commission's recommendations into law. The direct cost to taxpayers was estimated to be $400 million per year.95 The total price tag, including all costs to consumers and producers, apparently exceeds an estimated $6 billion.96 Yet the new security measures may not save any lives. On the contrary, they may even cost lives. Having made airline travel more expensive and more cumbersome, these measures have reduced the relative attractiveness of flying. Flying, however, is far less dangerous than driving. In fact, air travel is now the safest mode of transportation.97 Between 1960 and 1995 the fatal 94. For a general discussion, see Robert W. Hahn, The Economics of Airline Safety and Security: An Analysis of the White House Commission's Recommendations, 20 HARV. J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 791 (1997). We draw on that discussion here and on independent research, avoiding, for the sake of readability, footnotes for every mentioned fact. Additional examples from recent years include mass outcries over Agent Orange, asbestos in schools, and automobile airbags that endanger children.1°° Each of these cases has culminated in politically irresistible public demands for government action. Their common thread is that people tended to form their risk judgments largely, if not entirely, on the basis of information produced through a social process, rather than through personal experience or investigation. In each case, a public upheaval unfolded as vast numbers of players reacted to each other's actions and statements. And in each, the demand for swift, extensive, and costly government action came to be considered morally and socially desirable-even though, in most or all cases, the net benefit of the resulting regulations may well have been negative. 101 What explains widespread fixations on unthreatening waste dumps, nearly harmless chemicals, and unlikely causes of a tragic airplane crash, when for years on end far more serious health hazards, such as breast cancer, indoor air pollution, "junk food" consumption, and asthma in the inner city have commanded comparatively little attention? 02 What do the episodes involving Love Canal, Mar, and TWA 800 reveal about the formation of social policies? Do the underlying cognitive and social mechanisms carry lessons for the social sciences or study of the law? To what extent do they complement, reformulate, or undermine accounts of legislation and regulation based on the currently fashionable variants of public choice theory? 0 3 Finally, what implications do the mechanisms have for democratic theory? examples). 104. For a highly influential variant of this argument, see Herbert A. Simon, Theories of Bounded Rationality, in DECISION AND ORGANIZATION: A VOLUME IN HONOR OF JACOB MARSCHAK 161 (C. B. McGuire & Roy Radner eds., 1972); and Herbert A. Simon, Rationality as Process and as Product of Thought, 68 AM. ECON. REV., May 1978, (papers & proceedings), at 1, 10-13 (discussing the processes through which rational man makes resource allocation decisions and how the outcomes are often substantially inefficient). See also John Conlisk, Why Bounded Rationality?, 34 J. ECON. LITERATURE 669 (1996) (surveying previous scholarship and arguing for incorporating bounded rationality in economic models); Jolls et al., supra note 13, at 1477-79 (explaining how bounded rationality produces predictable mistakes). Cognitive findings about risk perception are generally studied through laboratory experiments. Over the past quarter-century, cognitive psychologists have reported a bewildering array of findings, and the publication of new findings continues. 10 6 These findings fall into several categories. The following is a summary of this increasingly complex literature, with an emphasis on what is critical for our purposes. 108. See Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kalmeman & David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law), 107 YALE L.J. 2071, 2109-10 (1998) (arguing that a jury's prior determination of compensatory damages is likely to have a large effect on the size of the actual award). The availability heuristic can obviously produce judgmental mistakes with unfortunate behavioral consequences." 5  The ease with which an event's occurrences can be recalled need not have any bearing on its actual frequency.11 6 Insofar as we estimate the incidence of a disease with the aid of the availability heuristic, we fail to compensate for special characteristics of our own knowledge, experience, memories, and acquaintances; as a result, our judgments contain systematic errors that make us behave either too cautiously or not cautiously enough. Likewise, if alarmist information is more salient, and thus more readily recalled, we may end up exaggerating the gravity of certain risks. 2. Prospect theory. caused by the availability heuristic). count for the overestimation and underestimation of risk). Whether a particular change qualifies as a loss or a gain depends on the relevant reference point, which can be manipulated. Is a change in the risk associated with some environmental hazard a loss or a gain? The answer could well depend on whether the reference point is 1979 or 1999. Loss aversion thus implies that one can distort policy evaluations through framing effects. 124 Like loss aversion, the certainty effect can be triggered by choosing an appropriate reference point. We will show later how the certainty effect and loss aversion connect with the availability heuristic to shape, and be shaped by, availability cascades. 125 3. The relative acceptability of risks. Risk Traits Familiarity Aggravating Mitigating Personal control Uncontrollable Controllable Voluntariness Involuntary Voluntary Media attention Heavy media coverage No media coverage Equity Evenly distributed Unevenly distributed Impact on children Children at special risk Children not at risk Impact on future generations Future generations at risk Future generations not at risk Reversibility Irreversible Reversible Identifiability of victims Victims known Victims unknown Accompanying benefits Benefits clear Benefits invisible Source Human-generated Natural origins Trust in relevant institutions Low trust in institutions High trust in institutions Immediacy of adverse effects Adverse effects immediate Adverse effects delayed Understanding Mechanisms poorly understood Mechanisms well understood Precedents History of accidents No past accidents Note: The first column lists certain important risk traits. The second lists the conditions that make the risk more threatening and, hence, less acceptable, holding all else constant. The third lists the conditions that reduce the threat of the risk, making it more tolerable. Outside of laboratory settings, of course, people consult each other; they learn from each other; they influence one another's values; they defer to each other; they share sources of public information; they try to mold each other's beliefs and values; and their social interactions shape their knowledge, perceptions, and interpretations. In sum, social processes contribute to the evolution of risk perceptions and also to the formation and transformation of the Availability Heuristic Let us consider a few cases in point. The frames through which individuals interpret a situation are generally formed socially. Their reference points for assessing gains and losses are generally given by popular conventions and communicated through conversation, not chosen by individuals autonomously. Anchors, which in principle can vary enormously across individuals, are in practice the product of social interactions and widely shared information flows. For example, a key anchor for a damages award will be the same for every member of a jury by virtue of the plaintiff s request. more equal than others,"'13 4 one heuristic is more fundamental than the restat least in social contexts where people, lacking reliable information of their own, look to others for interpretations of events. In such contexts, information does not influence individual perceptions unless it becomes available in the public domain, so the availability heuristic necessarily interacts with all the other heuristics and biases. Insofar as people exchange information with one another, the availability of information determines the characteristics of framing, representativeness, anchoring, and reference points. Likewise, (showing various cultural influences on the acceptability of risks). Against this background, it is not surprising that culturally and economically similar nations can display dramatically different reactions to identical risks. While nuclear power enjoys widespread acceptance in France, it arouses considerable fear in the United States. 135 Another implication of multiple equilibria is that any given risk assessment may change suddenly and dramatically even in the absence of any major change in the relevant 135. Analogous differences are observed across subgroups within any given society. Here is an example of particular interest to legal scholars in the United States: Casual empiricism suggests a substantial difference between law students at the University of Chicago and those at, say, Columbia, Yale, or Stanford in their apparent convictions on "hot button" political issues. Insofar as selection bias is minimal and the students entering these schools are not significantly different, the observed opinion differences are perhaps a product of availability cascades. On certain issues, "liberal" judgments are socially "taxed" at Chicago and socially "subsidized" at Columbia, Yale, and Stanford, which means that they are expressed and heard more commonly at the latter three. It would be valuable to know whether the differences endure after graduation. The concept of an availability market suggests the possibility of competition among availability entrepreneurs. Advocates of putting a cap on punitive damages will point to egregious cases of excess, such as the awarding of millions in damages because of hot coffee spilled on someone's arm at a fast 136. The general principle here is that small shocks may produce disproportionately large reactions. The principle is developed and demonstrated in KuRAN, supra note 5, at 247-348; Kuran, Now Out of Never, supra note 3; and Kuran, Sparks and Prairie Fires, supra note 3. See also ARTHUR, supra note 6; Bikhchandani et al., A Theory of Fads, supra note 3, at 993. An analysis of any mass upheaval that triggers political and legal responses to perceived risks must take account of two sets of influences: (1) social influences on the individual, and (2) individual influences on society. falsification. And by misrepresenting her risk judgment in public, she engages in a form of knowledge falsification. 142 The distinction between private and public variables calls for a refinement to the circular process described above. People's public judgments and preferences influence both the private and the public variables of other individuals. But the mechanisms are separate. In the former case, the influence rests on the informational value of public words and deeds; in the latter, it works through the generated reputational costs and benefits. As with any bidirectional relationship, one gains analytical clarity by focusing on each inference separately. We shall start with the transformation of private variables under the influence of public variables, then move onto the reverse influence. These analytical steps will prepare us for a fuller description of availability cascades, including the efforts that perceptive individuals undertake to exploit them. Because it is costly.to gather pertinent information, individuals ordinarily seek to free ride on knowledge that is publicly available through sources ranging from gossip and rumors to scientific reports. Most risk judgments rest on little, if any, personal investigation; they depend largely, if not wholly, on trust placed in the judgments of selected others. Consider Barbara Quimby, the Love Canal resident who sobbed before television cameras. 143 Quimby had not analyzed water samples or studied their impurities. 144. See id. 145. See DAMASIO, supra note 2, at 131-34. A person who encounters a leopard will sense a grave danger even if no one else seems alarmed. We all are hardwired to fear large, moving objects. To be sure, the media, especially the print media, feature various opinions on many issues, and on matters of risk they alone cannot account for an observed homogenization of individual knowledge or dispositions. But the diversity of opinion can be illusory because the editors of media outlets typi For the moment, let us abstract from the social pressures that cause people's private characteristics to diverge from their public characteristics. As an analytical step, we are thus assuming that no differences exist between private and public risk judgments, between private and public risk preferences, or between private and public policy preferences. Against this simplified background, consider the members of a society debating how to respond, if at all, to a toxic spill. As individuals, they all want to know what will be best for themselves, their families, and their communities. Generally, however, they will devote little time to examining the scientific evidence because, if nothing else, they would not know how to interpret such data without extensive study. Most of the community's members will form their private risk judgments, risk preferences, and policy preferences through very limited information. Moreover, the acquisition and processing of the readily available information will be shaped by one or more cognitive heuristics that economize on both mental effort and time. Suppose that large segments of the media are comparing the source of contamination to leaded gasoline, which was banned after a cost-benefit study showed it to be a highly toxic ion in the seemingly diverse coverage of the war with Iraq). Ordinarily, individuals differ in their preconceptions, the reliability of their personal sources of information, their openness to public discourse, and supra. To be sure, this stylized logic oversimplifies the way that most individuals interpret public claims. Numbers alone do not give information validity. Among the other influential factors is credibility. If one hundred people are denying that the contamination of Love Canal poses a danger to human beings, and a spokesperson for the National Association of Chemical Manufacturers joins the chorus by releasing data consistent with the claim, most listeners will discount the data on the ground that his association has an enormous stake in making the contamination seem trivial. His statements might even kindle suspicions of a cover-up, making listeners more, rather than less, receptive to evidence of serious danger.1 61 In any case, people's preconceptions make them exhibit selective trust and mistrust. Some people are skeptical of governmental claims about risk; others think that if a corpo 157. Part of the reason is that the brain's circuitry at any given moment reflects each individ ual's unique history and circumstances. See DAMASIO, supra note 2, at 260. 62 (1984) (examining, inter alia, television executives' use of canned laughter in sitcoms). C. The Distortion of Public Discourse Through Social Pressures By abstracting from social pressures, the previous Part disregarded the possibility that people will misrepresent their thoughts in order to accommodate the perceived agendas of others. But only rarely are social pressures negligible, and purely informational cascades are the exception rather than the rule. 163. For a definition of reputational utility and a discussion of how it relates to other sources 164. In addition, the more powerful person might be presumed to know more, by virtue of his professional success. Another complexity is that conformism, insofar as it is driven by the desire to be accepted and liked, often competes with the impulse to stand out and apart from the crowd, gain recognition, and (what is not the same thing) be oneself. Some people refrain from preference or knowledge falsification even when they thereby hurt their popularity. In addition, some people perceive general public opprobrium a subsidy rather than a tax, especially when it is accompanied by widespread approval, perhaps even a leadership role, within a dissident subcommunity. 169 As we shall see, the boundaries of acceptable nonconformism can change through an availability cascade. 165. See Lynn M. Sanders, What is Whiteness? Race-of-Interviewer Effects When All of the Interviewers Are Black, Paper Presented at the Social Science History Association Annual Meeting, Chicago, Ill. (Nov. 1998) (demonstrating that black interviewees gave less liberal, more "white" answers on issues such as police brutality and the fairness of the legal system when led to believe their interviewer was white) (on file with the Stanford Law Review). See generally Tetlock, supra note 131, at 662-63 (describing the acceptability heuristic as causing people to shift their views toward those of the perceived audience). We have already touched on the origins of the social pressures that create incentives for tailoring one's public expressions to social expectations. Where policies will create winners and losers, not everyone simply reacts to pressures. Ever alert to the mechanisms under consideration, some individuals take it upon themselves to shape the pressures in order to mold public discourse and control the policy selection process. Examples of such availability entrepreneurs include Lois Marie Gibbs in the case of Love Canal and members of the NRDC in the Alar case. Availability entrepreneurs actively encourage the statement of views favorable to these options and discourage the statement of unfavorable views. A precondition for a reputational cascade is thus the possibility of inducing splits between the private and public "selves" of a sufficient number of people. Such a split requires a willingness on the part of many citizens to shade their public expressions and tailor their public actions in the interest of protecting their social standing. those who oppose them. They make individuals seem altruistic or selfish, virtuous or vicious, depending on what preferences and beliefs they express. People ordinarily want to be perceived as standing on high moral ground, so in the presence of sufficiently strong pressures, they adjust their expressions accordingly. Suppose that questioning the wisdom of relocating the Love Canal residents is generally equated with obtuseness and cold-heartedness, is construed as giving antiand calling for further scientific study environmentalist firms time to develop their defenses. Under these circumstances, residents, observers, and policy makers will all think twice before expressing misgivings about the dominant diagnoses or policies. The personal motives that underlie a purely reputational cascade differ fundamentally from those of a purely informational one. In the reputational variant, a person asks himself, "How will my community think of me if I fail to endorse its dominant position?" And he then falls in line upon gaining awareness of the prevailing political mood. In the informational variant, a poorly informed individual seeks the truth by asking herself, "What is the dominant view within my society?" And she jumps on the bandwagon in motion by basing her views on those of others. In the former case individuals are motivated solely by social approval; in the latter they want only to know the truth. The balanced perspective offered here implies that when a possible risk, such as the contamination of a canal, is characterized as a dangerous problem or, alternatively, as no threat whatsoever, there will be two distinct influences on listeners. On the one hand, the characterization will shape their private risk judgments, risk preferences, and policy preferences. On the other, it will teach them something about the evolving political climate, thus shaping their perceptions of the reputational costs and benefits associated with the possible public expressions. The public counterparts of the foregoing variables-the judgments and preferences they choose to convey in so 171. For critiques of the two extreme positions, see James S. Coleman, A Rational Choice Perspective on Economic Sociology, in THE HANDBOOK OF ECONOMIC SOCIOLOGY 166 (Neil J. Smelser & Richard Swedberg eds., 1994); Mark Granovetter, Economic Action and Social Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness, 91 Ai. J. SOC. 481 (1985); and Dennis H. Wrong, The Oversocialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology, 26 AM. SOC. REv. 183 (1961). Both processes-interdependent responses driven by reputational motives as well as those fueled by informational motives-add to the availability of knowledge pointing to a danger. Astute individuals will sense that reputational incentives are breeding knowledge and preference falsification. If nothing else, involuntary "body language" will sometimes publicize thoughts and feelings that people are striving to keep private. 174 But one can know that public communications are partly feigned and try to make allowances for the dissembling without discounting it sufficiently. 175 The upshot is that knowledge and preference falsification can have lasting effects on how people actually think and feel. 173. People may consider it reputationally prudent to endorse the claim even if they understand how social pressures are distorting the public communications of others. One can recognize the insincerity of public discourse without being prepared to resist the underlying pressures. The reputational costs imposed on critics may, over time, lead to intellectual paralysis. Insofar as people refrain from expressing their doubts, uncertainties, and misgivings, public discourse will become impoverished, eventually making people whose perceptions depend on public discourse stop questioning what appears as the conventional wisdom. In other words, the unthinkable ideas of one period can turn into the unthought ideas of a later one. In one period, people with doubts do not speak out; in the next, doubts have ceased to exist. 177 In the course of an availability cascade, the content of the discussions will generally involve many of the risk traits listed in Table I. Communications will address, for example, matters of equity, such as the unfairness of businesses endangering the safety of a middle-class community. They will establish a reference point against which the risk is to be measured. And they will categorize the risk by highlighting similarities with previous dangers. As increasing numbers of individuals appear to agree on the specifications for various acceptability traits, and these specifications become more available in public discourse, cognitive biases other than availability will come into play. For example, as a consensus begins to form that the episode 178. See A Legal Time Bomb for Corporations, Bus. WK., June 16, 1980, at 150. 179. See Editorial, supra note 62. 180. See We've Been Asked, Hazardous Wastes-How Dangerous?, U.S. NEWS & WORLD REP., Nov. 5, 1979, at 46. Such analogies were doubtless motivated by the common tendency to treat crimes involving sneakiness as especially serious. In medieval Europe, misdemeanors committed at night were punished with extraordinary force. See JACQUES LE GOFF, MEDIEVAL CIVILIZATION 178 (Julia Barrow, trans., 1988). Like all errors, availability errors can have significant social consequences. Typically, there are both losers and winners. Knowing this, pressure groups-some entirely self-interested, others committed to a social cause for altruistic reasons-seek to instigate availability cascades. Their chances of success are limited insofar as people have access to reliable information of their own. But even then their causes are not hopeless. Pressure groups can alter people's perceptions of their self-interest, or at least the expression of their needs, through measures to prevent frank discussion. Reports of suicides tend to fuel new suicides through processes akin to those we are discussing here. Through the availability heuristic, wellpublicized suicides foster an awareness of suicide as a way out of pain. They also reduce the stigma attached to suicide, especially when the victims are celebrities who evoke sympathy.8 7 But to identify certain adverse effects of publicizing the commonness of suicides hardly implies that the availability campaigns in question constitute cases of cynical, self-serving manipulation. Suicide hotlines are run by people with honorable goals: prevention of despair and preservation of life. Nor does our observation imply that the campaigns are counterproductive on the whole. The lives saved through funds raised may well outnumber those lost due to the added holiday-season publicity. are typically minor, although the rate usually peaks in summer. See id. another phenomenon that involves availability cascades: "copycat crimes." See id. at 62-64. Whatever the merits of their campaigns, availability entrepreneurs make use of political institutions and the media to trigger cascades. In one common pattern, a special-interest group supplies information to members of Congress, who then hold hearings that enable the group to testify and publicize its mission. During the process, journalists help spread the group's message, partly through leaks they receive. Citizens join the fray through letters, phone calls, and participation in talk shows, thus heightening awareness of the identified problem, as happened in the Love Canal and Alar scares. Eventually, laws or regulations are adopted that give the instigating group fresh opportunities to provoke new uproars in order to strengthen the achieved general consciousness.1 90 The wide acceptance that falsehoods gain in the popular imagination can be traced partly, of course, to those who concoct and first report them. But another part of the responsibility falls on individuals who spread news that they hear, thus making it increasingly available to others. Availability cascades create serious problems for democracy and raise important issues for democratic theory. They create a danger that apparently democratic outcomes will rest on misinformation and be unrepresentative, in any normatively attractive sense, of citizens' actual beliefs, desires, and judgments. In discussing the relation between availability cascades and democratic theory, our focus remains on risk regulation, although the implications derived in this Part of the article, like the remedies we shall propose in the next Part, have much broader relevance. ally negative impression about a profession, another to identify particular cases of sloppiness. Our call for caution about populist firestorms evokes two time-honored themes of the American tradition of public law. The first involves the ideal of deliberative democracy, which elaborates on the principle of democratic judgment by insisting that policies be based on careful deliberation and reflection rather than on mechanical reactions to citizen preferences.1 96 A principal point of the original Constitution was to ensure that representatives "refine and enlarge" popular sentiment, rather than automatically translate it into law. 197 The key institutions of the American system of government were designed to promote the desired filtering. The second and more modem theme is that policy choices should rest on sound knowledge of relevant evidence. In the context of risk regulation, this objective requires a measure of deference to the purely factual judgments of scientific experts.1 98 It also requires democratic policy makers to discount regulatory demands rooted in availability cascades based on false information, to pay special attention to trained experts who have had time to put claims in perspective, and to show initiative in responding to significant problems that the citizenry happens to be overlooking. 194. For more complete definitions, see KuRAN, supra note 5, at 45-59. 195. Skepticism about popular frenzies is hardly new. See generally THE FEDERALIST No. 10 Suppose, for example, that more lives can be saved by regulating bicycles than by regulating coal-fired power plants. It does not follow that the government should automatically accord priority to reducing the former source of risk. As studies on risk acceptability show, popular judgments may well depend on factors other than the life-years at stake. From a deliberative perspective, judgments about qualitative differences among risks can legitimately influence political decisionmaking and legal outcomes, provided they are reflective and can survive critical scrutiny.20 1 Specifically, such judgments should be based to the extent possible on an accurate understanding of the facts, including the range of scientific uncertainty. In sum, a deliberative democracy seeks not only to ensure the accuracy of risk judgments but also to weight these according to reflective risk preferences. The first and most basic implication of the foregoing analysis is that a representative government may justifiably question the private risk judgments and preferences that underlie people's public communications on 200. See Albert L. Nichols & Richard J. Zeckhauser, The Perils of Prudence: How Conserva 203. One commentator has argued that preferences expressed in settings that encourage careful consideration of the facts, respectful listening, and open-ended learning are more valuable than those expressed outside of such settings. See JAMES S. FISHKIN, THE VOICE OF THE PEOPLE (1995). "Deliberative opinion polling," the device Fishkin proposes for creating the appropriate setting, gives participants the cover of anonymity only in the polling that concludes several days of deliberation. See id. at 161-76. This leaves the device open to distortions rooted in preference and knowledge falsification. Insofar as its discussions are afflicted by insincerity, the learning that it fosters will reflect the censored thoughts that participants choose to communicate rather than the group's sincere and complete understandings. Even the members of a small and educated group may feel compelled to shade or misrepresent their preferences and judgments. Moreover, availability cascades may play a role in the transformation of its private sentiments. In principle, however, the educational advantages of deliberative polling can be combined with those of anonymous polls following even the dictates of private opinion. With respect to risk issues on which individuals are unlikely to be sufficiently informed to make good judgments, or where cognitive biases tend to produce distortions, the private opinion of an educated representative sample may be more valuable than that of the population as a whole. The point remains, however, that governments can protect their policies from serious availability distortions through mechanisms identifying some form of private opinion.2°4 Each of our first two implications goes against an inclination common for more than half a century in neoclassical economics as well as its many cross-disciplinary derivatives, including the economic analysis of law: the tendency to equate people's choices 205 with "revealed preferences" that the social system must accommodate in the interest of efficiency. 20 6 Whatever the setting in which preferences are expressed, what they "reveal" depends on the stimuli responsible for their formation. A given distribution of public preferences may signal that the pertinent individuals have felt pressured to keep certain types of information to themselves. Alternatively, those preferences may point to people's lack of exposure to private knowledge whose uncensored circulation would have produced important influences. In and of themselves, people's words and deeds concerning risks tell us too little about what they truly know, what they sincerely want, and what influences have shaped their dispositions, attitudes, and sensitivities. From the knowledge that eighty percent of the American people support a massive program to clean up a waste site, one cannot legitimately infer that such a program would please even the majority. Nor should one infer that the program conducted and revealed before the final distribution of preferences is determined. For further details, see Timur Kuran, Insincere Deliberation and Democratic Failure, 12 CRITICAL REv. 529 (1998). Even in the absence of availability cascades, cognitive biases can have substantial effects on perceptions and decisions. Yet in exploiting a basic judgmental heuristic-the availability heuristic-availability cascades aggravate various cognitive biases, with socially costly consequences for regulatory policy. C. Undesirable Law and Policy Another immediate implication is that public discourse on any given risk may produce scientifically unnecessary, ineffective, even counterproductive policies. This follows from the possibility of untruthful and uninformed public discourse. If people base their judgments on what other people say and do, and if the words and deeds of these others are weakly informed, public discourse will rest on flawed judgments. And if people who happen to possess information pointing to the unlikelihood of serious danger hide their doubts about the wisdom of committing massive resources to cleaning up harmless wastes, the supporters of the clean-up program will easily achieve their aims. Having won the political struggle, they will then see their empirically unsupportable claims of danger become the conventional wisdom. 208. For related suggestions, see RICHARD A. POSNER, SEX AND REASON 383-404 (1992). 209. An exception, which has been a persistent intellectual puzzle, is gambling. Americans lose about $50 billion in legal gambling every year, which suggests that many benefit from taking the risks involved in gambling. See Want to Bet on an Election?, ECONOMIsT, May 2, 1998, at 31. On the associated intellectual challenges, see KENNETH J. ARROW, ESSAYS IN THE THEORY OF RISK-BEARING 1-43, 90-120 (1971). Like purely informational and purely reputational cascades, availability cascades eventually come to a stop. One reason is that some learning takes place independently of social forces, as when a person who accidentally drinks a glass of water from Love Canal senses, when he remains healthy, that the Canal's toxicity is exaggerated. Another reason is that the social approval obtainable through various forms of insincerity can come at the expense of intrinsic benefits. People who complain about actually harmless waste sites incur huge costs when the government orders their relocation. Their reputational benefits are accompanied by intrinsic inconveniences. The cascade comes to a stop when individuals have no net incentive to alter the preferences or judgments they convey to others. By definition, the stopping point forms an expressive equilibrium. never been to the Niagara Falls region, even those not yet born when Love Canal made the headlines daily, know of the episode through a public discourse still controlled by an availability cascade that ran its course twenty years ago.210 E. Uncoordinated Law A basic observation that undergirds the entire analysis has been that people's cognitive limitations make them compartmentalize their risks. Specifically, it makes them consider risks essentially in isolation from one another, rather than jointly and in a manner that permits the identification of tradeoffs. Because such compartmentalization is ubiquitous, risk regulations may show great variability across different risks, among different populations, and over time. Let us take up each of these implications in turn. 210. Our own informal survey of law students at the University of Chicago reveals that the problem of "abandoned hazardous waste sites" ranks high among a long list of social risks, even though few experts would concur. See Christopher Houston & Cass R. Sunstein, Risk Assessment and Resource Allocation Among Law Students, 48 J. LEGAL EDUc. 496 (1998). The possibility of variability over time in any country reflects the vulnerability of many cascade-generated equilibria. Because the public discourse that supports a given expressive equilibrium may rest substantially on preference and knowledge falsification, even an inherently minor shock may have huge repercussions. Specifically, by making hidden doubts surface and by giving exposure to unarticulated knowledge, the right shock will alter public discourse and cause the equilibrium to unravel. The unraveling may even cause both expressive and substantive fears to change sides, ushering in a dramatically different expressive equilibrium. As a case in point, a quartercentury ago few people considered second-hand smoke a health hazard. And members of this tiny minority could not ask smokers to move elsewhere without risking angry or condescending reactions. Now most Americans consider second-hand smoke harmful, and many seriously exaggerate the risk.222 Today it is smokers, the minority, who risk ostracism when they publicly assert that second-hand smoke is harmless. Likewise, only a few years ago, nonscientists showed little concern about the thinning of the ozone layer. Now most people seem alarmed. Each of these transformations occurred over periods much shorter than it took for the relevant scientific evidence to accumulate. Early on in the paper, we saw evidence of an even faster transformation. It took just a few months for Love Canal to heighten fears of industrial waste sites.22 3 Our analysis raises the possibility of large gains from institutional reforms. The motivation for such reforms is that availability cascades constitute a major, perhaps the leading, source of the risk-related scares that have cramped federal regulatory policy at both the legislative and executive levels, with high costs in terms of lives lost, lowered quality of life, and dollars wasted. Especially when they run their course quickly, cascades force governments to adopt expensive measures without careful consideration of the facts. The consequent rush to action need not pose a problem where the cascade draws attention to a major neglected risk and the proposed measures turn out to solve a genuine social problem; as already mentioned above, Many features of the prevailing system of checks and balances offer protection against availability cascades. For example, the bicameral legislature prevents cascades within one chamber from creating legislation on their own. Still, as matters now stand, the American government is imperfectly equipped to provide meaningful resistance against social pressures grounded in misinformation. When there is an upsurge of interest in addressing a particular risk, the government loses its ability to set sensible priorities, undertake long-range planning, and enforce intertemporal consistency. 224 It has been estimated that the American government could save an additional 60,000 lives per year at no additional cost or, alternatively, save the lives it currently does for as much as $31 billion less than it now spends.22 The reforms proposed in this Part would provide instruments for achieving such gains. may be found in BESSETTE, supra note 196. The Texas lawsuit that pitted beef producers against television talk show host Oprah Winfrey229 brought into sharp relief one possible measure against harmful availability cascades: civil actions to deter individuals and groups from instigating or aggravating such cascades in the hope of profiting from the ensuing panic. Conscious of the potential advantages, twelve states have enacted product disparagement laws.230 As one might expect, many observers consider such laws to be constitutionally unacceptable devices designed to placate powerful economic actors intent on suppressing legitimate doubts about the safety of their products. 231 But the underlying issues are more complicated. For one thing, it is unclear that all or most product disparagement laws violate the First Amendment. For another, their beneficiaries would hardly be limited to industries trying to block reports about the defects of their products. Just as ordinary libel law serves to discourage public falsehoods about individuals, product disparagement laws discourage false statements about products. In each case, the purpose is to prevent availability cascades from causing irreparable damage. Indeed, predictable social forces may reinforce rather than dampen sensational charges. One such force involves the mass media. The typical newspaper, magazine, or television station incurs a large penalty whenever it 4 Because a good relafalls behind its rivals in reporting "breaking news. ' tive position in the media hierarchy translates into disproportionately large profit differentials, a media outlet that exercises caution in reporting a frightening story may find itself at a huge, possibly irreversible, competitive disadvantage. 235 Facing a prisoner's dilemma with respect to sensational stories, it has every reason to compete aggressively to report sensationalistic stories as rapidly as possible. Another social force that reinforces sensational changes consists of reputational pressures. Evolving reputational pressures can make it personally costly for individuals to defend a disparaged product. And the consequent individual reticence may contribute to the growth and spread of availability errors. concurring). We now turn to the core institutions of the federal government. Congress is currently quite vulnerable to availability cascades, partly because its members feel compelled to respond to mass demands for legislation simply 1. Risk oversight. Like any government body, the risk regulation committee would most certainly become the target of well-organized lobbies intent on molding policies to their own advantage.2 4 1 But it should be possible to dampen the in 239. A counteracting factor is that the committee chairs, insofar as they consider their seats secure, have a long-term interest in maintaining consistency across policies. However, even where this condition is met, the chair may not be capable of blocking the demands of the membership. Other possible safeguards against harmful availability cascades would involve the executive branch, which is probably in the best position to analyze risks comprehensively. 247 Unlike the courts, the executive branch is capable of taking a bird's eye view of the entire regulatory system; and unlike Congress, it is already equipped with institutions designed to promote overall consistency. Obviously, measures adopted by the executive branch must be consistent with laws enacted by Congress; in principle, therefore, the legislature has the power to undermine any executive initiative to place regulations on more rational footing. Yet the executive branch exercises a powerful influence on public opinion, and it has considerable power to act on its own. help prevent cascades driven by misperceptions. tive branch). 2. Risk Information Site on the World Wide Web. We propose the creation of a central Risk Information Site (RIS) on the World Wide Web. This site would list various risks and identify the probabilities, or range of probabilities, associated with each of them. The technology of the web allows the nesting of multiple levels of detail. The most elementary level ought to be extremely simple to follow-simple enough, perhaps, for a high-school student to check the latest scientific knowledge on, say, the risks associated with Alar or Love Canal; below this layer would lie progressively more sophisticated layers, each accessible at the click of a mouse. Where the scientific community is divided on a particular risk assessment, as it is on the thinning of the ozone layer, the RIS should make the substance of the controversy as clear as possible, allowing websurfers to review the opposing arguments. The proposed website could be designed and operated by a nongovernmental Risk Information Center (RIC), along the lines of Consumer Reports. It could even be a profit-oriented enterprise; after all, there exist profit-driven credit bureaus that enjoy an exemplary reputation because they have a stake in their maintenance. 2 1 Only if no nongov to the case at hand, nonscientists may lack trust in the scientific community. This possibility could be minimized by selecting reviewers from among members of the scientific community who are respected for their integrity. If the peer review process falls into disrepute, nonscientists will turn elsewhere for information, thus becoming more susceptible to availability errors. In a world in which highly trusted scientists quickly evaluate all perceived risks and post their findings in comprehensible form on a widely known website, availability errors of the kinds that motivated this article would be less likely to develop than they currently do. Were a news program to claim that apples carry a deadly poison, people could check the RIS to learn what is known about the identified risk. If scientific tests suggested an infinitesimal risk, fewer people would believe the claim, and no major cascade would follow. It is possible, of course, for credible tests to be nonexistent. In this event, the RIC, or possibly some other organization such as the one we will propose next, would immediately undertake new tests to evaluate the claim. If the claim proved groundless, a possibly costly cascade would be prevented without involving the courts. 252. BREYER, supra note 65, offers many examples of preferences and judgments based on erroneous information. In view of the dangers of availability (and unavailability) cascades, OIRA should be reinvigorated and its powers extended and strengthened. This measure would serve to deter unreasonable regulations. Specifically, the OIRA should have, and be known to have, authority over both prioritysetting and cost-benefit balancing. It should be committed to mitigating the most unfortunate effects of availability cascades, not only by keeping small risks from consuming huge resources, but also by ensuring that major risks receive attention. Where experts working under OIRA lacked confidence in risk judgments spreading through a cascade, they would conduct fact-finding exercises. And, depending on the results, they would publicize any inaccuracies in popular beliefs. Likewise, where a scientific study suggested that a particular risk judgment should be revised, OIRA would examine the study's methodology, check whether its results can be replicated, and disseminate its findings. OIRA's mission should also include the dissemination of systematic information about risks, including changes in what scientists know about particular risks and the methods for controlling them. Finally, it should con tion unless the benefits outweigh the costs to society). cussing the role of OIRA in the Reagan and Bush Administrations). Courts, too, have a role to play in preventing excessive reactions to availability cascades. Most naturally, they can undertake judicial review of administrative actions alleged to be "arbitrary" or "capricious" within the meaning of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA).2 60 The ban on arbitrary or capricious action is increasingly being understood as requiring agencies to produce plausible evidence that their actions produce "more good than harm. '261 This notion appears to embody a presumptive requirement that costs not be grossly disproportionate to benefits. 262 Thus, existing doc trine authorizes courts to invalidate the most extreme and the most poorly conceived regulatory proposals, at least if they are not required by statutes. Courts can hardly be expected to identify availability cascades or to invalidate regulatory initiatives merely for being products of cascades. But if regulators are required to demonstrate that their policies would plausibly make things better rather than worse, taking account of all relevant variables, we will have a potentially valuable safeguard against harmful cascades. Finally, the "more good than harm" doctrine entails a mandate that, under the APA, agencies undergoing arbitrariness review should make a plausible showing that a regulation's costs are not grossly disproportionate to its benefits. We have said that our analysis makes a cognitive case for costbenefit analysis as a safeguard against socially destructive availability cascades. If availability and unavailability cascades can divert attention from important questions, then a broader reason exists for thinking that some form of cost-benefit analysis can do some good.267 F. Summary: Revisiting the Cases By way of summary, let us explore how the availability cascades discussed early in the article might have fared had the relevant institutional reforms been in place. The proposals that followed the terrorism-related concerns involving TWA 800268 are probably the easiest to reconsider in this light. Most would not have survived cost-benefit analysis. Studies probably would have shown that, in encouraging driving by raising the cost of flying, the proposals would not have enhanced overall safety and might well have harmed it.269 Our reforms would have had the same function as an earlier use of cost-benefit analysis, which tested a proposal to make young airplane passengers fly in their own child safety seats.270 In that case, cost-benefit analysis revealed that such a restriction would cost rather than save lives (by encouraging driving), and this finding helped defeat the proposal. 7. Availability cascades that spread empirically baseless information create and counterproductive regulations. These pressures might be mitigated by equipping the political system with "circuit breakers" to slow availability cascades and encourage the reconsideration of the demands they spawn. Without removing the right to select risk policies democratically, all three branches of government should be enabled to resist demands driven by misinformation about risks and to seek consistency among risk policies. rule.274 To ascribe moral authority to numbers is to instruct individuals that if they are outnumbered they are likely to be wrong and deserving of criticism. It is also to signal to the majority that it has a moral right to intimidate dissenters. As compared with people socialized to believe in the virtues of majority rule, those who understand the mechanics and consequences of availability cascades will be more resistant to their informational and reputational signals. The debate preceding the Gulf War of 1991 provides another instructive example from national politics. People on both sides of the debate recognized that their cause would benefit by framing the issue appropriately and exploiting the availability heuristic. Pro-interventionists sought to raise the availability of images of the Korean War, which is widely believed to have inhibited the spread of communism; anti-interventionists reminded Americans of the Vietnam War, generally remembered as a death trap born out of miscalculation, ignorance, and self-serving exaggeration of the stakes involved.277 (referring to Reagan's repeated use of anecdotes about "welfare queens"). There are also groups that work to prevent potentially salient events capable of producing availability cascades inimical to their legislative agendas. In 1998, a group of Greek-Americans organized a campaign that induced a famous actor to give up the lead role in a high-budget film about the life of Mustafa Kemal Atatfirk, the founder of modem Turkey. 2 2 Even though the period when Atatfirk held Turkey's presidency is remembered as the golden age of modem Turkish-Greek relations, the campaigners, who condemned Atatiirk for actions they perceived as evil, feared the film would depict him favorably. 2 3 They also feared that a reverential portrayal in a major Hollywood production would improve popular feelings toward Turkey, which they considered a threat to Greek interests.2 4 One of their justifications was that the probable transformation of public opinion would alter the political bal Availability cascades are relevant not only to routine legislative struggles but also to the making and exercise of constitutional law. Consider first the matter of constitutional design. The rules for constitution-making and constitution-amending 2 7 provide safeguards against bad cascades. In particular, they call for extended deliberation to prevent rushed, myopic, or misinformed judgments. Proposed amendments succeed only by surviving a complex process of "peer review" by many people in various institutional settings.288 Like the rules that govern constitutional design, the checks and balances of the Constitution are designed to counteract the potentially destructive social forces that we have highlighted here.2 9 So understood, the prevailing constitutional limits to rapid decisionmaking hardly constitute undemocratic obstacles to implementation of the popular will. On the contrary, they are instruments to improve the workings of democracy in the light of the inescapable cognitive limitations of individual citizens and their susceptibility to social pressures. 2 0 The courts are not immune to the social mechanisms examined in this article. Judges are subject to the availability heuristic, vulnerable to informational biases, and responsive to reputational incentives. All this leaves them open to the influences of availability cascades.291 Occasionally, a single legal decision-for example, Dred Scott v. Sandford,292 Plessy v. Ferguson,293 Lochner v. New York,294 Brown v. Board of Education,29s Roe v. 289. See generally BESSETTE, supra note 226 (examining the role of deliberation in American to amend the Constitution). constraints on majorities facilitate democracy). The evolution of the American legal community's understanding of Roe v. Wade offers an example of concurrent and competing local availability cascades. In principle, Roe may be treated as either "another Brown" or "another Lochner." Through the mutually reinforcing reputational and informational mechanisms discussed here, large segments of the legal community have come to perceive it as "another Lochner." Within these circles, a defense of Roe triggers reputational sanctions. These circles co-exist with others, within which one incurs reputational punishments for challenging rather than defending Roe. Within each of these rival camps, perceptual interdependencies are clearly at work. Their members consider Roe right or wrong partly, if not largely, on the basis of what their co-members generally seem to believe. 00 As with Brown, the social forces at work have spillover effects in other areas. Roe's controversial status may have initiated a powerful availability cascade that predisposes judges not to extend constitutional protections to new rights claimed to be part of constitutionally protected privacy or liberty. It may even have helped make the Supreme Court less inclined to processes highlighted here are not mutually exclusive. Availability cascades can help or hinder the tasks of governance by shaping social norms and determining compliance levels. Behavioral research shows that changes in the availability of information about compliance with a prevailing norm often influence the extent to which it is followed. For instance, taxpayers are far more likely to comply with the prevailing tax laws if they believe that most people fulfil their tax obligations than if they think that noncompliance is widespread. 30 2 Another example is the problem of drinking on college campuses. Students who "binge drink" tend to overestimate the number of binge drinkers; when informed of the actual numbers, they are less likely to continue this self-destructive and socially harmful behavior.30 3 The tax evasion and binge drinking examples suggest that undesirable behaviors may be curbed simply by controlling the information available to the relevant actors, or alternatively, correcting the availability errors that contribute to the conduct. Each of these cases also shows that the availability of information about compliance levels affects behavior through two channels: by signaling what is socially acceptable and by providing clues as to one's own interests. Laws that have produced compliance with little or no enforcement, such as those that relegate smoking to designated areas and require people to clean up after their dog, have much to do with the informational and reputational mechanisms discussed above.3 °4 Our arguments here constitute a challenge to both the economic analysis of law and branches of cognitive psychology that are beginning to influence legal scholarship.30 5 With few exceptions, economists have ignored critical interdependencies that govern people's preferences, choices, and beliefs; even the public choice school, which focuses on the sources of legislation, typically neglects the interdependencies at the heart of our argument here. Yet, as we have emphasized, there is no inherent conflict between the rational actor framework and the mechanisms that this article has high 301. See Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702 (1997) (holding that assistance in committing suicide is not an interest protected by the Due Process Clause); Vacco v. Quill, 521 U.S. 793 (1997) (holding that a state's prohibiting assisting suicide does not violate the Equal Protection Clause). This article has shown that social processes compound the effects of cognitive heuristics and biases, the importance of which may appear trivial when individual decisions are observed in isolation. It has also demonstrated that the interactions in question affect the content of law in important ways. The challenge for the future is to translate our understanding of availability cascades into improvements of a regulatory system that remains so vulnerable to them.