Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
American Political Science Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
PS: Political Science and Politics.
University of London November 9, 1998 Editor's Note: This excerpt from Professor McDowell's testimony is taken from the concluding section, titled "Oaths and Perjury." The use of oaths in legal proceedings in which evidence is given is an ancient part of the common law. Sir Edward Coke noted that the "word oath is derived from the Saxon word eoth." The oath is nothing less, said Coke, than "an affirmation or deniall by any Christian of lawYale University
December 7, 1998
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and the distinguished members of
this Committee. My name is Bruce
Ackerman. I am Sterling Professor
of Law and Political Science at Yale.
I request the Chair's permission to
revise and extend these remarks.
Since you have already heard so
much on the subject of constitutional standards for impeachment, I would like to concentrate on three
big mistakes that have characterized
the discussion up to now.
The use of oaths in legal proceedings in which evidence is given is an ancient part of the common law. Sir Edward Coke noted that the "word oath is derived from the Saxon word eoth." The oath is nothing less, said Coke, than "an affirmation or deniall by any Christian of anything law- full and honest, before one or more, that have the authority to give the same for advancement of truth and right, calling Almighty God to witness that his testimony is true" (1809, 165).1 Yet there is evidence that the use of oaths extends back to Roman times, where the law of the Twelve Tables provides that "Whoever gives false evidence must be thrown from the Tarpeian rock" (Stephens 1883, 1: 11). And Cicero in De Officiis argues that "in taking an oath it is our duty to consider not what we may have to fear in case of violation but wherein its obligation lies: an oath is an assurance backed by religious sanctity and a solemn promise given, as before God as one's witness, is to be sacredly kept" (1991, III: 104, 383). As Samuel Pufendorf emphasized, oaths were not simply the preserve of Christians:
An oath the very Heathens look'd
on as a thing of so great force,
and of so sacred authority, that
they believed the sin of perjury to be punished with the severest vengeance such as extended itself to
the posterity of the offender, and
such as might be incurr'd by the bare thought and inclination with- out the act. (1717, IV. II. 1, 117)
The significance of the oath in continued on page 26
Political Scientists Testify before the House Committee on the Judiciary during the Hearing on Impeachment Inquiry Pursuant to H. Res. 581*
Five APSA members testified before the U.S. House Judiciary Committee's impeachment hearings during the fall session of the Congress-Bruce Ackerman of Yale University, Samuel Beer of Harvard University, Matthew Holden of the University of Virginia, Cass Sunstein of the University of Chicago, and Gary McDowell of the University of London.
All or portions of reformatted versions of their statements are printed here to illustrate political scientists "speaking truth to power." The statements of the five scholars are their own and do not represent the positions of either their institutions or the American Political Science Association.
The editors of PS encourage other APSA members participating in federal and state policy processes in all substantive areas to notify PS of their activities. This information will be shared with journal readers in future issues.
Robert J-P. Hauck, Editor
The first big mistake centers on
the power of this Committee and
the present House of Representa- tives to send a case to trial in the
Senate. People seem to be assuming that once the present Committee
and the full House vote for a bill of
impeachment, the stage will be set
for a trial in the Senate during the
coming year, and that the next
House will not have to take any fur- ther actions on the matter.
Nothing could be further from the
truth. As a constitutional matter, the
House of Representatives is not a
continuing body. When the
House dies on January 3, all its unfinished business dies with it. To
begin with the most obvious example, a bill passed by the House
that is still pending in the Senate on January cannot be enacted into law unless it once
again meets the approval of the 106t
House.
This is as it should be. Otherwise
lame-duck Congresses would have a
field day in situations like the
present, where the old House major- ity has had a setback in the polls.
Recognizing that its political power
is on the wane, the dominant party
continued on page 29
University of Virginia November 9, 1998
sor's Holden's testimony is taken from the concluding section, titled "Impeachment is a Caged Lion: Should it Be Loose in the Streets?"
Someone, at a responsible level, must face up to the fact that impeachment is a caged lion, and ask seriously, and without prejudice, whether letting that lion loose in the streets will leave anyone safe. The House of Representatives is placed by the constitutional prescrip- tion in the role analogous to that of the prosecutor. When is it necessary to go forward? In the narrower domain of ordinary criminal law, the criminal prosecutor considers many factors in deciding whether to bring charges. Among others, the prosecu- tor considers "the strength of the evidence, the suspect's background and characteristics, the costs and benefits of obtaining a conviction, and the attitude of the community toward the offense the suspect is believed to have committed" (Miller et al. 1991, 695). The discussion for the past four years, and especially for the past ten months, has not gotten to this, the nexus of the most serious issue. The discussion has focused upon attitudes toward the person who now occupies the office of president, and, secondarily, upon what people believe is the evidence. But the most serious issue is different. There has been a continual avoidance of the costs and benefits of impeachment when considered in relation to the whole political system. There is some discussion of the attitude of the community, often in puzzlement as to the difference between opinion reflected in mass poll data and opinion expressed by those continued on page 34
Harvard University December 7, 1998 My concern is the political and constitutional consequences of impeachment rather than its legal and judicial aspects. The process is judi- cial in form, impeachment by the House being like indictment by a grand jury, and trial and conviction by the Senate being like trial and conviction by a court. In fact, however, the consequences of successful impeachment do not resemble the usual consequences of a judicial trial, for instance, punishment by fine and/or imprisonment. As Article I, section 3, paragraph 7 provides, punishment of that kind would be invoked after the president had become a private citizen by resignation, removal, or expiration of his term of office.
Removal from office, the grand and forbidding consequence of successful impeachment, distinguishes this process radically from the judgement of a court. It resembles rather a vote of no confidence in a legislature, such as the British par- liament. By such a vote the House of Commons can bring to an end the life of a government. In 1841, Sir Robert Peel summed up this fundamental convention of the British Constitution when he successfully moved that "her Majesty's Ministers do not sufficiently possess the confidence of the House of Commons to enable them to carry through the House measures which they deem of essential importance to the public welfare." Like a vote of no confidence, impeachment brings to an end a presi- dent's administration. Like a vote of no confidence, it relates not merely to some specific failure, but is a judgment on his record and promise as a whole with regard to those "measures which he deems of essen-
continued on page 33
University of Chicago
November 9, 1998
sor's Sunstein's testimony is taken from the concluding section, titled "How Should
We Understand Impeachment Today?"
Thus far I have suggested that
both the original understanding and
historical practice converge on a
simple principle. The basic point of
the impeachment provision is to allow the House of Representatives to
impeach the president of the United
States for egregious misconduct that
amounts to the abusive misuse of
the authority of his office. This principle does not exclude the possibility that a president would be impeach- able for an extremely heinous "pri- vate" crime, such as murder or rape. But it suggests that outside of such
extraordinary (and unprecedented
and most unlikely) cases, impeachment is unacceptable. The clear implication is that the charges made thus far by Judge Kenneth Starr and
David Schippers do not, if proved, make out any legitimately impeachable offenses under the Constitution.
In the present context, it would be
possible to respond to this sugges- tion in two different ways. First, it
might be urged that actual or possi- ble counts against President Clinton-frequent lies to the American pub- lic, false statements under oath,
conspiracy to ensure that such false
statements are made, perhaps perjury, interactions with his advisers
designed to promote further falsehoods under oath, and so forth-are
very serious indeed and that if these
very serious charges are deemed a
legitimate basis for impeachment, little or nothing will be done to alter
the traditional conception of impeachment. Perhaps some of these
possible counts, involving interac- tions with his advisers designed to
continued on page 37
continued from page 24 courts of law was explained by James Wilson in his law lectures: "The courts of justice, in almost every age, and in almost every country, have had recourse to oaths, or appeals to heaven, as the most universal and the most powerful means to engage men to declare the truth. By the common law, before the testimony of a witness can be received, he is obliged to swear, that it shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth." The purpose, Wilson concluded, is to secure truthful evidence:
Belief is the end proposed by evidence of every kind. Belief in testimony is produced by the supposed veracity of him who
declares it. The opinion of his veracity . is shaken, either when, in former instances, we have
known him to deliver testimony which has been false or when, in the present instance, we discover
some strong inducement which
may prevail on him to deceive. (McCloskey 1967, 2: 7O2-03)2
Wilson took his moral and historical bearings on the necessity of oaths to getting at the truth from William Paley, whose Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy (1788) was an influential work of considerable prominence among the early Americans. Wilson praised Paley as an authority of "high reputation," a "sensible and ingenious writer," who was "no undiscerning judge of the subject" of the administration of justice (McCloskey 1967, 1: 310, 240, 325). Joseph Story was similarly im- pressed with Paley as a writer of "practical sense" whose analyses of political institutions displayed "great skill and ingenuity of reasoning." Throughout his celebrated Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States (1851), Story relies often on the "excellent writings" of Paley.3 For Paley, the issue of oaths and perjury was one of morality as well as of law he expressed views not unlike that of Cicero who warned that "people overturn the fundamental principles established by nature, when they divorce expediency from moral rectitude" (1991, III: 101,
184). In Paley's view, the entire
question of perjury rested on the
definition of a lie: "A lie is a breach
of promise: for whoever seriously addresses his discourse to another,
tacitly promises to speak the truth,
because he knows that the truth is
expected." And the effects of lying are not simply private they are pub- lic in the deepest and most impor- tant sense:
[T]he direct ill consequences of
lying consist, either in some
specific injury to particular individuals, or the destruction of that
confidence, which is essential to
the intercourse of human life: for
which latter reason, a lie may be
pernicious in its general tendency,
and therefore criminal, though it
produce no particular visible mischief to anyone. (1788, 1: 184)
Given this public aspect to the
damages that come from lying, it is
necessary that oaths never be made
"cheap in the minds of the people." Since "mankind must trust to one
another" there is no more efficacious means than through the use of
oaths: "Hence legal adjudications,
which govern and affect every right
and interest on this side of the
grave, of necessity proceed and depend upon oaths." As a result, lying
under oath is far more serious than
merely lying perjury is, Paley notes,
"a sin of greater deliberation," an
act that "violates a superior confidence" (1: 193-197).
Because a witness swears that he
will "speak the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth,
touching the matter in question," there is no place where a person under oath can cleverly lie and not
commit perjury. The witness cannot
legitimately conceal "any truth,
which relates to the matter in adju- dication" because to so conceal "is
as much a violation of the oath, as
to testify a positive falsehood and
this whether the witness be interrogated to that particular point or
not." It is not enough, Paley observed, for the witness afterward to
say that he was not forthcoming "because it was never asked of me" an
oath obliges to tell all one knows
whether asked or not. As Paley
notes, "the law intends to require of the witness, that he give a
complete and unreserved account of
what he knows of the subject of the
trial, whether the questions proposed to him reach the extent of his
knowledge or not" (1: 200-01).
Nor is it sufficient an excuse that
"a point of honor, of delicacy, or of
reputation, may make a witness
backward to disclose some circumstance with which he is acquainted." Such a sense of shame or embarrassment cannot "justify his concealment of the truth, unless it could be
shown, that the law which imposes the oath, intended to allow this indulgence to such motives" (1: 201).
Similarly, linguistic contortions
with the words used cannot legitimately conceal a lie or, if under
oath, perjury. Paley's argument on
this point merits a complete hearing:
As there may be falsehoods which
are not lies, so there may be lies
without literal or direct falsehood.
An opening is always left for this
species of prevarication, when the
literal and the grammatical signification of a sentence is different
from the popular and customary
meanings. It is the willful deceit
that makes the lie and we willfully deceive, where our expressions are not true in the sense in which we
believe the hearer apprehends them. Besides, it is absurd to contend for any sense of words, in
opposition to usage, for all senses
of words are founded upon usage,
and upon nothing else. (1: 188- 89)4
Thus, the most common terms of
oaths sworn include a promise not
only to tell the truth, but the
broader promise to tell the whole
truth and nothing but the truth.
Willful deceit is the key to whether
a witness commits perjury or not,
whatever the means chosen.5 The moral and legal inheritance of the
founding generation included the
belief that the violation of an oath
was nothing less than "treachery"
(Sidney [1698] 1990, 225).
None of the major writers with
whom the founders were intimately conversant saw perjury as anything but one of the most serious offences
against the commonwealth.6 In his
widely cited Treatise on the Pleas of the Crown, for example, William
Hawkins explained that there were
certain kinds of offences that were
PS March 1999
just a sin it was a crime. Based on the foregoing analysis and review of the historical record, the conclusion seems inescapable, based on the expressed intent of the framers, the wording of the Constitution, the writings of the principal legal authorities known to the framers, and the common law, that perjury would certainly be included as a "high Crime and Misdemeanor" in an impeachment trial under the United States Constitution. Further, the record fails to support the claim that impeachable offences are limited to only those abuses that occur in the official exercise of executive power. As seen in the authorities, impeachable offences, in both Eng- lish and American history, have been understood to extend to "per- sonal misconduct" (Story 1851, 2: 274), "violation of . trust" (Simp- son 1916, 144 n. 6), and "immorality or imbecility" (Curtis 1854-60, 2: 260) among other charges. There is no power granted to the House of Representatives more formidable than "the sole power of impeachment." Knowing as they did the dangers of subjecting those in high office to the mere passion and caprice of the moment, the founders sought to create a power to impeach that would be capable of "displacing an unfit magistrate," but within the confines of a written and ratified Constitution of enumerated and limited powers. Thus did they limit the reasons for which an impeachment could be undertaken to "Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors." The success of the founders in creating the impeachment power to be both politically effective and safe
"infamous, and grossly scandalous, proceeding from principles of down right dishonesty, malice or faction" and it was under this rubric that he included "perjury and subornation of perjury." Indeed, he went further arguing that "perjury... is of all crimes whatsoever the most infamous and detestable" ([1724-26] 1972, 1:
318-19).7 Perjury was, in the first instance, tied to jurors who might give a false verdict and "for several centuries no trace is to be found of the punish- ment of witnesses for perjury." And, even after it originated in the Star Chamber, it was only by "slow degrees [that] the conclusion that all perjury in a judicial proceeding is a crime was arrived at" (Stephens 1883, 3: 241, 247). In 1562-63 there came the first statute providing penalties for those who committed both perjury and subornation of perjury (Holdsworth 1966, 4: 515-18). Thus were human punishments made to augment the fear of divine vengeance for lying under oath.8 This was, in Pufendorf's view, absolutely essential, as he noted by quoting Demosthenes: "Those who escape your justice, leave to the vengeance of the gods but those on whom you can lay hands, never consign over to Providence without punishing them yourselves" (1717, IV. II. 2, 118).
It was by this joint power of the sacred and the secular that men could put their faith in oaths as a means of securing truthful testimony from those sworn to give it. And by such oaths and the punishments to be meted out for perjury, the commonwealth could secure the proper administration of justice within the courts of law. Perjury was no longer
to the demands of republican government is seen most clearly in how
few have been the instances of its
use. Lord Bryce described the power of impeachment over a century ago
as "the heaviest piece of artillery in
the congressional arsenal" and thus
"unfit for ordinary use." The process
seeking to remove a president, he
said, "is like a hundred-ton gun which needs complex machinery to
bring it into position, an enormous
charge of powder to fire it, and a
large mark to aim at" (Bryce [1893]
1995, 1: 190). The constitutional
provisions for impeachment were
intended, in part, to secure the chief
executive from being driven from
office for mere partisan reasons. To
get rid of a president-or to try to Congress has to have good cause. As
Bryce said, one does not use impeachment for light and transient
causes, "as one does not use steam
hammers to crack nuts" (1: 190).
In the end, the determination of
whether presidential misconduct
rises to the level of "high Crimes
and Misdemeanors," as used by the
framers, is left to the discretion and
deliberation of the House of Repre- sentatives. No small part of that deliberation, guided as it must be by the history and meaning of "high Crimes and Misdemeanors," must
address what effect the exercise of
this extraordinary constitutional
sanction would have on the health
of the republic, as weighed against
the necessity of making clear that in
America no one is above the law. In
the end, that is what matters most
and must bear most heavily on the
members of the House of Represen- tatives as they consider what they must do in the weeks ahead.
PS March 1999
tional power of the current lameduck House to vote out a bill of impeachment. But I do respectfully submit that the Constitution treats a lame-duck bill of impeachment in precisely the same way it treats any other House bill that remains pending in the Senate on January 3. Like all other bills, a lame-duck bill of impeachment loses its constitutional force with the death of the House that passed it. This point was rightly ignored before the election, since everybody expected the new Congress to be more Republican than its predeces- sor. On this assumption, it was perfectly plausible for this distinguished Committee to proceed in earnest-if the House voted to impeach, there was every reason to suppose that the 106th House would quickly reaffirm its judgment, and send the matter on its way to the Senate. But now that the voters have spoken, the constitutional status of lame-duck impeachments deserves far more attention than it has been given. Worse yet, we cannot rely much on the past for guidance. The closest precedent comes from the 1988 impeachment of federal district judge Alcee Hastings. The House had impeached Hastings, but both sides wanted to delay the Senate trial to the 101st session, and the Senate Rules Committee granted their request (U.S. Senate 1988). The Senate's perfunctory six-page report, however, does not resolve any of the key issues raised by the present case. Judge Hastings wanted to delay his Senate trial as long as possible, and did not even try to argue that his bill of impeachment expired on January 3 for fear that his Senate trial would be expedited. What is more, Hastings was a judge not a president and he was impeached during a normal session of Congress, not by a Congress of lameducks. As a consequence, the Senate committee understandably failed to consider any of the crucial constitutional issues raised by the present case. It did not even pause to consider the fact that the people decisively sought to limit the capacity of lameduck Congresses by solemnly enacting the Twentieth Amendment. If
continued from page 24 will predictably use its lame-duck months to pass lots of controversial legislation on to the Senate in defiance of the judgment made by the voters. This abuse was very common during the first 150 years of the Repub- lic. Until the Twentieth Amendment was passed in 1933, a newly elected Congress ordinarily waited 13 months before it began its first meeting in Washington. In the meantime, lameducks did the nation's business for a full session, often in ways that ran against the grain of the last election. This might have been an acceptable price to pay in the eighteenth century, when roads were terrible and it took time for farmer-representatives to arrange their business affairs. But as the centuries passed, the operation of lame-duck Congresses proved to be an intolerable violation of democratic principles, and they were basically abolished by the Twentieth Amendment in 1933. This amendment anticipates that new Congresses will begin meeting as soon as possible after the elections-the text specifies January 3. In enacting it into our fundamental law, Americans believed they were reducing the lame-duck problem to vestigial proportions (Nagle 1997). Perhaps some grave national emergency might require decisive action, but the old Congress would normally fade away as the nation enjoyed a respite from politics between Thanksgiving and New Year's Day. Generally speaking, lame-duck Congresses have proved faithful to this expectation. For example, during the 65 years since the Twentieth Amendment became part of our higher law, no lame-duck House has ever impeached an errant federal judge, much less a sitting president. Such matters have been left to the judgment of Congresses that were not full of members who had been repudiated at the polls or were retiring from office. These proceedings, then, are absolutely unprecedented in the post- lame-duck era. Despite this fact, I do not question the raw constitu-
we take this amendment seriously, it
means that a lame-duck House
should not be allowed to relieve its
freshly elected successor of its solemn obligation to determine
whether the nation's political life
should be disrupted by a lengthy trial of the president in the Senate.
In short, whatever decision is
reached by this Committee and this
House this month, the Constitution
requires the newly elected House to
reconsider impeachment afresh in
January.
Moreover, if the next House of
Representatives tries to evade its
fundamental constitutional responsibility, the Senate will not be free to
dispense with the problem of lameduck impeachment by a simple reference to its 1988 decision in Judge
Hastings' case. Not only does this
report fail to confront the basic issues, but the Senate Rules Committee, which authored the report, will
not even be the final judge of the
matter this time around. Instead, the
constitutionality of a lame-duck impeachment will be the first question
confronting Chief Justice Rehnquist, the designated presiding officer at
the Senate trial. Following the precedent established by Chief Justice
Chase before and during the trial of
President Andrew Johnson, the chief
justice will rightly assert his authority to rule on all procedural issues
(Ackerman 1998, 467-68). And the
first of these should undoubtedly be
a motion by the president's lawyers
to quash the lame-duck impeach- ment as constitutionally invalid unless reaffirmed by the 106th House.
Now, Chief Justice Rehnquist is in
fact a scholar of the impeachment
process, having written an entire
book on the subject. I am sure that
he will be fully aware of the historical importance of his conduct of the
proceeding, and will quickly grasp
the obvious dangers of lame-duck
impeachment. Moreover, there are
many strands in the chief justice's
jurisprudence which will lead him to
give great weight to the idea that it
is only a truly democratic House, and not a collection of lameducks,
that has the constitutional authority to proceed against a man who has
been fairly elected to the presidency
by the people of the United States.
president facing a lame-duck impeachment. Thus, even if the new House leadership chooses to rely on a lameduck impeachment, and refuses to allow another vote on a fresh bill before sending the matter to the Senate, there is no way it can avoid the need to test the majority sentiment of the new House. By voting against the slate of managers, a majority of the new House will be in a position to stop the impeachment process dead in its tracks.
It is a big mistake, then, for the distinguished members of this Committee and this House to suppose that they are the final judges of the bill of impeachment. To be sure, the recommendations of this Committee and the vote of the entire House deserve serious consideration by the members taking office next month. But so do the judgments of the voters, as expressed at the elections in November. I respectfully urge you to consider this point as you determine your present course. To put my point in operational terms: If you don't believe that a bill of impeachment or the election of impeachment managers will gain the majority support of the next House, the wise thing to do is to stop the process now. While it may be embarrassing to reverse gears after so much momentum has been gener- ated in favor of a bill of impeachment, the leadership of the next House will confront a much more embarrassing situation if it becomes evident that its slender proimpeach- ment majority has vanished over the Christmas recess.
II So much for the first big mistake. A second mistake involves a persis- tent confusion about impeachment standards. People keep on talking as if the standards that apply to judges also apply to presidents. But a glance at the constitutional text is enough to establish that this is a mistake. Under Article III of the Constitution, any federal judge may be deprived of his lifetime job if he fails the test of "good Behavior." Thus, the House and Senate may remove a judge even if his "bad"
Without any hint of partisanship, he would be well within his rights to quash the lame-duck impeachment and remand the matter back to the House.
Since the status of lame-duck impeachments has never before been briefed and argued in the modern era inaugurated by the Twentieth Amendment, it is impossible to make a firm guess as to the way the chief justice will rule on the matter. Only one thing is clear. It would be far better for the country and the constitution if the chief justice is never put to this test. As Alexander Bickel, my great predecessor in the Sterling Chair at Yale, frequently reminded us, the health of our constitutional system is not measured by the number of "hard cases" that have been resolved by clear rulings. It is measured instead by the number of statesmen in our history who, seeing a hard case on the horizon, act in sensible ways so as to avoid ever precipitating a constitutional crisis. If this Committee and the present House choose to go forward and vote in favor of a bill of impeach- ment, I respectfully urge the new Speaker of the 106th Congress to do the right thing, and remit the matter once again for consideration by the new House. Suppose, however, he does not do so suppose further that the chief justice, when pressed, upholds the continuing validity of the lame-duck impeachment despite the expiration of the Congress. Even then, the new House of Rep- resentatives will not be able to escape the need for another up or down vote to determine whether a majority of members continue to favor impeachment. To see why, consider that the House must select a group of its members, called "impeachment managers," to present its case against the president at the Senate trial. Without the energetic prosecution of the case by the managers, the Senate trial cannot go forward. No managers, no trial but only the new House can appoint the manag- ers. This was done in Judge Hast- ings' case, and it certainly should be required in the case of a sitting
behavior would not otherwise
amount to a "high Crime and Misdemeanor."
In contrast, the Constitution does
not allow presidents to be removed
for want of "good behavior"-for the
obvious reason that he does not
serve for life, but is under regular electoral scrutiny by the people.
Moreover, there should be no doubt
that the Framers were serious in
restricting themselves to high crimes
and misdemeanors. In contrast to
the impeachment clause, other textual references to crime do not contain similar emphasis on high crime.
Thus, the Extradition Clause applies to anyone who commits "Treason,
Felony or other Crime," and Article
I, Section 6 gives every congressman
an immunity from arrest except in
cases of "Treason, Felony, and
Breach of the Peace." This stands in
sharp contrast to the high crimes
required of presidents, and the mere
breaches of good behavior required in the case of judges. It is a bad mistake, then, to assume that the relatively low impeachment standard applied to judges also applies to the
president. The mere fact that they are undoubtedly removable for perjury does not imply that the presi- dent is also impeachable for the
same offense.
Which leads me to the third and
last mistake. Perhaps because of the
role of the special prosecutor in this
case, there has been a constant
temptation to imagine that what we
are doing here is considering whether you should issue something similar to a criminal indictment.
This is a mistake today, even though there was a time long ago when this
view was plausible. When impeach- ment began in the English parliament five hundred years ago, this
medieval assembly still thought of
itself as a High Court, and often
subjected the victims of impeach- ment to dire criminal punishments. But the Framers of our Constitution self-consciously rejected these
medieval precedents. They carefully
limited the sanctions for impeach- ment to removal from political office, and the like. Once a president departs, he is fully subject to the
rigors of criminal prosecution. Rather than standing above the law,
PS March 1999
on the provision that appears in the text today. Instead, they actually approved a standard that required the proof of a "high crime and misdemeanor against the state" [emphasis added]. These last three words were later eliminated by the Committee on Style, which had absolutely no authority to change the substance of any provision. Thus, the Committee must have thought that the text's insistence on "high crime and misdemeanors" already included the requirement of an assault on the foundations of the American state. And as we have seen, this is the standard that has, in fact, consistently governed the House's actions over the past two centuries. If the House had been operating under any lower standard, our history books would have been littered with many, many bills of impeachment, and not only two. When judged against this consistent history of restrained congressional interpretation of the impeachment clause, there can be little doubt that the present case falls far short of the standard set by the Framers when they in- sisted on "high crimes and misdemeanor against the state." Indeed, if the Committee does find President Clinton's conduct impeachable, it will be setting a prece- dent that will haunt this country for generations to come. Under the new and low standard, impeachment will become an ordinary part of our po- litical system. Whenever Congress and the presidency are controlled by different political parties, the Congress will regularly use impeachment as a weapon to serve its partisan purposes. After all, presidents are often called upon to make fateful decisions of the first importance, and, in the short term at least, these decisions can be very unpopular. Once the House's centuries-long tradition of constitutional restraint has been destroyed, its future political leadership will be sorely tempted to respond to unpopular decisions by regularly seeking to force the president from office. The result would be a massive shift toward a British-style system of parliamentary government. This is in fact what happened in the aftermath of the impeachment
of President Andrew Johnson in
1868. Though this impeachment effort barely failed to gain two-thirds
support in the Senate, it drained
effective power from the presiden- cy-to the point where Woodrow
Wilson, writing in 1885, could describe our system as "congressional
government." And it could readily
happen again. Imagine, for example, that the political wheel turns and
that a Democratic Congress confronts a Republican president in the
year 2001. Can there be any doubt
that enterprising members of the
House will be tempted to use the
Clinton precedent to unseat the next
Republican president at the first po- litically propitious opportunity?
My study of history and human
nature convinces me that once such
an abusive cycle of impeachments has begun, it will be very difficult to
keep the bitter disagreements generated by our often-divided govern- ment under control.
Let me emphasize that, though
the lawyers for President Clinton
asked me to testify today, I would
be equally emphatic in my opposition to any future effort by a Democratic Congress to impeach a Republican president for anything short
of an outright assault on the foundations of the Republic. But it is a far, far better thing to cut short a cycle of incivility before it starts. I respectfully urge the distinguished members of this Committee to defer
further action on impeachment to
the next session of Congress, when
our newly elected representatives will be in a much better position to
decide on the kind of action-ranging from impeachment to censure to
nothing-that is most appropriate in this case.
William Jefferson Clinton probably runs a greater risk of an indictment for perjury in the year 2001 than any other American citizen alive today. This committee does not sit as a grand jury of the District of Columbia, but as a grand inquest representing the nation. It should not focus on the details of a particular crime, but ask itself a very different question: Does the conduct alleged in this case constitute such a threat to the very foundations of the Republic that it is legitimate to deprive the people of their freely elected choice as president? For two centuries, the Congress has shown great restraint in dealing with this question. From the era of George Washington to that of Ronald Reagan, presidents have often stretched their constitutional authority to the very limits, making unpopular decisions which have often proved to be in the larger interest of the nation. And yet only one President-Andrew Johnson-has been impeached, and only one-Richard Nixon-has resigned under threat of impeachment. The presidential conduct involved in both cases amounted to an assault on the very foundations of our democracy. Andrew Johnson sought to block the enactment of the Fourteenth Amendment, and its guarantees of equal protection and due process to all American citizens (Ackerman 1988, chap. 8). Richard Nixon sought to undermine the very foundations of the two-party system. Once we lower the impeachment standard to include conduct that does not amount to such clear and danger to our constitutional order, we will do grievous damage to the independence of the presidency. James Madison saw this. At the [Constitutional] Convention, he opposed the addition of any language which would water down the solemn requirement of a "high Crime and Misdemeanor." A lower standard, he said, would transform the Presidency from an office with a fixed four-year term to one "whose term will be equivalent to a tenure during the pleasure of the Senate" (Far- rand 1996, 550). Indeed, when the Founders voted on the impeachment standard, they did not, in fact, vote
PS March 1999
Supreme Court and similar bodies. The states, likewise, we may note, experimented in theory and practice with a variety of methods of bridging this gap. At the last moment, the framers incorporated a structure almost exactly in the form then being used in England in the impeach- ment of Warren Hastings. This device, although it had ancient roots, had come to special prominence in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries when Great Britain also for a time displayed a separation of powers, as a still powerful and independent monarch faced off against the rising assertions of the parliament. In those circumstances, impeachment was adopted by the parliamen- tarians as a means of enforcing responsibility on the monarch through action against his ministers. When, finally, the monarch was eased out of politics the old fusion of executive and legislative power was taken over by a committee of the parlia- ment-the cabinet. Now, the interim method of getting a hold on the executive was dropped in favor of a vote of confidence which performed more effectively the function of enforcing responsibility on parliament. At the same time that impeachment was dying out in Britain, it was taken up by Americans, who found in it a way of supplementing the principal mechanism of democratic responsibility by quadrennial elec- tions. The broad scope of impeach- ment was embodied in a very different system.
continued from page 25 tial importance to the public wel- fare." Because of these broad and weighty consequences, impeachment is primarily a political, not a judicial, act. As a political act, impeachment, like a vote of no confidence, passes judgement on and enforces responsibility on the executive power. In the British system, that responsibility runs directly to the legislature. In the American system, on the contrary, that responsibility runs to the legislature only secondarily and in special circumstances. For us, the responsibility of the president is essentially and directly to the voters. The legislature, as a separate office, separately elected, likewise is held accountable by the voters. This sepa- ration of powers is fundamental in our constitutional design and is a main point of distinction from the British system. The direct responsibility of both branches to the voters expresses the sovereignty of the people as the ultimate authority of our constitution and of the government established under it.
As the framers struggled to give expression to this principle, they ran into a problem. How were our liberties to be protected against misuse of power by the executive between quadrennial elections? At the Philadelphia convention during the summer of 1787, they explored various possibilities, such as appeals to the
Where the ultimate sovereign is
the people, the interference of one
power, the legislature in its exercise
of such a dire responsibility as removal of a popularly elected presi- dent imposes severe duties on the
legislature. The Congress itself, not
the primary source of authority, but
only a creature of the people, must
act in lieu of the people between
quadrennial elections. At their best, the legislators will do what the people, at their best, would do, weighing the pluses and minuses of the
record and the promise as a whole,
asking, "Does the national interest
require the removal from office of
this president?" In the case of President Clinton, the American people have twice answered that question
by electing him to the American
presidency. If we seek further light on the American mind, surveys of opinion continue to confirm that
answer which also in no way is disturbed by the outcome of the recent
midterm elections.
The failure to consider the whole
record of Clinton's presidency in
foreign and domestic affairs could
have severe long-run costs. The removal of a president, thanks to such
neglect in judgement, could damage
our democratic system. Consider the
temptations which this precedent would excite in a Congress of a different party against a future presi- dent of a different party. As a great historian, Henry Adams, said, on the
failed attempt of the Jeffersonians to
remove Justice Chase, impeachment
is not a suitable activity for party politics.
bination of formal and informal powers that revolve around his centrality to the executive branch, his role as the prime leader in national security policy, his leadership of one of the political parties, and his twentieth-century role in legislative leadership, [are] strongly affected by all his other powers, but grounded in his possession of the veto, which effectively makes him one-third of the legislative process. The president does not prevail all the time in these domains, or even in any one of them. But the presi- dent's role in several of them is almost always critical, and is so even now.1 The normal requirement of American government engages all these resources, as presidents work with, against, and around a variety of allies and opponents. If any president were to be removed, no other per- son could exercise equivalent leader- ship until the successor had developed his own relationships. The level of cost to the system goes far beyond this. It is in the intense animosity that almost surely will have developed. These seventeenth-century cases that I mentioned earlier are not mere decoration, but have direct application. Lawyers, of course, use them to trace the very meaning of the law itself (U.S. House of Repre- sentatives 1974). These historical cases help me to state a simple hypothesis: Whatever new weapon is introduced into the political battle tends soon to become domesticated, even banalized, so that its use is more and more common judgment. It will be adapted and adopted by many other groups. James J. Kil- patrick was not talking about impeachments, but about [having] ... the Supreme Court hold the Paula Jones law suit out until the conclusion of the president's term. But his statement [that] the decision "is likely to encourage trumped-up harassments of future presidents on down the line" (1998, 46) is appo- site. Impeachment investigations, trumped-up and otherwise, will virtually be mandated by going forward on this one. Richard H. Tawney, who wrote an account of the govern-
continued from page 25 commentators whose profession it is to express opinion. I can recall a television commentary, in August 1998, when panelists were asked about the reason that public audiences generally did not have the same intense feelings about the Clinton-Lewinsky information as the television journalists. One panelist said: "We'll just have to educate them." Such commentary fails to consider that the general public may already have made its judgments, however rough, that the "cost" of further action against the president may exceed the "benefit" to the po- litical system. The general public has good reason to believe that, on the basis of past performance, its evaluation of such a cost-benefit ratio may be more clear-minded than that of many reporters and editors from whom they have heard. To initiate an impeachment ([an] accusation of asserted "high crime" or "high misdemeanor") against the president would impose far too heavy a burden upon the political system since no reasonable person argues that the acts under discussion in any way disable, or potentially disable, the Congress. Neither Congress nor [the] courts [are] disabled, or under any potentiality of being disabled, or the president would not now be on the defensive. Impeach- ment and conviction of a president would mean replacing an entire administration. Within the parameters of the Constitution, some significant insti- tutional features have developed, and it is to their interrelationships that the idea of the "system" refers. Our ability to operate under this Constitution, with a strong presidency, has given the United States a remarkably stable government. If, for example, the United States had a parliamentary regime, President Reagan probably would have had to yield in 1982 under the pressure of economic recession. If that were so, he could never have evolved to a de facto partnership, as some see it, with Gorbachev toward winding down the arms race.
The president has a unique com-
mental career of Lionel Cranfield, also wrote that "The resurrection of
(this) antiquated weapon produced some forty impeachments between 1621 and 1688" (1958, 248).
That is sixty-seven years (67) times twelve months (12) for a sum of
eight hundred and four months
(804). Divided by forty (40), the
number of impeachments, the result
is, on a straight-line average, one
impeachment every twenty months.
In fact, of course, these impeach- ments came in clusters, rather than
on a straight-line average basis. But
the echoes from seventeenth-century England, with its fifteen to twenty
impeachments during a three year
period, with numerous impeach- ments on slender evidence (Holds- worth 1924, 260), are not to [be] taken lightly. In the slow-moving seventeenth century, factions brought each other to the testwhether routinely over long periods
or more intensely in periodic bursts.
We should not expect an impeach- ment in 1999 or 2000 to let the
United States slip back into political tranquillity. The better hypothesis is that we
should expect more turmoil. The
twentieth century has been, since
World War II perhaps, somewhat
similar to the seventeenth century in
one respect: intense ideological antagonisms. Even in the past twenty
years, when it might have been
thought to decline, there are intense
ideological battle groupings, easily
activated. The resultant turmoil will
be made far worse by an impeach- ment on the grounds that we now
know. Massive distrust will feed it.
Ideological antagonism will feed it.
Well-financed political entrepreneurs will feed it. Instantaneous
communication of information, disinformation, and misinformation will
feed it. Impeachment as technique will increasingly be domesticated as
legal defense funds, political action
committees, and many other techniques have been domesticated. Private groups will urge their congres- sional friends to initiate calls for
independent counsels or other pro- cedures to inquire into whether
there might be a basis for determining that someone has violated, or
conspired to violate, some law.
PS March 1999
independent counsel, as a civil officer, also within the scope of Article II, Section 4, if there are those who are motivated to make the effort? Even regulatory commissioners, beyond presidential direction, are also civil officers, are they not? What reason is there for affected interests not to use this newly avail- able weapon? While the impeach- ment of federal judges does not pro- vide much to go on, as to standards for evaluating presidential impeachments, there is one response in which the reverse situation becomes part of the system threat. The Article III courts [are also] subject to the same threats of punitive impeachment actions-regardless of whether they succeed-if someone becomes dedicated to making their lives miserable. This is, again, not to be taken lightly. Even under the stricter standards that apply to Article III judges. There are members of Congress who have, within the past three years, been known to argue that judges making "wrong" decisions should be impeached.2 Will this approach be withheld if federal trial judges depart from what [have] been thought [of as] conventional procedures? For example, a trial judge had appointed a special master to conduct certain proceedings involving the Justice Department's current litigation against Microsoft. In due course, he was obliged to dispense with the special master by virtue of an appeals court decision. The judge has reportedly "told lawyers for both sides that he may ask [this dismissed special master] to write a 'friend of the court' brief summarizing his views on the case." Is it beyond reasonable belief that, under intense conditions, someone would choose to impeach such a judge in such a case?
Clearly, my approach is framed, as stated in the first place, in political system terms. This does not imply that impeachment should never be employed. It does, however, suggest a balancing test: specifically, that the gravity of the presidential offenses should be weighed against the po- tential of far greater costs to the whole country. The assigning of some behavior to the category of
Those who urge this resurrection should, if they believe that the polit- ical system concern is worthwhile, have a public duty to weigh carefully whether the result they achieve is the result they want to achieve. It is thus likely that we will see attempts to initiate impeachment actions against other presidents. In each instance, one may assume that such effort will be made by people who genuinely believe their charges, and who believe they have credible cases. Since all successful efforts de- pend upon coalitions, explicit or de facto, such efforts will become successful only as varieties of other groups and persons join the efforts on a variety of grounds. There must be a number of upwardly mobile congressmen, senators, and governors-Republican as well as Democratic-who should expect to find themselves absorbed in such controversies over the next two, three, or four presidential cycles. Congressional leaders know that impeach- ment does not have to stop with a president. The same provision (Article II, Section 4) also applies to "the Vice President, and all civil Officers of the United States." Cabinet officers and sub-cabinet officers are also civil officers. There is no reason for adversaries not to seek to invoke the process whenever they are deeply angry, or simply calculatedly ration- al, about some action. Is it beyond the imagination that, as many people genuinely believe that abortion is an ultimate evil, impeachment at- tempts would not be initiated against some secretary of Health and Human Services on the basis that he or she is conducting policies favorable to this perceived evil? Is there any reason to believe that some attorney general, even the present one, might not be the object of attempted impeachment actions if he (or, in the present case, she) were resolutely to decline to initiate some independent counsel investiga- tion desired by Senate leaders? Is there any reason to suppose that such an attorney general would be even more at peril for limiting, or exercising the legal discretion to terminate, an independent counsel investigation if the independent counsel were to wish to continue? Is the
those "other high Crimes and Misdemeanors"-parallel to treason and
bribery-should be done only with
utmost seriousness, and assessed
with maintaining the essentials of
the political system (or "the structure of government" or "institutional
stability") as the prime purpose.
The maintenance of this kind of
seriousness will be increasingly problematic, in somewhat the same way of maintaining a high level of dignity has already proved problematic.
House leadership has, presumably
with all seriousness, urged dignity.
But since the beginning of 1998, every level of the inquiry has become
more raucous than anyone in the
leadership predicted before. It will
continue to go beyond control unless
there is some clear decision that
produces the contrary. Alexander
Hamilton was right to say in Federalist 65 (423): "The prosecution of
[actions deemed impeachable] will seldom fail to agitate the pas- sions of the whole community, and
to divide it into parties more or less
friendly or inimical to the accused."
That tells us that such matters
should be approached with prudence and wisdom.
The impeachment process lends
itself to the persistent conflict of
factions. Each of which will seek to
use the process to advance its own
material goods and its own revered
symbols, to pursue vengeance and
feud as if they were Capulet and
Montague. Case in point: On October 8, 1997, during the House debate on the resolution to launch an
impeachment inquiry into the conduct of President Clinton, one man
from Alabama called the CNN conservative phone line to say that what
he enjoyed was frustration and defeat in the eyes of the liberals who
had been having it all their way, having been in power for 40 years. Such a statement should be seen as
the cloud no bigger than a man's
hand. Again, to cite Hamilton: "In
many cases it will connect itself with
the pre-existing factions, and will
enlist all their animosities, partialities, influence, and interest on one
side or on the other and in such
cases there will always be the great- est danger that the decision will be
regulated more by the comparative
tant as each side disputes the morality and the methods of the other. Political leaders have already lost too much of the lessons of how to trade with each other and learned instead to turn each conflict into a dramatic morality play, or to an oc-
strength of parties, than by the real demonstrations of innocence or guilt." The importance of prosecution, with impeachment as its leading case, as a weapon of recurrent group conflict becomes more impor-
casion of political vengeance. The
magnification of conflict is something we have seen before. Congress
should [do] nothing further to let
this lion loose in the streets. Prudence and wisdom argue for terminating this process. Close the cage.
PS March 1999
ment. Probably the best general statement is that a false statement under oath is an appropriate basis for impeachment if and only if the false statement involved conduct that by itself raises serious questions about abuse of office. A false statement about an illicit consensual sexual relationship, and a "conspiracy" to cover up that relationship, is not excusable or acceptable but it is not a "high Crime or Misdemeanor" under the Constitution. The same is true for the other allegations made thus far. It trivializes the criminal law to say that some violations of the criminal law do not matter, or matter much. But it trivializes the Constitution to say that any false statement under oath, regardless of its subject matter, provides a proper basis for impeachment. Of course people of good faith could say that the president has a special obligation to the truth, especially in a court of law, and that it is therefore reasonable to consider impeachment whenever the president has violated that obligation. It is certainly true that as the nation's chief law enforcement officer, the presi- dent as a special obligation to the truth. Perhaps such people also believe that false statements under oath, and associated misconduct, are genuinely unique and that impeach- ment for such statements and such misconduct would therefore fail to do damage to our historical practice of resorting to impeachment only in the most extreme cases. But this po- sition has serious problems of its own. Even if it would be possible, in principle, for reasonable people to confine the current alleged basis for impeachment, it is extremely doubtful that the line could be held in practice. Thus, a judgment that the current grounds are constitutionally appropriate would set an exceedingly dangerous precedent for the future, a precedent that could threaten to turn impeachment into a political weapon, in a way that would produce considerable instability in the constitutional order.
Consider, for example, the fact that reasonable people can and do find tax evasion more serious than false statements about a consensual sexual activity, and that reasonable
continued from page 25 promote lies or continued proce- dural objections to the underlying inquiry, even amount to abuse of power. Second, it might be said that whatever history and past practice show, we should understand the Constitution's text to allow the President to be impeached, via the democratic channels, whenever a serious charge, of one sort or another, is both made and proved. I take up these two responses in sequence. If the first claim is that certain kinds of falsehoods under oath, perjury, conspiracy to lie, and so forth, could be a legitimate basis for impeachment, there can be no objec- tion. A false statement under oath about a practice of using the IRS to punish political opponents would almost certainly be an impeachable offense so too about a false statement about the acceptance of a bribe to veto legislation. Thus, false statements under oath might well be a legitimate basis for impeachment. Indeed, lying to the American people may itself be an impeachable offense if, for example, the president says that a treaty should be signed because it is in the best interest of the United States when in fact he supports the treaty because its signa- tories have agreed to give him a lot of money. But it does not diminish the universal importance of telling the truth under oath to say that whether perjury or a false statement is an impeachable offense depends on what it is a false statement about. The same is true for "obstruction of justice" or interactions with advisers designed to promote the underlying falsehood. Anyone can be prosecuted for violating the criminal law, and if the president has violated the criminal law, he is properly subject to criminal prosecution after his term ends. But it does not make sense to say, for example, that an American presi- dent could be impeached for false statements under oath in connection with a traffic accident in which he was involved, or that a false statement under oath, designed to pro- tect a friend in a negligence action, is a legitimate basis for impeach-
people can and do find an alleged unlawful arms deal more serious, from the constitutional standpoint, than either. Here is the underlying
problem. Whenever serious charges are made, participants in politics
may well be pushed in particular directions by predictable partisan
pressures. The serious risk is therefore that, contrary to the constitutional plan, impeachment will become a partisan tool, to be used by reference to legitimate arguments by
people who have a great deal to
gain.
A special risk of a ready resort to
the impeachment instrument is that
it would interact, in destructive
ways, with existing trends in American democracy. Those trends-toward an emphasis on scandals and
toward sensationalistic charges-have characterized the conduct of members of both parties in the last decades. For those who love this country and its institutions, the use of
impeachment, in such cases, is quite ominous-not least because of the
demonstrable good faith of many of
those who are recommending it.
From the standpoint of the constitutional structure, it is far better to
try a kind of line in the sand, one
that has been characteristic of our
constitutional practice for all of our
history: A practice of invoking im- peachment only for the largest cases
of abuse of distinctly presidential
authority.
Text, history, and longstanding practice suggest that the notion of
"high Crimes and Misdemeanors"
should generally be understood to
refer to large-scale abuses that involve the authority that comes from
occupying a particular public office.
Thus a president who accepted a bribe from a foreign nation-or who
failed to attend to the public busi- ness during a war-would be legitimately subject to impeachment. Per- jury, or false statements under oath,
could certainly qualify as impeach- able offenses if they involved (for example) lies about using the Internal Revenue Service to punish one's political opponents or about giving arms, unlawfully, to another nation.
But the most ordinary predicate for impeachment is an act, by the presi- dent, that amounts to a large-scale
