INFORMATIONAL REGULATION AND INFORMATIONAL
STANDING: AKINS AND BEYOND
CASS R. SUNSTEINt
As Government programs and policies become more complex and far reach-
ing, we must be sensitive to the articulation of new rights of action that do not
have clear analogs in our common-law tradition .... In my view, Congress
has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give
rise to a case or controversy where none existed before ....
If today's decision is correct, it is within the power of Congress to authorize
any interested person to manage (through the courts) the Executive's enforce-
ment of any law that includes a requirement for the filing and public availabil-
ity of a
It is often said that the American economy has been shifting from one
based on industrial development to one based on the creation and dissemi-
nation of information.3 Whether or not this is so, there can be little doubt
that a number of statutes in the last forty years were designed to ensure dis-
closure of information, and that mandatory disclosure is an increasingly
pervasive and important regulatory tool. Indeed, informational regulation,
or regulation through disclosure, has become one of the most striking de-
velopments in the last generation of American law.4
t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago Law School
and Department of Political Science. I grateful to Jack Goldsmith and Richard Posner for
valuable comments on a previous draft.
I Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 580 (1992) (Kennedy, J., concurring in
part and concurring in the judgment).
Election Comm'n v. Akins, 118 S. Ct. 1777, 1792 (1998) (Scalia, J., dissent-
3See, e.g., DAVID OSBORNE & TED GAEBLER, REINVENTING GOVERNMENT: HOW THE
ENTREPRENEURIAL SPIRIT IS TRANSFORMING THE PUBLIC SECTOR 15-16 (1992) (describing
the failure of government bureaucracy to adjust to the new "knowledge-based economy").
4See STEPHEN BREYER, REGULATION AND ITS REFORM 171-75 (1982) (discussing alter-
natives to classical regulation that overcome some of the information problems associated
with regulation) WESLEY A. MAGAT & W. KIP VISCUSI, INFORMATIONAL APPROACHES TO
REGULATION (1992) (discussing, in depth, various informational approaches to regulation)
ANTHONY OGUS, REGULATION: LEGAL FORM AND ECONOMIC THEORY 121-49 (1994)
(identifying "mandatory disclosure" and "control of false or misleading information" as the
two broad categories of information regulation, and discussing the justifications for each)
614 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
Informational regulation takes several different forms. Sometimes the
government attempts to improve the behavior of private industry by requir-
ing companies to disclose information about, for example, toxic releases,
the contents of food and drink, and workplace injuries. Prominent examples
include the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act5 and
regulations governing the disclosure of the nutritional content of food.6
Here the goal is to fortify either market mechanisms or political checks on
private behavior.7 Sometimes the government attempts to control its own
agents through compulsory production and disclosure of information con-
sider the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 ("NEPA"),8 the Free-
dom of Information Act ("FOIA"),9 and the Federal Election Campaign Act
("FECA").10 Here the goal is to allow more in the way of public monitoring
of governmental decisions, with particular issues (insufficient environ-
mental concern, unlawful behavior during campaigns, official corruption)
receiving special attention.
Legal struggles between those seeking information on the one hand, and
government or others required by law to disclose information on the other,
Paul R. Kleindorfer & Eric W. Orts, Informational Regulation of Environmental Risks, 18
RISK ANALYSIS 155 (1998) (examining the informational regulation of environmental risks
from an economic perspective) Eric W. Orts, Reflexive Environmental Law, 89 Nw. U. L.
REV. 1227, 1258-64, 1313-40 (1995) (advancing "reflexive law" as a means of regulating
complex societies by adopting procedures rather than "detailed pronouncements of acceptable
behavior," and advocating mandatory environmental audits as a type of reflexive environ-
5 42 U.S.C. ?? 11,001-50 (1994) (establishing notification and reporting requirements
relating to hazardous chemicals).
6 See Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-535, 104 Stat. 2353
(codified as amended at 21 U.S.C. ? 343 (1994)). The most important provisions of this Act
are codified at 21 U.S.C. ? 343(r).
7 Throughout this Article, a reference to the "goals" or "purposes" of a statute requiring
disclosure is designed not to capture the actual political forces that give rise to the law, but
instead to put the law in a
light and to make the best sense of it. Undoubtedly,
statutes that require disclosure-like all statutes-owe a
deal to interest group pressures,
some of them pernicious. The existence of informational regulation rather than more aggres-
sive controls may reflect the power of self-interested private groups attempting to minimize
government's presence in their lives. So, too, the existence of informational regulation may
reflect the efforts of self-interested, entrepreneurial groups. Both of these possibilities are
connected to the risk that informational regulation will be futile or excessively expensive.
8 42 U.S.C. ?? 4321-4370d (1994) (establishing the Council on Environmental Quality
and related federal environmental departments to carry out research and reporting responsi-
9 U.S.C. ? 552 (1994 & Supp. III 1997) (requiring agencies to publish public informa-
tion in the Federal Register and to make nonpublished materials available to persons who re-
10 2 U.S.C. ?? 431-56 (1994 & Supp. III 1997) (requiring candidates for federal office to
disclose certain types of campaign contributions).
1999] INFORMA TIONAL STANDING 615
promise to provide many of the most important public law cases in the next
several decades. The outcome of these struggles will have significant con-
sequences. Victories for those who seek to withhold information are im-
portant not only because they dispose of the case at hand, but also because
they give similarly situated people, in both government and the private sec-
tor, a clear signal about whether they must disclose information outside of
the context of litigated cases. This signal will inevitably affect behavior
well before cases arise.
For many years it has been unclear whether, and under what circum-
stances, a citizen will have standing in federal court to seek access to infor-
mation held by the government. FOIA gives standing to all persons to ob-
range of information 11 there is no requirement that the
information involve a particular citizen, or even be shown to be relevant to
her professional or personal concerns. Mere curiosity appears to be enough.
Anyone is entitled to obtain any information that FOIA makes public.12 Is
FOIA therefore unconstitutional? NEPA requires the government to com-
pile and disclose environmentally relevant information before it proceeds
with projects having a major impact on the environment.13 But who, ex-
actly, may sue to require preparation of an environmental impact statement
("EIS")? Is curiosity enough here as well? FECA imposes a wide range of
reporting and disclosure requirements on all "political committees."14 Does
this mean that any American can bring suit against the Federal Election
Commission ("FEC") to require it to enforce the law?
I See 5 U.S.C. ? 552 (requiring agencies to make certain information available to the
12 In Akins v. Federal Election Comm'n, 101 F.3d 731 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (en banc), va-
cated, 118 S. Ct. 1777 (1998), the court gave the closest thing to an explanation of the pre-
Congress can create a legal right (and, typically, a cause of action to protect that
right) the interference with which will create an Article III injury. Such a legal right
can be given to all persons in the country. In that event, any person whose individ-
ual right has been frustrated or interfered with has standing to sue, even though all
other persons have the same right, without the claim being regarded as a generalized
grievance. That is why anyone denied information under the Freedom of Informa-
tion Act (FOIA) has standing to sue regardless of his or her reasons for suing.
Id. at 736 (citations omitted).
13 42 U.S.C. ?? 4321-4370d. Specifically, 42 U.S.C. ? 4332 provides that "all agencies
of the Federal Government shall... include in every recommendation or report on proposals
for legislation and other major Federal actions significantly affecting the quality of the human
environment, a detailed statement... on (i) the environmental impact of the proposed action."
14 2 U.S.C. ?? 431-56 (1994 & Supp. III 1997).
616 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
The Supreme Court has now started to sort out this area of the law.
Federal Election Commission v. Akins15 is by far the most important pro-
nouncement on the general issue of standing to obtain information. More
than that, it reorients the general law of standing in several significant ways.
In particular, the Court appears to have held that any citizen has standing to
sue under FECA that Congress is permitted to grant standing to all or many
citizens, even if they are seeking to redress a
the key question, in cases involving information or anything else, is what
the relevant source of law actually says and that Article II is no barrier to
suits brought by citizens whose interests are not substantially different from
those of the citizenry as a whole.16 The most important step here is the sug-
gestion that Congress can overcome the barrier to "generalized grievances,"
for this barrier is likely to be crucial to plaintiffs seeking information.
At the same time, the Court's opinion marks a significant new devel-
opment in the law of "redressability," a development that is in considerable
tension with previous cases. And the Court's opinion raises or leaves open
a host of new questions about the circumstances in which citizens may bring
suits to obtain information. It is no wonder that Justice Scalia wrote a pas-
sionate dissent, suggesting that the Court's opinion violates not only Article
III but Article II as well.17
Remarkably, the emerging law governing standing to obtain informa-
tion has yet to receive academic attention. The basic purpose of this Article
is to begin to fill this gap, above all by exploring the intersection between
the law of standing and the wide range of statutes mandating public disclo-
sure. In the process it will be necessary to offer an understanding of the
extent to which disclosure of information has become a central part of the
American regulatory state-as central, in its way, as command-and-control
regulation and economic incentives. As we shall see, it is impossible to un-
derstand the standing questions without understanding the regulatory ques-
tions as well. As we shall also see, an understanding of the emerging law of
standing to receive information has a set of implications for the law of
standing in general.
The Supreme Court's decision in Akins is the vehicle for much of the
analysis, because the Akins Court covers a
wide range of standing
issues, in a way that is full of implications for the future. My most general
claim is that at least in information cases, the question of standing is for
15 118 S. Ct. 1777 (1998).
6 See infra Part II (discussing the Court's holding and analysis in Akins).
7 See Akins, 118 S. Ct. at 1789-92 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 617
congressional rather than judicial resolution. It follows that whether some-
one has informational standing depends on what Congress has said. If
Congress creates a legal right to information and gives people the authority
to vindicate that right in court, the standing question is essentially resolved.
Insofar as it recognizes this point, Akins appears to vindicate the passage
from Justice Kennedy's important concurring opinion in Lujan v. Defenders
of Wildlife, quoted above,18 and in the process suggests that Justice Scalia's
prophecy, also quoted above,19 will eventually be proved correct.
This Article comes in four parts. Part I discusses the use of information
as a regulatory tool, partly as a background for the question of standing, and
partly as a brief, freestanding treatment of an important development in
regulatory law. The basic point here is that informational strategies are dis-
placing (and have significant advantages over) command-and-control ap-
proaches. In some contexts, however, they risk futility and excessive cost,
partly because of the difficulty that people face in dealing with low-
Part II deals with Akins itself and outlines the several clarifications of,
and departures from, current law. The argument here is that the Court has
revised the "injury in fact" test so as to focus attention on what kind of harm
Congress sought to prevent in the process the Court has made clear, for the
first time, that Congress can grant standing to someone who suffers a quite
generalized injury. Part III evaluates the Akins Court's approach to infor-
mational standing, with particular emphasis on the relationships among
standing, injury in fact, congressional instructions, and Article III. I
that the Court's decision suggests the right approach for informational
standing, but that the decision leaves open a
of questions, both
practical and conceptual.
Part IV discusses the future, with reference to a
of actual and
hypothetical cases. I attempt to show how an understanding of informa-
tional regulation sheds light on the question of informational standing. The
most important claim is that if Congress creates an interest in receiving in-
formation, and gives people a right to vindicate that interest in court, then it
has acted consistently with Article III. This claim bears in turn on the gen-
eral law of standing and the whole notion of "injury in fact," especially, but
not only, in the context of information. It suggests that whether there is an
18 504 U.S. 555, 580 (1992) (Kennedy, J., concurring in part and concurring in the judg-
ment) see supra text accompanying note 1.
19 See supra text accompanying note 2.
618 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
"injury" cannot be decided in the abstract, or solely by reference to the
"facts" it turns instead on positive law.
I. INFORMATION AS A REGULATORY TOOL
In this Part I deal with the rise of informational regulation. At least a
general understanding of this development is a prerequisite for an under-
standing of informational standing. In addition, it is worthwhile to have a
sense of this important development in the fabric of the modern regulatory
state, a development that promises to become all the more central in the
coming decade, when there will likely be a great deal of experimentation in
A. An Overview
Informational regulation is far from new to American law. At common
law, sellers of goods and services face certain obligations of disclosure thus
a failure to convey relevant information may violate the common law of
contract or tort.21 The New Deal, of course, witnessed a
regulation through common law courts to regulation via administrative
agencies,22 and disclosure of information became a pervasive regulatory
strategy, most obviously through the work of the Securities and Exchange
Commission.23 But the great modem surge of informational regulation-
20 This is a bipartisan view. See NEWT GINGRICH ET AL., CONTRACT WITH AMERICA
131-35 (1994) (discussing reforms that would, inter alia, increase information) AL GORE,
COMMON SENSE GOVERNMENT: WORKS BETTER AND COSTS LESS (1996) (discussing the
Clinton Administration's efforts to restructure the federal government to increase flexibility
and reduce rigid regulation).
21 See McMahon v. Bunn-O-Matic Corp., 150 F.3d 651, 655-56 (7th Cir. 1998) (sug-
gesting that there may be circumstances under which manufacturers must warn consumers
"about a surprising feature that is potentially dangerous yet hard to observe," but holding that
a coffee manufacturer did not have to provide a detailed warning about the severity of burns
potentially caused by hot liquid) RESTATEMENT (THIRD) OF TORTS: PRODUCTS LIABILITY
? 2 (1998) ("A product... (c) is defective because of inadequate instructions or warnings
when the foreseeable risks of harm ... could have been reduced or avoided by the provision
of reasonable instructions or warnings ... and the omission of the instructions or warnings
renders the product not reasonably safe.") WILLIAM L. PROSSER, HANDBOOK OF THE LAW
OF TORTS 641-82 (4th ed. 1971) (discussing products liability).
22 See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, AFTER THE RIGHTS REVOLUTION 11-46 (1990) (describing the
displacement of the common law by regulatory programs).
23 See Securities Act of 1933, 15 U.S.C. ? 77h, j
& Supp. III 1997) (establishing
disclosure requirements for offerings of securities) Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 15
U.S.C. ? 78a-1 1 (1994 & Supp. III 1997) (establishing the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion and providing for regulation of securities transactions and exchanges).
See 21 C.F.R. ? 201.57 (1998) (stating labeling requirements for prescription drugs and
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 619
growing out of laws involving health, safety, and the environment-is a
post-1960s phenomenon. Mandatory disclosure was a central part of the
rights revolution of the 1960s and 1970s, and it has become especially
prominent in the 1980s and 1990s, largely as an alternative to command-
Many statutes and regulations now require the disclosure or even the
production of information. Some of these are designed to assist consumers
in making informed choices such statutes are meant to be market-
enhancing. By contrast, others are designed to trigger political, rather than
market, safeguards such statutes are meant to enhance democratic proc-
esses. Of course there is an overlap between the two categories. A statute
that requires companies to place "eco-labels" on their products may produce
little in the way of consumer response, but shareholders and participants in
the democratic process may attempt to punish those whose labels reveal en-
vironmentally destructive behavior. Companies will know this in advance,
with likely behavioral consequences. The risk of sanctions from sharehold-
ers and state legislatures may well produce environmental improvement
even without regulation.25
Heavily publicized health risks from tobacco represent the most promi-
nent forerunners of more recent measures that attempt to fortify the opera-
tions of markets by informing consumers. Thus, mandatory messages about
the dangers of cigarette smoking, first set out in 1965 and modified in 1969
and 1984, are, of course, designed to ensure that smokers are aware of the
associated risks.26 The Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") has long
maintained a policy of requiring risk labels for pharmaceutical products.27
The Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") has done the same for pes-
ticides and asbestos. Congress itself requires warnings on products that
24See the discussion of informational strategies in ROBERT V. PERCIVAL ET AL.,
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION: LAW, SCIENCE, AND POLICY 612-27 (2d ed. 1996).
Consider the eco-label required by the European Union. See Council Regulation
generally Kleindorfer & Orts, supra note 4.
26See Comprehensive Smoking Education Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-474, 98 Stat.
79 Stat. 282 (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. ?? 1331-1341 (1994)) (same).
28 See 7 U.S.C. ? 136-136y (1994 & Supp. III 1997) (referring to environmental pesticide
620 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LA WREVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
contain saccharin.29 There are numerous other illustrations, but several
post-1980 initiatives are especially striking and deserve brief description by
way of illustration and for purposes of understanding the standing question.
In 1983, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ("OSHA")
issued a Hazard Communication Standard ("HCS"), applicable to the manu-
facturing sector.30 In 1986, the HCS was made generally applicable.31 Un-
der the HCS, chemical producers and importers must evaluate the hazards of
the chemicals they produce or import develop technical hazard information
for material safety data sheets, and labels for hazardous substances and,
most importantly, transmit this information to users of the relevant sub-
stances. All employers must adopt a
that includes individual training-and inform workers of the relevant
The FDA has also adopted informational strategies. In its most ambi-
tious set of proposals, the FDA required a form of disclosure that affected
nearly all food and drink purchased in the United States. The FDA (1)
compelled nutritional labeling on nearly all processed foods, including in-
formation relating to cholesterol, saturated fat, calories from fat, and fiber
(2) required compliance with government-specified serving sizes (3) com-
pelled companies to conform to government definitions of standardized
terms, including, "reduced," "fresh," "free," and "low" and (4) allowed
health claims only if the claims (a) are supported by scientific evidence and
(b) communicate clear and complete information about such matters as fat
and heart disease, fat and cancer, sodium and high blood pressure, and cal-
cium and osteoporosis.33
Act (TSCA)) 40 C.F.R. ? 156.10 (1998) (detailing EPA regulations requiring warning labels
on pesticides promulgated under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act
29 See 21 U.S.C. ?
(1994) (requiring a warning on products containing saccharin
that the sweetener causes cancer in laboratory animals).
30 See Hazard Communication, 29 C.F.R. ? 1910.1200 (1998). OSHA promulgated a
all chemical manufacturers and importers to assess the hazards of chemicals which
they produce or import, and all employers having workplaces in the manufacturing
division, . .. to provide information to their employees concerning hazardous chemi-
cals by means of hazard communication programs including labels, material safety
data sheets, training, and access to written records.
31 See 52 Fed. Reg. 31,852 (1987) (expanding the scope of the HCS to "cover all em-
ployers with employees exposed to hazardous chemicals in their workplaces").
32 See id. ("Expansion of the scope of the HCS requires non-manufacturing employers to
establish hazard communication programs to transmit information on the hazards of chemicals
to their employees by means of labels on containers, material safety data sheets, and training
33 See 58 Fed. Reg. 2,927 (1993).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 621
A great deal of recent attention has been given to informational regula-
tion in the particular context of the communications industry. As an alter-
native to direct regulation, which raises especially severe First Amendment
problems, the government might attempt to increase information instead.
Thus, the mandatory "V-chip" is intended to permit parents to block pro-
gramming that they want to exclude from their homes.34 The V-chip is sup-
posed to work hand-in-hand with a ratings system.35 Similarly, a provision
of the 1996 Telecommunications Act (1) requires television manufacturers
to include technology capable of reading a program rating mechanism (2)
requires the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") to create a
ings methodology if the industry does not produce an acceptable ratings
plan within a year and (3) requires that broadcasters include a rating in their
signals if the relevant program is rated.36 Spurred by this statute, most of
the networks generated a system for television ratings that is now in place.37
A new set of proposals under current discussion would require broadcasters
to make public a of reports about their public interest activities, includ-
ing providing free time for political candidates and educational program-
noted, some disclosure statutes are designed to trigger politi-
cal, rather than market, mechanisms here consumers are not directly in-
volved. The most famous of these statutes is NEPA. Enacted in 1972,
NEPA's principal goal was to require the government to compile and dis-
close environmentally related information before going forward with any
projects having a major effect on the environment.39 NEPA does not re-
quire the government to give environmental effects any particular weight,
nor is there judicial review of the substance of agency decisions.40 The pur-
34 See JAMES P. HAMILTON, CHANNELING VIOLENCE: THE ECONOMIC MARKET FOR
VIOLENT TELEVISION PROGRAMMING 289-92 (1998) (discussing the political call for a V-
c See id. at 289 (noting that the V-chip can block programs which carry ratings).
36 1996 Telecommunications Act, 58 U.S.C. ?? 151-611 (1998) see also HAMILTON,
supra note 34, at 302 (discussing ratings requirements).
37 See HAMILTON, supra note 34, at 304-11 (detailing the development of the television
38 See FINAL REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC INTEREST
OBLIGATIONS OF DIGITAL TELEVISION BROADCASTERS: CHARTING THE DIGITAL
BROADCASTING FUTURE 45-46 (1998) [hereinafter FINAL REPORT] (calling for "enhanced
disclosures of... public interest programming and activities on a quarterly basis" and other
recommendations) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest (1999) (un-
published manuscript) (on file with author).
39 See Calvert Cliffs' Coordinating Comm., Inc. v. United States Atomic Energy
Comm'n, 449 F.2d 1109, 1112 (D.C. Cir. 1971) (noting NEPA's procedural goal).
40 See Strycker's Bay Neighborhood Council, Inc. v. Karlen, 444 U.S. 223, 227 (1980)
(stating that "once an agency has made a
subject to NEPA's procedural requirements,
622 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
pose of disclosure is principally to trigger political safeguards coming from
the government's own judgments or from external pressure.41 Hence, any
governmental indifference to adverse environmental effects is perfectly ac-
ceptable under NEPA. The idea behind the statute is that if the public is
concerned, then the government will have to give some weight to environ-
In 1986, Congress enacted an ambitious statute, the Emergency Plan-
ning and Community Right-to-Know Act ("EPCRA").42 Under this statute,
firms and individuals must report to state and local governments the quanti-
ties of potentially hazardous chemicals that have been stored or released
into the environment. Users of such chemicals must report to their local fire
departments the location, types, and quantities of stored chemicals. They
must also give information about potential adverse health effects. On the
basis of the relevant results, the EPA publishes pollution data about the re-
lease of over 300 chemicals from over 20,000 facilities.43 This has been an
exceptional success story, one that has well exceeded the expectations at the
time of the statute's enactment.44 A detailed report by the General Ac-
counting Office suggests that EPCRA has had important beneficial effects,
spurring innovative, cost-effective programs from the EPA and from state
and local governments.45
Many other statutes involving health, safety, and the environment fall
into this general category. The Animal Welfare Act is designed partly to
ensure publicity about the treatment of animals thus covered laboratories
are required to file reports with the government about their conduct,46 with
the apparent thought that the reports will deter noncompliance and also al-
low continual monitoring. In addition to its various command-and-control
provisions, the Clean Air Act requires companies to create and disclose
"risk management plans" involving accidental releases of chemicals, which
the only role for a court is to insure that the agency has considered the environmental conse-
41 See id. (noting that NEPA is an "area of discretion of the executive as to the choice of
42 42 U.S.C. ?? 11,001-50 (1994) see also supra note 5 and accompanying text.
43 See HAMILTON, supra note 34, at 302 (stating these figures for EPA pollution data).
44 See PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 624, 626 ("Congress anticipated that the avail-
ability of information ... would enable the public to put substantial pressure on companies to
45 See General Accounting Office, Toxic Chemicals, Report to the Congress (1991)
[hereinafter GAO Report].
46 Animal Welfare Act, 7
?? 2131-59 (1994).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 623
must include a
case scenario.47 The Safe Drinking Water Act was
amended in 1996 to require annual "consumer confidence reports" to be de-
veloped and disseminated by community water suppliers.48 Statutes gov-
erning mortgages, crime, discrimination, sexual violence, and medical care
also seem partly committed to the idea that "sunlight is ... the best of disin-
fectants" 49 thus, they require covered institutions to compile reports about
their conduct and compliance with applicable law.50 As noted, FECA re-
quires political committees to disclose a great deal of information about
their activities. In the same category is a proposed code for television
broadcasters, designed partly to ensure publicity about the public service
activities of various stations. Its goal is to ensure more in the way of such
activities indirectly, and simply by virtue of the fact that there will be a
For an overview, consider the following table:
42 U.S.C. ? 7412(r) (1994).
48 42 U.S.C. ? 300g-3(c)(4) (1994).
The phrase comes from LOUIS D. BRANDEIS, OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY AND HOW THE
BANKERS USE IT 62 (Torchbook ed. 1967).
50 See, e.g., Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 (HMDA), 12 U.S.C. ?? 2801-10
(1994) (requiring banks to maintain records of where they make mortgage loans and to make
such records available to the public) Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 (CRA), 12
U.S.C. ?? 2901-07 (1994) (subjecting banks to detailed reporting requirements and rating the
banks based on the extent to which they serve their community) Crime Awareness and Cam-
pus Security Act of 1990 ? 204(a), 20 U.S.C. ? 1092(f)(1)-(6) (1994) (requiring that colleges
develop policies to encourage the prompt reporting of crimes to police and college officials)
Higher Education Amendments of 1992 ? 486(c)(1)-(2), 20 U.S.C. ? 1092(f)(1)(F), (f)(7)
(1994) (requiring that colleges compile and report statistics on listed crimes including sexual
assault, and requiring that colleges promulgate and enforce policies against sexual assault)
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. ?? 1319, 1342, 1369 (1994) (requiring permit
holders to sample their discharges and then submit the results in the form of discharge-
monitoring reports ("DMRs") to the proper authority these DMRs are made available to the
See FINAL REPORT, supra note 38, at 45-46 (discussing proposed disclosures of public
624 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
Table 1. Examples of Informational Regulation
Trigger Market Trigger Political
* Tobacco warnings * EPCRA (annual
* Nutrition regulation * Proposed broadcasters
Duties * Warnings for television code
Imposed on programming *
IPrvte Sect on * Hazardous materials * Clean Air Act's "risk
warning regulation management plans"
* Telecommunications *
Act of 1996 (ratings
* Warnings about the use * EPCRA (Toxic Release
of drugs Inventory)
Government * Safe Drinking Water
Why has information disclosure become such a central regulatory tool?
There are several answers. For various reasons, a
failure may come
in the form of an inadequate supply of information.52 Because information
is generally a public good53 -something that if provided to one is also pro-
vided to all or many-workers and consumers may attempt to free ride on
the efforts of others, resulting in too little information being provided. For
this reason, compulsory disclosure of information can provide the simplest
response to the relevant market failure.
52 See OGUS, supra note 4, at 121-23 (1994) (discussing information deficits).
53 Of course, it is possible to give information more "private good" characteristics, and
innovative approaches can be expected in the next decade. Consider, for example, fees for
access to information on the Internet or the subscription-based Consumer Reports. Neither of
these approaches converts information into a private good, but both reduce the range of people
who may, without high cost, have access to it. Thus, it is possible to imagine a range of ap-
proaches that would diminish the cost of access for some or many, while increasing it, or
holding it constant, for others.
1999] INFORMA TIONAL STANDING 625
It is increasingly recognized that information is often a less expen-
sive and more efficient strategy than command-and-control, which consists
of rigid mandates about regulatory ends (a certain percentage reduction in
sulfur dioxide, for example), regulatory means (a technological mandate for
cars, for example), or both.54 A chief advantage of informational regulation
is its comparative flexibility. If consumers are informed of the salt or sugar
content of foods, they can proceed as they wish, trading off various product
characteristics however they see fit. If workers are given information about
the risks posed by their workplace, then they can trade safety against other
possible variables (such as salary, investments for children or retirement,
and leisure).55 From the standpoint of efficiency, information remedies can
be better than either command-and-control regulation or reliance on un-
regulated markets alone.
From the democratic point of view, informational regulation also has
substantial advantages. A well-functioning system of deliberative democ-
racy requires a certain degree of information, so that citizens can engage in
their monitoring and deliberative tasks. Subject as they are to parochial
pressures, segments of the government may have insufficient incentives to
disclose information on their own consider FOIA or FECA, where the self-
interest of the government or private groups may press in the direction of
too little disclosure. A good way to enable citizens to oversee government
action and also to assess the need for less, more, or different regulation, is to
inform them of both private and public activity. The very fact that the pub-
lic will be in a position to engage in general monitoring may well spur de-
EPCRA is the most obvious example here. Sharp, cost-effective, and
largely unanticipated reductions in toxic releases have come about without
anything in the way of direct regulation.56 This approach appears to be
emerging as the wave of the future.57 In the area of broadcasting, it is pos-
sible to hope that disclosure of public interest programming, and the mere
need to compile the information each year, will increase educational and
public affairs programming without involving government mandates at all.58
See BREYER, supra note 4, at 161-64 (analyzing disclosure as an alternative regulatory
regime) OGUS, supra note 4, at 121-49 (explaining the less interventionist strategy of infor-
55 See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, FREE MARKETS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE 327-28 (1997) (dis-
cussing efficiency and information).
56 See PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 612-16 (discussing the efficacy of informa-
tional approaches to toxic substance regulation).
See supra text accompanying notes 4-10.
58 See HAMILTON, supra note 34, at 302 (discussing informal governmental attempts to
increase educational programming).
626 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
A primary virtue of informational regulation is that it triggers political safe-
guards and allows citizens a continuing oversight role-one that is, in the
best cases, largely self-enforcing.
C. Policies and Prospects
None of this is to say that informational regulation is always desirable.
Under imaginable assumptions such regulation will be inferior to command-
and-control regulation and to reliance on markets unaccompanied by disclo-
sure requirements. There are two problems with informational strategies.
First, providing information may be expensive, sometimes costing more
than it is worth. Second, the provision of information is sometimes inef-
fectual, or even counterproductive.
Consider, for example, the fact that the government estimated the cost
of the FDA disclosure rules as "$1.7 billion over twenty years."59 The
president of the National Food Processors Association claimed that the first-
year costs alone would exceed $2 billion.60 In either case, the cost is sig-
nificant, and an important question is what improvements-in terms of re-
duced mortality or morbidity-are produced in return. OSHA's hazard
communication policy is estimated to save 200 lives per year-a large num-
ber-but at an annual cost of $360 million.61 The expenditure per life saved
is therefore $1.8 million. This is far better than a large number of regula-
tions, and is probably an amount well worth spending but it is more than
many agencies spend for life-saving regulations.62 The OSHA rule does not
stand out as a means of saving lives especially cheaply.63 (Of course there
59 Nancy Ryan & Linda M. Harrington, FDA Offers New Rules on Food Labels, Claims,
CHI. TRIB., Nov. 7, 1991, at 2.
60 See id.
61 These figures come from John F. Morrall III, A Review of the Record, 10 REGULATION
25, 30 (Nov./Dec. 1986), which was criticized in Lisa Heinzerling, Regulatory Costs of
Mythic Proportions, 107 YALE L.J. 1981, 1999-2000 (1998).
62 See W. KIP VISCUSI, FATAL TRADEOFFS: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RESPONSIBILITIES
FOR RISK 264 (1992).
63 When informational strategies are costly, there are two possible responses from the
government. The first is to do nothing. If the savings-in terms of health, life, and informed
choice-are relatively low, then costly strategies, even informational ones, make little sense.
There will, therefore, be circumstances in which a government remedy for an absence of in-
formation is unwarranted.
The second possibility is to impose a regulatory strategy rather than to require disclosure.
By a regulatory strategy I
a mandatory outcome, such as a
ban on the materials in
question, or governmental specification of a particular outcome, as in a mandated maximum
level of carcinogens in the workplace. Sometimes the regulatory strategy will be cheaper be-
cause the price of disclosing information-changing packaging and so forth-is so high. This
is likely to be the right response when most or all people would respond to the information in
the same way. In that case, it is unnecessary to provide information, and better simply to dic-
1999] INFORMA TIONAL STANDING 627
are likely to be large morbidity and other gains that are not captured in the
"lives saved" number.)
Even when informational strategies are not prohibitively expensive,
they may be ineffectual and thus have low benefits they may even be
counterproductive. This is so for various reasons, and here a great deal
more work remains to be done. People have a
ability to process in-
formation.64 They have a notoriously difficult time thinking about low-
probability events. Sometimes people discount such events to zero some-
times they treat them as much more dangerous than they actually are. If
people are told, for example, that a certain substance causes cancer, then
they may think that it is far more dangerous than it is in fact.6 But some
carcinogenic substances pose little risk of cancer. There is also a pervasive
risk of "alarmist bias," as frightening information is more salient and potent
than comforting information, regardless of what is true.
For example, California's Proposition 65, an initiative designed to pro-
mote citizen awareness of risk levels, requires warnings for exposure to car-
cinogens.67 At first glance, the requirement seems entirely unexceptionable,
indeed an important advance. But it has in some ways been counterproduc-
tive. Consumers appear to think that twelve of every 100 users of a product
with the required warning will die from cancer, an estimate that exceeds re-
ality by a factor of 1000 or more.68 With respect to information, less may
be more. If information is not provided in a clear and usable form, it may
actually make people less knowledgeable than they were before, producing
overreactions, or underreactions, based on an ability to understand what the
information actually means. People also face a pervasive risk of "informa-
tion overload," causing consumers to treat a large amount of information as
tate an outcome that, by hypothesis, is generally or almost universally preferred. For an espe-
cially dangerous substance, one that reasonable people would choose not to encounter, a flat
ban is appropriate.
64 See JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES (Daniel Kahneman
et al. eds., 1982) Christine Jolls et al., A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics, 50
STAN. L. REV. 1471, 1533-37 (1998) (discussing how simply providing information "is not
See W. KIP ViscusI, PRODUCT-RISK LABELING: A FEDERAL RESPONSIBILITY 11-16
(1993) (analyzing the results of California's Proposition 65) W. KIP VISCUSI, RATIONAL
RISK POLICY 5 (1998) (suggesting that "[i]ndividual risk perceptions are often in error").
66 See W. Kip Viscusi, Alarmist Decisions with Divergent Risk Information, 107 ECON. J.
1657, 1666-67 (1997) ("[T]he fear of the worst case scenario receives greater weight than
does the low risk assessment.").
67 See PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 616-21 (describing California's approach to
the information problem).
68 See W. Kip Viscusi, Predicting the Effects of Food Cancer Risk Warnings on Consum-
ers, 43 FOOD DRUG COSM. L.J. 283, 288 (1988) (finding that "individuals have a difficult
time in processing refined distinctions between very miniscule probabilities").
628 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
equivalent to no information at all.69 Certainly this is true when disclosure
campaigns are filled with details that cannot be processed easily.
With respect to industry responses, companies may respond to certain
disclosure requirements by refusing to provide information at all (if this is
an available option). The result will be the removal from the market of in-
formation that is useful overall. If industry responds to a requirement of
evidentiary support for scientific claims with mere "puffing," then consum-
ers may have less information than they did to begin with. If advertisers
must conduct extensive tests before they are permitted to make claims, then
they will be given a strong incentive to avoid making claims at all.70
There is a further problem: optimistic bias.71 People often believe
themselves to be immune from risks that they acknowledge are significant
and real with respect to others. About 90% of people believe that they are
above-average drivers, less likely than others to be involved in automobile
accidents.72 In one study, 97% of those surveyed ranked themselves as av-
erage or above average in their ability to avoid both bicycle and power
mower accidents.73 If most people think that the information does not apply
to them, disclosure requirements may have little effect.
Disclosure strategies may also have disproportionately little effect on
people who are undereducated, elderly, or poor. If this is so, the disadvan-
taged may continue to face the risks that informational disclosure strategies
are aimed to counteract (at least if market forces fail to induce general
changes from producers).74 And when risks are placed on outsiders who are
69 See Jacob Jacoby et al., Corrective Advertising and Affirmative Disclosure Statements:
Their Potential for Confusing and Misleading the Consumer, 46 J. MARKETING 61, 70 (1982)
(describing how the language used in remedial statements designed to correct misleading ad-
vertising messages may be more confusing to the consumer than the advertising message it-
70 See Richard Craswell, Interpreting Deceptive Advertising, 65 B.U. L. REV. 658, 719-
25 (1985) (noting the various incentives that sellers have to not disclose useful information).
71 See Christine Jolls et al., A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L.
REV. 1471, 1524-27 (1998) (describing optimistic bias as "[a] common feature of human be-
havior" where "[p]eople tend to think that bad events are far less likely to happen to them than
72 See SHELLEY E. TAYLOR, POSITIVE ILLUSIONS: CREATIVE SELF-DECEPTION AND THE
HEALTHY MIND 10-11 (1993).
73 See id. at 116.
74 See George W. Schucker et al., The Impact of the Saccharin Warning Label on Sales of
Diet Soft Drinks in Supermarkets, 2 J. PUB. POL'Y & MARKETING 46, 54-56 (1983) (finding
no change in diet soft drink sales in poor, undereducated areas after the FDA added warning
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 629
not in a contractual relationship with the wrongdoer,75 information may do
little good, because the outsiders are not in a position to extract a higher
price in return for the relevant risk, and may in fact be unable to do anything
These points should be taken as cautionary notes, and not as sugges-
tions that informational regulation is ill advised. Whether informational
regulation is preferable to complete reliance on markets, or instead to regu-
lation through command-and-control or through economic incentives, de-
pends on the details. Certainly there is reason, in both theory and practice,
to think that informational regulation is the best approach in many con-
texts.77 The most promising setting involves a
failure in the provi-
sion of information and reason to believe that information can be provided
in such a way as to be understandable to the people who receive it.
D. Why Suits? Why Citizen Suits?
As we will see, Congress sometimes explicitly authorizes citizen suits
to ensure disclosure of information. Where Congress is not explicit, infer-
ences must be drawn about legislative instructions the Administrative Pro-
cedure Act ("APA") or some other source of law may or may not be read to
allow apparent outsiders to bring suit to require disclosure. This possibility
leaves an obvious question. Why does Congress give standing to citizens or
others to allow them to use courts to require government, or regulated par-
ties, to disclose information?78
The simplest answer is connected to the reason for statutes requiring in-
formation disclosure in the first instance. Both agencies and private compa-
nies often have powerful incentives to withhold information, and suits can
serve both as an ex ante deterrent and as an ex post corrective to an unlaw-
ful failure to disclose. In the face of disclosure requirements, government
failure may mimic market failure, and a
to bring suit might provide
75 The notions of "outsiders" and "wrongdoers" are of course pre-Coasian. See RONALD
H. COASE, THE FIRM, THE MARKET, AND THE LAW 95-156 (1988) (discussing the reciprocal
and interactive nature of harms). I use the terms to build on common understandings.
76 See BREYER, supra note 4, at 23 (discussing how information is an inadequate re-
sponse to externalities) OGUS, supra note 4, at 310 (same).
See the suggestive discussion in JAMES T. HAMILTON, CHANNELING VIOLENCE: THE
ECONOMIC MARKET FOR VIOLENT TELEVISION PROGRAMMING 310 (1998), finding that "in-
formation provision offers a
to reduce exposure of children to violent programming while
allowing adult views to consume what they wish," and MAGAT & VISCUSI, supra note 4, at 4-
9, discussing the advantages of informational regulation in the hazard warning context, in
which the government seeks to reduce accident and health risks.
78 As noted, there is a separate question about the actual origins of the relevant law the
answer to that question likely will depend on the constellation of relevant interest groups.
630 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
some help. The incentive not to disclose takes multiple forms. People may
not want to disclose because of the sheer economic burden of doing so in
the first instance. It can be quite costly to compile and disseminate the rele-
vant reports. Consider the large expense involved in producing an EIS,79 as
well as other paperwork requirements that may impose substantial bur-
In addition, both private and public agencies may have an incentive not
to disclose because of the qualitatively diverse problems, and costs, that
may follow disclosure. The market may well punish bad news via de-
creased sales or (perhaps in consequence) decreased stock prices the pun-
ishment may be mild, optimal, or excessive and alarmist,81 and it can be
hard to predict in advance. A cereal company that discloses the nutritional
content of its foods may find itself with much fewer purchasers a company
that discloses workplace risks may have to increase wages or cut back pro-
duction. An agency and affected developers may resist compiling an EIS
because once the statement is made public, the project itself will be in jeop-
ardy. The perception of jeopardy may impose costly delays and eventually
development may be blocked entirely-a far from uncommon result of the
EIS process.82 So too, a political organization that discloses its financial
backers may find itself far less influential.
These incentives not to disclose may be especially hard to counteract in
light of the fact that information is often a
good.83 As noted above,
the benefits of disclosure are often obtained by many people, whereas the
costs of ensuring disclosure are borne (at least in the short run) by one or a
few. In these circumstances, it is possible that with market ordering, or
even a law on the books, few or none will bother to take the necessary
steps-economic, political, or otherwise-to counteract the unlawful with-
holding of information. Thus, the economic and political markets may un-
derproduce disclosure, even in the face of a law that mandates it.
79 Millions of dollars are appropriated each year for federal oversight alone. See
WILLIAM RODGERS, ENVIRONMENTAL LAW 806 (1994).
80 Hard data are difficult to find, but the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 44 U.S.C. ??
3501-20 (1994 & Supp. II 1996), was a clear response to perceived expenses.
81 There is a
possibility of an alarmist reaction, producing excessive punishment
alarmist information is especially salient and hence memorable, and people might read non-
alarmist information in an alarming way. See Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability
Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 STAN. L. REV. (forthcoming Apr. 1999) Viscusi, supra
note 66, at 1668 (concluding that people overvalue risk, overreact to highly publicized risks,
and "place considerable weight on the risk information provided to them").
82 See PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 1060-65 (discussing the adequacy of the EIS
83 See BREYER, supra note 4, at 26 (discussing the public good aspects of information)
OGUS, supra note 4, at 121-26 (same).
1999] INFORMA TIONAL STANDING 631
Congress may offer a broad grant of standing-perhaps even to citizens
generally-so as to counteract the relevant incentives. The hope is that
some plaintiff, whether altruistic or self-interested, will take steps to ensure
the availability of information. FOIA is the most obvious example. The
grant of the power to obtain information, and to litigate, to "any person"84
operates to inform agencies that there will be ready judicial review of any
denial of a FOIA request, a factor that should make agencies less likely to
engage in unlawful denials. In any case, such denials can and often will be
corrected if they are unlawful. Or Congress may decide that citizens gener-
ally can bring suit against the FEC to ensure compliance with federal cam-
paign laws, believing that this mechanism will deter violations of a law
central to the electoral process. A general grant of standing may help to
remedy the problems created by the relevant incentives and the public-good
character of information, for there may be someone, out of a large group of
potential beneficiaries, who is willing to bear the costs of a
shall see, Akins itself is a prime example.85
None of this is to say that a grant of informational standing is a good
idea. Lawsuits can be expensive they also can be diversionary and even
frivolous. With respect to information, a
of standing to all citizens
may divert an agency from its preferred course of action and can make sen-
sible priority-setting extremely difficult. It even may involve a kind of pri-
vate conscription of public resources86 in a way that undermines a fully
democratic effort, by the agency involved, to allocate its limited resources
to the most serious problems. If all citizens can bring suit against the FEC
to require it to regulate all groups that any citizen would like to see treated
as "political committees," then the FEC may have to spend all of its time
defending itself in court. If any agency definition of "animals" can prompt
a federal action by some citizen asking the government to expand its defini-
tion,87 the government may have fewer resources to enforce the Animal
Welfare Act. Alternatively, the mere risk of a citizen suit may lead the
agency to an outcome that it believes is undesirable, and that perhaps is, in
84 5 U.S.C. ? 552 (1994 & Supp. III 1997).
85 See infra Part II (discussing the Court's holding and analysis in Akins).
86 See Michael S. Greve, Private Enforcement, Private Rewards: How Environmental
Citizen Suits Became an Entitlement Program, in ENVIRONMENTAL POLITICS: PUBLIC
COSTS, PRIVATE REWARDS 105, 108-10 (Michael S. Greve & Fred L. Smith, Jr. eds., 1992)
(discussing the increase in private enforcement actions under the Clean Water Act as a result
of the ease in bringing such actions, the EPA's desire to settle the suits, and the subsequent
transfer of settlement payments from the agency to private environmental groups).
87 See Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Espy, 23 F.3d 496, 496 (D.C. Cir. 1994)
("Animal welfare groups and two individuals brought suit challenging [a] regulation promul-
gated by [the] Department of Agriculture that failed to include birds, rats and mice as 'ani-
mals' within the meaning of [the] Federal Laboratory Animal Welfare Act (FLAWA).").
632 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAWREVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
fact, undesirable. From the agency's point of view, if the suit can be
avoided by choosing a certain route, why not choose that route, even if the
suit might be unsuccessful and even if the problem at hand does not deserve
These points are sufficient to show that it cannot be decided, in the ab-
stract, whether a grant of informational standing is or is not desirable. The
answer depends on a range of empirical issues-the likely performance,
without lawsuits, of the agency and the private sector the cost of any law-
suits the effects of lawsuits on the agency's capacity for priority-setting
and the effects of lawsuits on the agency's substantive regulation. It would
be highly desirable to obtain a
deal more information on these points.
E. Standing Puzzles and Problems
Before Akins, the law governing standing to obtain information was in
considerable disarray, probably in even more disarray than the law of
standing generally. The most serious question was how the "injury in fact"
requirement8 should operate in cases involving a deprivation of access to
information. The Supreme Court has held that a public interest group, con-
sisting of citizens, suffered an injury in fact when the group was deprived of
information that was required to be disclosed under the statute governing
federal advisory committees.89 The Court has also held that deprivation of
information concerning available housing constituted a
injury" to establish injury in fact.90 Lower courts have uniformly upheld the
general grant of standing under FOIA, but without providing a clear ration-
ale for doing so.91
Outside of the FOIA context, the leading case is Lujan v. Defenders of
Wildlife,92 which invalidated a congressional grant of citizen standing and
suggested that citizens could not bring suit unless a
88 See, e.g., Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561 (1992) (establishing that
the "irreducible constitutional minimum of standing contains three elements," one of which is
that the "plaintiff must have suffered an 'injury in fact"').
89 See Public Citizen v. Department of Justice, 491 U.S. 440, 449 (1989) (rejecting the
department's argument that the plaintiff did not allege sufficient injury so as to confer stand-
90 See Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, 455 U.S. 363, 374 (1982).
91 See Reporters Comm. for Freedom of the Press v. Sampson, 591 F.2d 944, 945 (D.C.
Cir. 1978) (granting standing to plaintiffs seeking access to Richard Nixon's presidential ma-
terials through FOIA) Skolnick v. Parsons, 397 F.2d 523, 524-25 (7th Cir. 1968) (holding
that the plaintiff had standing to bring an action to compel the President's Commission on
Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice to release a specific report).
92 504 U.S. at 571-72 (1992) (holding that the respondents lacked standing to seek judi-
cial review of Section 7(a)(2) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 633
ticularized" interest was at stake.93 This idea seemed to suggest that a
widely generalized injury, of the sort often invoked by information-seeking
plaintiffs, would not be a sufficient basis for standing. Thus, the injury in
fact requirement, after Lujan, appeared to merge with the ban on standing
for those invoking generalized grievances, and to have created serious ad-
verse consequences for those seeking informational standing.94 At the same
time, lower courts generally agreed that withholding information to which a
plaintiff had a legal right was sufficient to create a legal injury for purposes
of Article III.95 But a complex set of rulings from the D.C. Circuit sug-
gested that a plaintiff whose injury was widely shared would be held to not
have standing under the "zone of interests" test.96
It seemed clear that the Court's recent standing cases were on a kind of
collision course with a
of statutes, including FOIA and FECA,
which gave standing to citizens generally. It was against this background
that the Court decided Akins.
II. WHAT THE COURT SAID
The American Israel Public Affairs Committee ("AIPAC") may or may
not be a "political committee" within the meaning of FECA. If AIPAC is a
political committee, then it is subject to a range of legal restrictions, in-
volving, for example, statutory limits on the amount that it can contribute to
a candidate for political office.97 More importantly for the particular pur-
poses of informational standing, FECA imposes a number of record-keeping
and disclosure requirements on all political committees.98 These require-
ments are designed to expose a
of political activities to public view.
As a result, such committees must register with the FEC keep names and
addresses of contributors record the purpose and amount of disbursements
and file annual reports to the FEC which include lists of donors giving more
than $200 per year, contributions, expenditures, and disbursements.99 A se-
ries of complex provisions define "political committee." The statute also
93 Id. at 560.
94 See Federal Election Comm'n v. Akins, 118 S. Ct. 1777, 1791 (1998) (Scalia, J., dis-
senting) (questioning the majority's suggestion that abstract interests "go hand in hand" with
those which are unduly shared).
95 See infra notes 110-12 and accompanying text (discussing the requirements for a legal
See infra notes 212-13, 218-19, 225-27 and accompanying text (discussing the zone of
97 See 2 U.S.C. ?? 432-34 (1992).
98 See id. (codifying registration requirements for political committees).
99 See id.
634 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
provides that "any person who believes a violation of this Act... has oc-
curred, may file a complaint with the Commission."100 It adds that "[a]ny
party aggrieved by an order of the Commission dismissing a complaint filed
by such party ... may file a petition"101 to seek review of the dismissal of
In 1997, a number of voters attempted to persuade the FEC to treat
AIPAC as a political committee.102 Their evident motivation was political
disagreement with AIPAC. They also believed that AIPAC was involved in
campaign activities and that the FEC had behaved unlawfully in failing to
engage in regulation and in failing to require disclosure of AIPAC's rele-
vant activities.103 After extended deliberation, the FEC concluded that it did
not consider AIPAC to be such a committee, because "the Act's definition
of 'political committee' includes only those organizations that have as a
'major purpose' the nomination or election of candidates."104 AIPAC was
an "issue-oriented lobbying organization, not a campaign-related organiza-
tion."105 Disagreeing with the FEC's judgment, the voter-plaintiffs then
filed suit to seek review of the complaint, claiming that they were "ag-
grieved" and therefore statutorily authorized to bring suit. The FEC re-
sponded by asserting, among other things, that the voters lacked standing in
their capacity as citizens and that the suit should therefore be dismissed.
In Akins, the Supreme Court held that the voters had standing because
of their interest in obtaining the relevant information about AIPAC.106 The
analysis came in four parts. First, the Court said that there was no problem
with "prudential standing."107 Congress itself had granted standing to
"[a]ny party aggrieved,"'08 and any prudential limits had been overcome by
statute and were therefore inapplicable.109
100 Id. ? 437g(a)(1).
101 Id. ? 437g(a)(8)(A).
102 See Federal Election Comm'n v. Akins, 118 S. Ct. 1777, 1781-82 (1998) (discussing
the efforts of a group of voters from which this case arose).
103 See id. (noting that voters had "views often opposed to those of AIPAC").
104 Id. at 1782-83.
106 See id. at 1784 (holding that plaintiffs suffered a "genuine 'injury in fact"' since they
could not obtain information concerning AIPAC donors and contributions).
107 Id. at 1783.
ference between a "party" who could file a complaint with the FEC and a "party aggrieved"
who could bring suit. See id. at 1789-90 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (calling the majority's inter-
pretation of an aggrieved party "too much of a stretch").
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 635
Second, the plaintiffs suffered injury in fact, and hence the statutory
grant of standing to citizens was constitutional.110 The injury "consists of
their inability to obtain information-lists of AIPAC donors ... and cam-
paign-related contributions and expenditures-that, on respondents' view of
the law, the statute requires that AIPAC make public.""11I The Court added
that there was "no reason to doubt their claim that the information would
help them ... to evaluate candidates for public office, especially candidates
who received assistance from AIPAC, and to evaluate the role that AIPAC's
financial assistance might play in a specific election."112 This injury was
sufficiently "concrete and particular" for purposes of Article III.
The Court faced a possible obstacle to this conclusion in United States
v. Richardson.'13 There, a plaintiff bringing suit principally as a taxpayer
sought information involving the expenditures of the Central Intelligence
Agency ("CIA"), which, in his view, had to be made public under the Ac-
counts Clause of the Constitution. The Court denied standing.114 As the
Akins Court explained, this was because there was no "logical nexus" be-
tween the plaintiff s
status and the claimed failure of Congress to
detailed report of CIA expenditures. 15 In Akins, by contrast,
"there is a statute which, as we have previously pointed out[,] ... does seek
to protect individuals... from the kind of harm they say they have suf-
fered."'116 Under FECA, the "'logical nexus' inquiry" in Richardson was
thus entirely irrelevant.117 In a crucial passage, the Court added that Akins
involving not taxpayer standing, but voter standing. If
Richardson had involved voter standing, the question would have arisen
whether the Constitution's "general directives" allowed for enforcement
through lawsuits brought by private persons. The answer to that question
"(like the answer to whether there was taxpayer standing in Richardson)
would have rested in significant part upon the Court's view of the Accounts
At this point, the Court turned to the third standing question: whether
standing was lacking because the injury was a "generalized grievance,"
110 See id. at 1784 (stating that a plaintiff suffers an injury in fact when the plaintiff "fails
to obtain information which must be publicly disclosed pursuant to a statute").
113 418 U.S. 166, 179-80 (1974) (holding that respondents lacked standing because they
had nothing more than "generalized grievances" and had not suffered an actual injury).
114 See id. at 171.
636 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
shared by all or most citizens. The Court acknowledged that previous deci-
sions suggested "that where large numbers of Americans suffer alike, the
political process, rather than the judicial process, may provide the more ap-
propriate remedy for a widely shared grievance."'19 Indeed, in some cases,
including Richardson itself, the Court suggested that Article III might be an
obstacle to a suit by plaintiffs whose injuries were widely shared.120 But the
Court concluded that with an express congressional grant of standing, the
generalized character of the grievance here was no obstacle, because the
limitation was prudential in character. In its key step, the Court distin-
guished between injuries that are widely shared and injuries that are "ab-
stract and indefinite." An abstract injury-such as an injury "to the interest
in seeing that the law is obeyed"121-would not allow for standing. By
contrast, a concrete but widely shared injury would suffice for purposes of
Article III. "Thus the fact that a political forum may be more readily avail-
able where an injury is widely shared (while counseling against, say, inter-
as conferring standing) does not, by itself, automatically
disqualify an interest for Article III purposes."122 This point seemed to the
Court "obvious" for cases involving the same common law injury, as in a
mass tort or an "interference with voting rights."123 "We conclude that
similarly, the informational injury at issue here, directly related to voting,
the most basic of political rights, is sufficiently concrete and specific such
that the fact that it is widely shared does not deprive Congress of constitu-
tional power to authorize its vindication in federal courts."124
The fourth and final standing issue involved redressability. Would the
plaintiffs' injury be remedied by a decree in their favor? The FEC urged
that even if it agreed with the plaintiffs on the law, it may have exercised its
statutory discretion so as not to require AIPAC to produce the information.
Thus the plaintiffs' injury might not be redressed by a decree in their favor.
The Court answered with an analogy: "Agencies often have discretion
about whether or not to take a particular action. Yet those adversely af-
fected by a
agency decision generally have standing to com-
plain that the agency based its decision upon an improper legal ground."125
The Court explained that it is typical to remand a case after a judicial judg-
that Article III may prevent a
with only generalized grievances from bringing suit).
121 Akins, 118 S. Ct. at 1786.
125 Id. (citing Abbott Lab. v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 140 (1967)).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 637
ment, even though the agency may end up doing the same thing after the
remand. This familiar practice was sufficient to justify a conclusion that the
plaintiffs had met the redressability requirements.
Justice Scalia's dissenting opinion was rooted in a concern that the legal
provision in FECA "is an extraordinary one, conferring upon a private per-
son the ability to bring an Executive agency into court to compel its en-
forcement of the law against a third party."126 His principal argument in-
voked Richardson, which, in Justice Scalia's view, held that in order to have
standing, each plaintiffs harm must be "particularized," in the sense that it
affects him "in a personal and individual way."127 In a mass tort, each per-
son suffers "a particularized and differentiated harm" but in this case, as in
Richardson, the harm caused to the plaintiff is "precisely the same as the
harm caused to everyone else."128 The requirement of a particularized harm
is also based on a
understanding of Article II, which gives the Execu-
tive, not the courts, the responsibility to "take Care that the Laws be faith-
Justice Scalia complained that the logic of the Court's opinion is that "it
is within the power of Congress to authorize any interested person to man-
age (through the courts) the Executive's enforcement of any law that in-
cludes a requirement for the filing and public availability of a piece of pa-
per."130 The result of allowing suits in cases like these is to produce "a shift
of political responsibility to a branch designed not to protect the public at
large but to protect individual rights."131 This result would violate both Ar-
ticle III and Article II.132
III. EVALUATING AKINS: INFORMATIONAL STANDING AS A QUESTION OF
I now turn to an evaluation of the Court's principal conclusions. The
unifying theme is that with respect to information, and perhaps more gener-
ally, the Court has rooted the standing question firmly in Congress's in-
structions. Whether a plaintiff has standing depends on what the relevant
129 U.S. CONST. art. II, ? 3.
131 Id. This point amounts to a one-sentence summary of Justice Scalia's influential es-
say on standing. See Antonin Scalia, The Doctrine of Standing as an Essential Element of the
Separation of Powers, 17 SUFFOLK U. L. REV. 881 (1983).
constitutionally transfers executive power under Article II to Article III courts).
638 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
statute says. For both the "injury in fact" and generalized grievance issues,
the foundation for the Court's conclusion is that Congress created a legally
cognizable injury and gave citizens the right to redress that injury in court.
The Court was correct to stress this point, and as we shall see, the em-
phasis on congressional instructions carries with it a
implications. Justice Scalia's dissenting opinion is also correct insofar as it
contends that the Court suggests that Congress may create an interest in in-
formation and allow people to vindicate that interest in court. But Justice
Scalia is wrong to suggest that this outcome would violate the Constitution.
A. Injuries, in Fact and in Law
Begin with the idea of "injury in fact." The Court held that there was
such an injury in Akins because the plaintiffs were denied information to
which they had a legal right.133 Because the statute created a right to infor-
mation of which they were deprived, the plaintiffs suffered an injury that
was sufficient for Article III purposes. Was the Court correct in reaching
1. Preliminaries: Of Fact and Law
To answer this question, it is necessary to step back a bit. There now
appears to be a consensus that the "injury in fact" idea has extremely serious
problems.134 The first problem is that the idea is not a product of the text or
history of the Constitution it is a recent innovation by the Court itself.135
To be sure, the text of the Constitution does require a "case" or "contro-
versy," and this provision does limit the kinds of claims that can be heard in
court.136 Without some kind of cause of action-with a purely ideological
133 See id. at 1784 ("The injury of which respondents complain-their failure to obtain
relevant information-is injury of a kind the FECA seeks to address ....").
134 See Lee A. Albert, Standing to Challenge Administrative Action: An Inadequate Sur-
rogate for Claim for Relief, 83 YALE L.J. 425, 492 (1974) (suggesting that the standing ques-
tion is not injury in fact, but cause of action) David P. Currie, Misunderstanding Standing,
1981 SUP. CT. REV. 41, 42 (same) William A. Fletcher, The Structure of Standing, 98 YALE
L.J. 221, 229 (1988) (arguing that standing should not require injury in fact) Richard B.
Stewart, The Reformation of American Administrative Law, 88 HARV. L. REV. 1669, 1737-39
(1975) (discussing the problems of injury in fact when the injury is to an ideological interest).
Many authorities to this effect are collected in Fletcher, supra, at 223 n. 18.
35 Specifically, the test is an outgrowth of Association of Data Processing Serv. Orgs. v.
Camp, 397 U.S. 150 (1970). The origins of the test lay in the 1958 treatise by Professor Ken-
neth Culp Davis. See 3 KENNETH CULP DAVIS, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW TREATISE ? 22.02, at
211-13 (1958) (arguing that as a matter of elementary justice, "one who is in fact hurt by ille-
gal action should have a remedy").
136 See U.S. CONST. art. III.
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 639
objection or complaint-there is no "case" or "controversy" within the
meaning of Article III. It follows that courts cannot hear objections unac-
companied by some kind of legal right to initiate suit. But both before and
after ratification, legislatures-including the very first Congress-gave citi-
zens and taxpayers causes of action in certain circumstances, and these
causes of action were not thought to violate Article III.137 The injury in fact
test has its roots not in the founding period, but in New Deal era cases, and
did not take Article III form until about 1970.138 As a matter of text and
history, the best reading of the Constitution is that no one can sue without
some kind of cause of action. An injury in fact, however, is neither a neces-
sary nor a sufficient condition for standing.
There are problems with the injury in fact test even if we put text and
history to one side. The test was originally designed to simplify the stand-
ing inquiry by separating the issue of standing and the merits,139 but it has
actually produced extremely complex and unwieldy threshold issues of fact,
ill suited to judicial resolution-involving, for example, the question of
how, exactly, fuel economy standards alter the mix of available automobiles
for consumers.140 But a more important problem with the injury in fact idea
is conceptual: the test is not even coherent.141 The basic difficulty is that
many people suffer injuries "in fact" every day, but these injuries do not be-
137 See Raoul Berger, Standing to Sue in Public Actions: Is It a
ment?, 78 YALE L.J. 816, 817 (1969) (arguing that the English precursor of standing "did not
in fact demand injury to a personal interest as a prerequisite") Louis L. Jaffe, Standing to Se-
cure Judicial Review: Public Actions, 74 HARV. L. REV. 1265, 1265 (1961) (reviewing the
common law development of public actions to protect public interests and contrasting the
limitations that standing places on these actions) Cass R. Sunstein, What's Standing After
Lujan? Of Citizen Suits, "Injuries," and Article III, 91 MICH. L. REV. 163, 176 (1992) (dis-
cussing evidence that "Article III did not impose constraints on Congress' power to grant
standing to strangers") Steven L. Winter, The Metaphor of Standing and the Problem of Self-
Governance, 40 STAN. L. REV. 1371, 1395 (1988) (suggesting that in early Supreme Court
jurisprudence, the Court did not recognize a cause of action in terms of "standing," but rather
in formalistic terms).
A competing view of the history is provided in Bradley S. Clanton, Standing and the
English Prerogative Writs, 63 BROOK. L. REV. 1001 (1997). I cannot discuss Professor
Clanton's valuable treatment here note, however, that even if he is correct on eighteenth-
century law, the early American practice argues against any "injury in fact" requirement.
See Sunstein, supra note 137, at 179-81 (providing a historical overview of standing
during the New Deal).
139 See Camp, 397 U.S. at 153 (distinguishing between the legal interest test, which goes
to the merits, and the question of standing).
140 See Center for Auto Safety v. Thomas, 806 F.2d 1071, 1075 (D.C. Cir. 1986) (holding
that as a membership organization, the petitioners had standing because they sought to protect
the interests of their members in the choice of the most fuel efficient vehicles).
141 See Fletcher, supra note 134, at 221 (stating that "[t]he structure of standing law in
the federal courts has long been criticized as incoherent").
640 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
come legally cognizable, and are not even visible to the legal system, unless
and until some source of law creates a
legal interest and a right to
bring suit. The legal system does not "see" an injury unless some law has
made it qualify as such. If this point seems obscure, it is only because of
widespread agreement, within the legal culture, about which injuries are
"injuries in fact" and which are not. But the agreement comes from under-
standings of law, not understandings of fact.
Thus, for example, if a citizen sought information from the government
in 1956 and even claimed that his request involved "the right to informa-
tion," his complaint would have seemed purely ideological, and he would
not have had standing. It is only after the passage of FOIA that there is a
legal claim and hence an injury (in fact?) that is the basis for a federal cause
of action. If a woman sued for sexual harassment in 1958, her injury would
seem purely ideological and would not support a federal action things are
altogether different in 1999. Can it possibly be suggested that the "facts"
have changed? If someone was turned down for a job in 1954 because of
his skin color and complained about the rejection in court, there would have
been no possible basis for a lawsuit. Things changed in 1964.142 The rea-
son is not that the facts are different it is the law that has changed. The line
between injuries in fact and "other" injuries is usually clear, and it cannot
possibly be one involving just "facts" it necessarily involves the require-
ments of law.
To say this is to say that under Article III, an injury in fact is not an in-
telligible basis for standing. Something involving a violation of the law is
required. But-it might be asked-is not an injury in fact a
minimal condition for standing, as the Court has suggested in many cases
since 1980?143 The most important problem with this question is that it is
hard to know what the question means. For the question to be a sensible
one, we would have to be able to think that there is a way, entirely inde-
pendent of law, of figuring out whether a litigant has been "injured" at all.
Some cases may seem quite easy on this count. If I sue to prevent the gov-
ernment from taking my land, surely I have been injured "in fact." If I am
an Illinois citizen and sue to prevent racial discrimination in North Carolina,
a state that I
visit, surely my interest is purely ideological. These
in fact as an element of standing) Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. 727, 740-41 n.16 (1972)
(citing 1 ALEXIS DE TOCQUEVILLE, DEMOCRACY IN AMERICA 280 (Phillips Bradley ed., A.A.
Knopf 1945) (1835)), for the assertion that "judicial review is effective largely because it is
not available simply at the behest of a partisan faction, but is exercised only to remedy a par-
ticular, concrete injury").
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 641
cases seem to suggest that common sense, or ordinary perceptions, can tell
us whether someone has really, or "in fact," been injured, quite apart from
But this conclusion is much too quick. "Injuries" are not some kind of
Platonic form, so that we can distinguish, without the aid of some under-
standing of law, between those that exist "in fact" and those that do not exist
"in fact." What is perceived, socially or legally, as an "actual" injury is a
product of social or legal categories giving names and recognition to some
things that people, prominently people within the legal culture, consider to
be (actual, cognizable) harms. Takings cases, and cases involving Illinois
citizens suing about discrimination in North Carolina, seem easy, and they
are, but this is only because the relevant legal understandings are so deeply
internalized that they appear to be mere "common sense." That these cases
are easy is a
to the agreed-upon nature of the relevant legal under-
standings it is not a product of any simple or law-free understanding of the
"facts." The only way to distinguish between cognizable and noncognizable
injuries is to see what the law says, or is there is no prepolitical or prelegal
way of making that distinction.144
2. The Akins Reformulation
Thus far these objections seem to run counter to the whole thrust of
modem standing doctrine. But the Court has shown unambiguous signs of
acknowledging this point.145 The Akins Court was alert to these problems
and indeed seems to have taken the injury in fact test in a new, and far more
Note first that the Court seems to meld the injury in fact inquiry with
the inquiry into what the law is: "The 'injury in fact' that respondents have
suffered consists of their inability to obtain information ... that, on respon-
144 A hard case for this proposition would be created if Congress said that anyone may
sue for any acts of unlawful racial discrimination anywhere. Would this not be a
someone being given standing, or a legal right, when she had no injury in fact? I think that
this question, meant to be rhetorical, is too simple relevant discussion can be found infra, at
145 See, for example, Lujan, where the Court, in introducing the standing requirements,
said that "the plaintiff must have suffered an 'injury in fact'--an invasion of a
tected interest." 504 U.S. at 560 (emphasis added). See also International Primate Protec-
tion League v. Administrators of Tulane Educ. Fund, 500 U.S. 72 (1991), where the Court
said that "standing is gauged by the specific common-law, statutory or constitutional claims
that a party presents," and noted that standing "should be seen as a
law, answerable by reference to the statutory and constitutional provision whose protection is
invoked." Id. at 77 (quoting Fletcher, supra note 134, at 229).
642 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYL VANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
dents' view of the law, the statute requires that AIPAC make public."146
This formulation unambiguously mixes the injury in fact inquiry with an in-
quiry into the content of the law. The Court does not refer merely to an in-
ability to obtain information it refers to an inability to obtain information
that must, under the relevant law, be made public. Here is a suggestion that
without FECA, it is not clear that there would be a
The point emerges even more straightforwardly from the Akins Court's
treatment of United States v. Richardson, 47 where it is made clear that the
injury in fact question would be assessed by reference to positive law,
whether statutory or constitutional. If the citizens in Richardson had
claimed standing qua citizens, the legal issue "would have rested in signifi-
cant part upon the Court's view of the Accounts Clause."148 Quoting
Richardson, the Court said that there would thus be an issue "whether 'the
Framers... ever imagined that general directives [of the Constitu-
tion] . . would be subject to enforcement by an individual citizen.'"149 In
other words, Akins was different from Richardson: in Akins, Congress had
expressly said that the widely diffused interest could be enforced by indi-
vidual litigants, whereas in Richardson, it was not at all clear that the rele-
vant source of law (the Constitution) said that the relevant, widely diffused
injury could be enforced by individual litigants. Whether there was injury
"in fact" depended on what had been provided "in law."
This is a striking way to understand the inquiry into "injury in fact." It
suggests unambiguously that whether a perceived harm is legally cognizable
depends not on facts, but on law. If a denial of citizen standing was appro-
priate in Richardson, it was not because there was no injury "in fact," but
because there was no injury in law-that is, because no source of law cre-
ated a right to bring suit. This suggestion is compatible with several prom-
ising pronouncements in previous cases.150 In Lujan itself, the Court said
that part of the injury in fact test involved whether a "legally cognizable"
interest was involved.151
that the principal question after Akins, for purposes of "in-
jury in fact," is whether Congress or any other source of law gives the liti-
146 Federal Election Comm'n v. Akins, 118 S. Ct. 1777, 1784 (1998).
147 418 U.S. 166 (1974).
148 Akins, 118 S. Ct. at 1785.
149 Id. (quoting Richardson, 418 U.S. at 178 n.l 1) (alteration in original).
150 See, e.g., Air Courier Conference v. American Postal Workers Union, 498 U.S. 517,
523 (1991) (stating that in order to sue under the APA, one must establish that she has suf-
wrong as the result of an agency's action).
151 See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 578 (1992) (affirming the principle
that only "legally cognizable injuries" satisfy the requirements of Article III).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 643
to bring suit.152 Previous cases suggest that there are limits on
Congress's power to grant standing to people who have sustained no "injury
in fact,"153 and these cases have not been overruled by Akins. But at least
where the plaintiff seeks information, and where Congress has created a le-
gal interest and a right to bring suit, the Constitution does not stand as an
obstacle. This is, to say the least, a major development in the law of infor-
mational standing. It is also a promising development, because it puts the
standing question in the hands of Congress, where it belongs. And even if
this statement is controversial in its broadest form-applying outside the
context of information154-it should not be controversial in a case in which
Congress expressly gives people a right to receive information and allows
them to bring suit to vindicate that right in court.
B. Generalized Grievances
Perhaps the most important aspect of the Akins decision is the Court's
novel understanding of the old idea that "generalized grievances" are not
subject to judicial protection. Before Akins, it was fair to say that the ban on
generalized grievances was moving from a prudential one to one rooted in
Article III.155 Lujan seemed to suggest that to have standing, citizens would
have to show that their injuries were "particular" in the sense that they were
not widely shared.156 This was the view defended in an influential law re-
152 See United States House of Representatives v. United States Dep't of Commerce, 11
F. Supp. 2d 76, 85 (D.D.C. 1998) Judicial Watch, Inc. v. Federal Election Comm'n, 10 F.
Supp. 2d 39, 41 (D.D.C. 1998).
53 See Lujan, 504 U.S. at 576-77 (rejecting the proposition that courts act as pseudo-
legislatures by accepting cases without a person suffering "distinctive concrete harm") Sierra
Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. 727, 740 (1972) ("The requirement that a party seeking review must
allege facts showing that he is himself adversely affected does not insulate executive action
from judicial review, nor does it prevent any public interests from being protected through the
154 I do not suggest that Akins overrules Lujan insofar as the latter case requires an injury
in fact. All that is clear is that after Akins, a deprivation of information consists of an injury in
fact if Congress has said so. The tension between Akins and Lujan stems from the Akins
Court's recognition that whether there is an injury depends on what Congress has said, and its
clear indication that Congress has the power to create new interests and new injuries. It re-
mains to be seen whether and how Akins alters Lujan's apparent belief that "injury" is a kind
of Platonic form, existing above and apart from the law. For a quite extreme example of the
Platonic form view of standing law, see Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154
F.3d 426, 445-50 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (Sentelle, J., dissenting).
155 See Lujan, 504 U.S. at 573-74 (stating that making a generalized grievance claim
against the government "does not state an Article III case or controversy").
See id. at 574-75 (quoting with approval Doremus v. Board of Educ., 342 U.S. 429,
433-34 (1952), which stated that "to invoke the judicial power ... it is not sufficient that [the
citizen] has merely a general interest common to all members of the public").
644 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
view article by then-Judge Scalia, which Lujan appeared to follow.157 The
article urged that the distinctive role of the courts is to protect individual
rights, and that when numerous people are being injured, their remedy is
political rather than judicial. This claim was bottomed, in turn, on the idea
that the distinctive role of the courts is to vindicate rights held by individu-
als, rather than majorities or large groups.158 There were many suggestions,
in the lower courts as well as the Supreme Court, that prudential or consti-
tutional considerations counseled against standing for those whose injuries
were not individuated.159 These suggestions were especially important in
cases involving information, since the interest in receiving information is
often widely shared-sometimes, in fact, shared by millions of citizens, as
in the typical deprivation of information suit under FECA.
The Akins Court makes what reasonably could be considered either an
important clarification or a dramatic shift. After Akins, the fact that an in-
jury is generalized is not a barrier to standing under Article III. Congress is
entirely authorized to grant standing to individuals who share an injury with
many other people, even with all citizens. Akins reads the references to
generalized grievances in connection with the requirement that injuries be
concrete rather than abstract. Concreteness, the Court says, is indeed a con-
stitutional requirement. Injuries must not be speculative. But an injury that
is both concrete and generalized is constitutionally cognizable.160
Frequently, this is the case with a
of information. The person
who has been denied information suffers a concrete harm, even though she
may be part of an extremely large class of people. As we have seen, this is
the point where Justice Scalia departed, with some alarm, from the Akins
majority, on the theory that any injury must be both concrete and "particu-
larized" in the sense that it must be distinct to the complaining individual.161
Frequently, a plaintiff seeking information would run afoul of this require-
157 See Scalia, supra note 131, at 881-82 (1983) ("I suggest that courts need to accord
greater weight than they have in recent times to the traditional requirement that the plaintiffs
alleged injury be a particularized one, which sets him apart from the citizenry at large.").
158 See id. at 894-97 (arguing that "the law of standing roughly restricts courts to their
traditional undemocratic role of protecting individuals and minorities against impositions of
15 See, e.g., United States v. Richardson, 418 U.S. 166, 179-80 (1974) (stating that a
citizen who is not satisfied with a congressional ruling can resort to the electoral process as a
remedy, and that there is a "basic principle that to invoke judicial power the claimant must
have a 'personal stake in the outcome,' or a 'particular, concrete injury,' or 'a direct injury'"'
160 See Federal Election Comm'n v. Akins, 118 S. Ct. 1777, 1786 (1998) ("[W]here a
harm is concrete, though widely shared, the Court has found 'injury in fact."').
161 See id. at 1791 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (stressing the importance of a "particularized"
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 645
ment, for often those deprived of information are not injured in a way that is
(in Justice Scalia's particular sense) particular.
What, then, remains of the supposed ban on generalized grievances?
Very little-but not nothing. The Court says that the fact that an injury is
widely shared, and hence the political forum is available, will "counsel[]
against... interpreting a statute as conferring standing."162 Hence, the no-
tion is retained as a
one, and as we will see, it may turn out to be
quite important as such, in information cases and in others.163
Now, it would be possible to suggest that Akins eliminates the "gener-
alized grievance" requirement entirely and focuses solely on injury in fact.
The Court's use of the mass tort case-in which numerous people are af-
fected, but each has standing-might be taken as indicative of a
this direction. In the mass tort case, however, many people are affected, but
each in a
and concrete way. A more serious question is whether
the same is true when thousands or millions of people are deprived of in-
formation. It is not easy to answer that question in the abstract. Perhaps a
deprivation of information (involving, for example, television ratings) af-
fects each individual particularly and concretely. But the Court should
probably be taken at its word with its suggestion that a widely generalized
injury is not cognizable if Congress has not expressly said that it is.
An especially narrow reading of Akins would fasten on the following
sentence: "We conclude that similarly, the informational injury at issue
here, directly related to voting, the most basic of political rights, is suffi-
ciently concrete and specific such that the fact that it is widely shared does
not deprive Congress of constitutional power to authorize its vindication in
the federal courts."164 A future court could possibly read Akins as crucially
about information directly related to voting. Such a court could plausibly
say that the Akins Court allowed standing for citizens asserting a general-
ized grievance only because, and to the extent that, the injury involved "the
most basic of political rights."
The first question here is obvious: Was the Court correct to say that
Article III poses no barrier to those who have grievances that are both con-
crete and widely shared? As a matter of text and history, the Court's con-
clusion is unimpeachable there is no constitutional barrier to judicial recog-
nition of legally authorized claims asserted by citizens whose interests are
widely shared.165 Generalized grievances were recognized in both England
163 See infra notes 209-41 and accompanying text.
165 See Berger, supra note 137, at 816, 840 ("[T]he notion that the constitution demands
injury to a
interest as a prerequisite to attacks on allegedly unconstitutional action is
646 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
and America, where, as we have seen, citizen and taxpayer standing was
permitted.166 Even if it were possible to generate from text and history a
constitutional requirement of an "injury," such a requirement would not
stand as an obstacle to suits by people who suffer along with many others.
Such people have injuries, too they are not mere bystanders, and they are
not complaining about violations of law as such. Thus the Court's conclu-
sion that widely generalized injuries are cognizable is right even if we agree
that some "injury in fact" test is constitutional in character.
In both judicial and nonjudicial writing, Justice Scalia has defended the
ban on generalized grievances not by reference to text and history, but in-
stead by invoking considerations of policy and structure.167 In his view, the
ban stems from an understanding of the distinctive role of the judiciary in a
democratic society. Courts properly protect individuals, or members of
small groups, against governmental illegality. But when injuries are widely
shared, the victims can and should use the political process, not the courts,
for they have (by hypothesis) sufficient political voice to resort to their
democratic remedies. In the context of information, the argument would be
that if government is refusing to regulate (for example) AIPAC as a political
committee, and thus refusing to require it to disclose relevant information,
number of people are harmed. They should have enough politi-
cal influence to be able to pressure the FEC and Congress to respond. That
is the appropriate arena for their claims, not the judiciary.
As a matter of political science, this is not an entirely implausible set of
generalizations a large group certainly has more access to political reme-
dies than a small one, other things being equal. But the generalization is
crude. Whether it is right depends on a number of variables, including the
information and the organizational capacity of the relevant group members,
who may face serious collective action problems.168 Return here to a basic
reason for statutes requiring information disclosure and indeed for grants of
standing in public law cases: when a large group of people is denied infor-
historically unfounded.") Louis L. Jaffe, Standing to Secure Judicial Review: Public Actions,
74 HARV. L. REV. 1265, 1307-14 (1961) (explaining that the Constitution does not bar a
shared interest suit). See generally Winter, supra note 137, at 1418-25 (explaining the onto-
logical development of the term "standing").
166 See Sunstein, supra note 137, at 171 ("In both England and America, actions by
strangers, or by citizens in general, were fully permissible and indeed familiar.") Winter, su-
pra note 137, at 1441-57 (describing constitutional standing).
167 See Akins, 118 S. Ct. at 1791-92 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (arguing that such suits un-
dermine the powers of the Chief Executive) Scalia, supra note 131, 894-97 (arguing that
courts should not be political instruments).
See generally RUSSELL HARDIN, COLLECTIVE ACTION 6-9 (1982) (analyzing collec-
tive action problems) MANCUR OLSON, THE LOGIC OF COLLECTIVE ACTION 1-2 (2d ed.
1971) (explaining that without a coercive force, groups may not take steps to advance their
common or group interests).
1999] INFORMA TIONAL STANDING 647
mation, many or most of them may not know that they have been harmed
and even if they know, any particular member-say, member A-may not
consider it worthwhile to participate in the relevant political activity. This
is especially so in light of the fact that nothing is likely to happen unless
other members act, in which case little will be added by the participation of
member A. With respect to information in particular, the free rider problem
is likely to make political remedies insufficient, even or especially when
large numbers of people have been deprived of information to which they
have a legal right.
Justice Scalia's argument is basically one from democracy: when many
people are injured, they should use the democratic process, not the courts.
But as a claim from democracy, the argument is weak. The most basic dif-
ficulty is that Congress has, by hypothesis, concluded that the agency (or
private defendant) is not entirely reliable on its own and that relevant people
should have access to the courts in order to ensure that the (democratically
enacted) law is enforced. If Congress has made that judgment, then there
should be no (democratic) problem with allowing that kind of enforcement
of the statutory directive. If Congress has given anyone the right to ensure
disclosure of campaign-related information, it is because Congress was con-
cerned that the FEC would not adequately enforce the law, and because
Congress believed that a right to challenge FEC decisions in court would
increase the likelihood of good outcomes. Perhaps that judgment was un-
wise perhaps citizen suits cause more trouble than they are worth. But that
would be a policy problem, not a constitutional one.169
There is also nothing in Article II that argues against allowing standing
for people who suffer a widely shared injury. To be sure, it is for the Ex-
ecutive, not the courts, to "take Care" that the laws are faithfully executed.
In these cases, however, the plaintiffs' allegation is that the Executive has
failed in that task. In order to prevail, the plaintiffs must overcome a sub-
stantial burden by showing (to simplify a
story) that the agency has
violated an unambiguous statute170 or has behaved in an arbitrary or capri-
cious manner.171 It does no violence to Article II for a
to hear a plain-
169 There is a difference here between standing in constitutional cases and standing in
administrative law cases. Perhaps courts should be cautious in allowing citizens to invoke the
Constitution to challenge the outcomes of the democratic process. Even if this is so, however,
there is far less reason for courts to be cautious in allowing people to invoke statutes to chal-
lenge the outcomes of the administrative process.
170 See Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837,
842-43 (1984) ("If the intent of Congress is clear, . . . the court, as well as the agency, must
give effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress.").
and set aside agency action ... found to be ... arbitrary [or] capricious").
648 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
tiffs complaint to this effect and to rule against the Executive if it is shown
that the agency has, in fact, violated the law.
With respect to redressability, the Court proceeded with an analogy that
operated as a kind of reductio ad absurdum. With some incredulity, the
Court indicated that if this injury was not redressable, then the same would
be true of countless complaints in countless administrative law cases, where
agencies might also end up rejecting the plaintiffs' complaints after remand.
The point is correct the logic of the government's redressability argument
might well have this extraordinary consequence.
It also seems clear that Akins marks a noteworthy clarification of pre-
existing law. The prior cases172 seemed to suggest that standing should not
be permitted if there is any nontrivial reason to think that a
cision, by the agency or a private party, might prevent the plaintiff from
obtaining the requested relief. In Akins, this idea is rejected standing exists
even in the face of a substantial possibility that the agency would exercise
its discretion to the plaintiffs detriment. We might even say that after Ak-
ins, the redressability requirement is unlikely to matter in the administrative
law context, at least where the exercise of agency discretion on remand is
what makes the remedy "speculative."173
But the Court's explanation nonetheless leaves a good deal to be de-
sired. Under the Court's existing redressability cases, it has yet to be ex-
plained why, in principle, there is no serious problem in conventional ad-
ministrative law cases. We know that there is no such problem we do not
To be more concrete: the Court made clear that Article III requires the
plaintiff to show that a decree in his favor will remedy his asserted injury. It
must not be "speculative" whether the decree would do so. In Linda R.S. v.
zation v. Simon, 426 U.S. 26 (1976), and Linda R.S. v. Richard D., 410 U.S. 614 (1973), dis-
cussed infra, at notes 174-77 and accompanying text.
173 See Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 445-49 (D.C. Cir.
1998) (Sentelle, J., dissenting). Akins does not disturb previous law insofar as it is focused on
the exercise of discretion by a private party. See Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737 (1984) (exer-
cise of discretion by private schools) Eastern Ky. Welfare Rights Org. v. Simon, 426 U.S. 26
(1976) (exercise of discretion by nonprofit hospitals) Linda R.S. v. Richard D., 410 U.S. 614
(1973) (exercise of discretion by parent). But it is not clear, on the Court's view, why this
should make a substantial difference. I suggest below that the different results really turn on
the statutory interpretation-that is, on an understanding of Congress's instructions under the
1999] INFORMA4TIONAL STANDING 649
Richard D.,174 for example, the mother of a child born out of wedlock chal-
lenged the local prosecutor's failure to bring proceedings against her child's
father for failure to pay child support. The Court denied standing on the
ground that even if the prosecutor initiated proceedings, the father might not
pay.175 So, too, in Simon v. Eastern Kentucky Welfare Rights Organization
("EKWRO"), where indigent individuals, denied emergency services in local
hospitals, brought suit against the Internal Revenue Service challenging a
new policy that allowed hospitals to claim a charitable deduction after pro-
viding fewer emergency services to the indigent.176 The Court denied
standing on the ground that it was possible that even if the charitable de-
duction had been unchanged, services might have been denied.177 Thus, a
decree in the plaintiffs' favor would not have prevented or redressed their
injuries. In both cases, the Court seemed concerned that a grant of standing
would have allowed a kind of advisory opinion.
The problem here is that many conventional administrative law cases
seem to have precisely the same difficulty there is no assurance that a
plaintiff will ultimately receive what he wants even if he succeeds on the
issue at hand. Thus, for example, if a plaintiff complains that the agency
failed to give an adequate explanation for a
there is no assurance that
on remand, the agency will not come up with exactly the same rule after
justifying itself adequately. The plaintiff's victory may not result in an out-
come in his favor. The central question, unanswered in Akins, is this: Why,
then, do the redressability requirements not create problems in ordinary ad-
ministrative law cases?
The beginning of an answer may seem to lay in a controversial expla-
nation in the Lujan opinion, consisting chiefly of a
in which the
Court suggested that the redressability requirements would be relaxed in
174 410 U.S. 614 (1973).
175 See id. at 619 (holding that the mother lacked standing since she had not shown that
the prosecution of the father would vindicate her interest).
176 426 U.S. 26 (1976).
the complaint fairly can be traced to petitioner's 'encouragement' or instead result from deci-
sions made by the hospitals without regard to the tax implications."). See also Allen, 468 U.S.
737, where the Court denied standing to parents of black children attending public schools
undergoing desegregation. The plaintiffs attempted to challenge the grant of tax deductions to
segregated public schools. The Court held that the denial of the tax deduction would not nec-
essarily affect the plaintiffs. See id. at 758 ("[I]t is entirely speculative ... whether with-
drawal of a exemption from any particular school would lead the school to change its poli-
cies."). After Akins, both EKWRO and Allen might be seen as cases in which Congress did
not create standing as a matter of construction of the Internal Revenue Code, third parties
usually lack standing to litigate the tax liability of others.
178 Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 572 n.7 (1992).
650 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
some cases involving a "procedural injury," such as where a plaintiff com-
plains of the failure to prepare an EIS. Standing is available if plaintiffs
"are seeking to enforce a procedural requirement the disregard of which
could impair a separate concrete interest of theirs."179 It is true that the
mere preparation of an EIS need not have favorable consequences for any
plaintiff the agency may prepare the statement and go ahead with its plans
undaunted. But if a concrete recreational or health interest "lies behind" the
complaint, then this fact is not fatal to standing by a
the Court said that a "person who has been accorded a procedural right to
protect his concrete interests can assert that right without meeting all the
normal standards for redressability and immediacy."180 This was essentially
the logic that the Court followed in Akins, without citing the Lujan sugges-
tion. And we can agree that the redressability requirements should not be
taken to forbid people from complaining about procedural violations that are
connected with injuries to their legally cognizable interests. But the ques-
tion remains: Why is this so?
The best response has to do with the nature of procedural rights and
their distinctive relation to the question of redressability. When Congress
creates a procedural right, it does so not because the right will necessarily
lead to particular results, but instead because procedural rights create desir-
able structures, incentives, and increased or decreased probabilities-and
also because they increase the legitimacy of any government interference
with substantive rights. In Congress's apparent view, those structures, in-
centives, and probabilities tend to produce outcomes that are better or more
fair. This is the underlying logic of the brief analysis in Lujan NEPA is de-
signed not to require particular results, but to structure processes in a way
that will increase the likelihood of good or fair decisions. Once properly
characterized-as involving a
to certain procedures rather than certain
outcomes-the statutory injury would be redressed. When a court holds
that an agency has not complied with NEPA and requires the preparation of
an EIS, the court has redressed the plaintiffs NEPA-related injury. That
injury does not consist of an environmental injury alone, or even at all the
injury consists of the failure to provide the beneficiaries of NEPA with the
procedural protections (and agency incentives) created by that statute. The
key point here is that we cannot know whether the redressability require-
ments are met without properly characterizing the relevant injury, and the
only basis for a
characterization is the statute. NEPA gives rise to a
179 Id. at 572.
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 651
new and distinctive set of injuries, and those injuries are precisely redressed
that agencies prepare (legally required) EISs.
A similar situation arises with the campaign finance law in Akins. Per-
haps the agency would decide, on remand, to exercise its discretion not to
challenge AIPAC, but at least it would be doing so as an exercise of prose-
cutorial discretion and not on the basis of what would be (by hypothesis) an
illegitimate interpretation of FECA. A central point of the APA arrange-
ment for judicial review of administrative action is to ensure that agencies
proceed both publicly and on the basis of legitimate reasons. The plaintiffs
in Akins alleged that the FEC misinterpreted the relevant law, and the rele-
vant injury-government inaction threatening to their statutory rights in
their capacity as citizens, based on that misinterpretation-would be ade-
quately redressed by a decision in their favor. The general conclusion is
that characterization of the injury comes from the governing statute. This
conclusion cuts across standing doctrine and indeed applies in information
cases quite broadly.
The point incidentally explains why Justice Scalia was able to attract
only a plurality on the redressability question in Lujan itself. There, the plu-
rality concluded that the plaintiffs, challenging federal funding of an inter-
national project that threatened certain endangered species, should be denied
standing because they could not show that the denial of federal funding
would save any endangered species.181 The plurality noted that even if the
plaintiffs prevailed, and the Secretary of the Interior determined that the
funding was unlawful, the funding agencies might not change their behav-
ior. The Court also noted that American agencies provide only a
funding for the relevant foreign projects and hence a denial of federal funds
might not save the relevant species.182 If the plurality's reasoning is right,
then the redressability reasoning of the Akins Court is probably wrong. But
the plurality's reasoning is not right. Insofar as the Endangered Species Act
forbids the use of federal funds to jeopardize the continued existence of en-
dangered species, its purpose is not necessarily to preserve endangered spe-
cies (an outcome that depends not only on federal funding or even federal
action), but to ensure that the American government does not take actions
that contribute to their elimination. The injury that the plaintiffs sought to
address was the increased probability of extinction that would be created by
the unlawful use of federal funds.
181 See id. at 571 (stating that "[r]espondents have produced nothing to indicate that the
projects they have named will either be suspended, or do less harm to listed species, if that
fraction is eliminated").
182 See id. (noting that the agency provided less than 10% of the funding).
652 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
If the injury is understood in these terms, the redressability requirement
is met by showing that if the plaintiff prevailed, then the funds would not be
used in the unlawful manner. The six justices who joined the majority
opinion in Akins straightforwardly have rejected the four-person opinion in
Lujan. These claims about redressability are closely related to the claims
about injury in fact offered above. Both injury in fact and redressability are
crude ways of getting at the central question: What kind of injury is created
by the relevant source of law?
There is an important corollary. When a plaintiff seeking to attack an
institution objects to an unlawful expenditure of federal funds-involving,
for example, schools that discriminate on the basis of race or sex-standing
is available even though a withdrawal of funds may not prevent the dis-
crimination. The injury consists of the increased probability or dimensions
of discrimination by virtue of government funding, or of the use of federal
funds to subsidize discrimination that injury would be redressed by the de-
cree the plaintiff seeks.183
These points help sort out the whole area of procedural injuries. When
a concrete interest lies behind a procedural violation, a plaintiff has standing
to bring suit, even if the agency, after complying with applicable proce-
dures, might not give the plaintiff the relief he seeks or might proceed on a
course that the plaintiff dislikes. For purposes of informational standing,
the course for the future is therefore clear. Even if an agency might not pro-
ceed against a third party to require disclosure of information, a plaintiff
with congressional authorization has standing to object to the procedures
that the agency followed in choosing that course. This is not because the
redressability requirements are "relaxed" in procedural cases (as the Lujan
Court would have it), but because the injury, properly characterized in light
of the underlying (procedural) law, would be redressed by a decree in the
plaintiff's favor (consider NEPA and funding cases above as examples).
These answers also help to recast the whole idea of redressability, cer-
tainly, but not only, in cases involving access to information. Whether an
injury is redressable depends on how it is characterized, and how it is char-
acterized depends on the nature of the relevant law. In procedural cases, a
plaintiff with a concrete interest faces no redressability problem if the gov-
erning law also creates a legally cognizable interest in the relevant struc-
tures and incentives-so, too, with other standing cases. Consider, as Ex-
183 The point suggests that EKWRO and Allen were incorrectly decided if they are taken
as pure redressability cases. But if they are taken as cases about congressional instructions,
then they were probably correct, because Congress is generally not understood to allow one
taxpayer to litigate the tax liability of another.
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 653
hibit A, Northeastern Contractors,84 in which white construction contrac-
tors challenged an affirmative action program, only to meet with the seem-
ingly plausible objection that they could not show that they would have re-
ceived the contracts without the affirmative action program. The Court
responded that this showing was irrelevant what was important was that the
plaintiffs had suffered an injury to an interest protected by the Equal Pro-
tection Clause-that is, the opportunity to compete on an equal basis.185
That injury would have been addressed by a favorable decree. Although I
cannot discuss the point in detail here, I
that Northeastern Contrac-
tors, together with Akins, will eventually force a rethinking of the whole
idea of redressability, requiring the Court to be more explicit about the
kinds of "injuries" that it recognizes.186
The appropriate conclusion is that the Akins Court was correct to allow
standing in the face of a redressability challenge, and also that it was correct
to invoke the analogy of conventional administrative law cases. But the
correctness of the result and of the analogy suggest deeper problems with
redressability the problems have to do with the need to characterize the in-
jury properly. The proper characterization of the injury turns on the content
of the relevant law, procedural or substantive.
IV. INJURIES AND INFORMATION IN THE FUTURE
The discussion thus far suggests that the Akins Court was right on each
of the three principal standing issues.187 But larger questions remain. For
example, what are its implications for informational injury in the future?
And how does it bear on standing questions not involving information in-
jury at all?
184 Northeastern Fla. Chapter of Associated Gen. Contractors v. City of Jacksonville, 508
U.S. 656 (1993).
185 See id. at 666 ("The 'injury in fact' in an equal protection case of this variety is the
denial of equal treatment resulting from the imposition of the barrier [to compete for benefits],
not the ultimate inability to obtain the benefit.").
186 See Cass R. Sunstein, Standing Injuries, 1993 SUP. CT. REV. 37, for a general discus-
sion on how injuries should be characterized for purposes of standing.
187 The Court was also right on the smaller issue, involving interpretation of the statute.
Justice Scalia's disagreement was plainly motivated by his belief that the statute should be
construed so as to avoid constitutional doubts. See Federal Election Comm'n v. Akins, 118 S.
Ct. 1777, 1789-90 (1998) (Scalia, J., dissenting) (urging the Court to adopt a "narrower read-
ing of the phrase 'party aggrieved"' in order to avoid constitutional doubt).
654 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
A. Injury in Fact. Mostly Easy Cases
After Akins, there are, with respect to information, many easy cases. If
Congress granted standing to citizens in general to seek information and in-
formation has been withheld, citizens in general can bring suit. Certainly
this is clear if the information bears directly on their behavior as voters. It
seems equally clear if the information bears directly on the plaintiffs' ac-
tivities in their individual or organizational capacities. Suppose, for exam-
ple, that an individual or institution is interested in obtaining information
relating to enforcement of the Animal Welfare Act, and that individual or
organization has a demonstrable interest in the protection of animals from
suffering. In such cases, standing is clearly available.
The situation is slightly less clear when an individual or institution
seeking information invokes no interest expressly related to the political
process and when that individual or institution cannot show that the infor-
mation would relate to relevant activities on his or its part. The strongest
argument for denying standing would be that the plaintiff has a purely
ideological interest, or an interest in law enforcement for its own sake.
Suppose, for example, that an ordinary, relatively young citizen is seeking
information about compliance with the Age Discrimination Act. Suppose
the citizen seeks this information simply because she is curious, or because
she generally wants to make sure that the government is enforcing the law.
It is possible to argue that Akins does not cover this case. As stated, the
plaintiff has no particular interest as a citizen, and she cannot connect the
denial of information to any tangible activity independent of the lawsuit.
Thus, there is a plausible basis for denying standing even in light of the out-
come in Akins.
The argument is plausible, but no more than that a congressional grant
of standing in a case of this kind would probably be constitutional after Ak-
ins. (If there is no such grant, then standing should probably be denied on
prudential grounds.)188 The first point is analogical and involves FOIA.
Under FOIA, anyone can bring suit to obtain any information that FOIA re-
quires to be made public.189 The plaintiff need not show an interest in using
the information for anything in particular simple curiosity is enough. The
denial of the information is the injury in fact. No court has held this provi-
sion unconstitutional. It is hard to distinguish the countless imaginable
FOIA cases from the hypothesized case.
188 See the discussion of generalized interests within the zone, infra Part IV.C.
proceedings are public information).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 655
The second point involves Akins itself. The Akins Court could have is-
ruling, saying that when citizens bring suit to obtain informa-
tion directly involving the political process, there is no constitutional obsta-
cle to a congressional grant of standing. As noted, there is some language in
Akins emphasizing that the case itself involved voting, "the most basic of
political rights,"190 and it would be possible to seize on this language to con-
fine the opinion's reach. A narrow understanding of this kind, however,
would not be consistent with the spirit of the decision, for the Court spoke
far more generally about Congress's creation of a legal right to information
and its grant of a right to bring suit to vindicate that interest. The remark
about "the most basic of political rights" was in the nature of an exclama-
tion point, and not in any sense central to the Court's reasoning.
In any case, it would not be sensible, for Article III purposes, to distin-
guish between citizens seeking information directly bearing on the political
process and citizens seeking other kinds of information. If the question is
whether the plaintiff has suffered injury in fact, then why would that line be
appropriate? At best, such a line would invite strategic behavior and in-
genious pleading almost any information can plausibly be characterized as
bearing on voting behavior. In the hypothesized case, for example, the
plaintiff could contend, at least as plausibly as the citizens in Akins, that the
relevant information would bear on her decision about how to vote, and in
what kinds of political activity to engage. Putting the risk of strategic be-
havior to one side, nothing in Article III supports the view that Congress
may create citizen standing in cases involving denial of information bearing
on the right to vote, but may not do so when voting is not at stake. Article
III requires a legal right-if Congress has created a legal right to informa-
tion, that requirement is satisfied.
that after Akins, the injury in fact test is not a
plicit congressional grants of standing to citizens seeking information to
which they have a legal right. The real difficulties lie elsewhere they have
to do with redressability and with congressional instructions.
B. Redressability. Information, Bounties, and the U.S. Treasury
Suppose that the government or some private entity refused to disclose
information, or suppose that the government failed to require disclosure of
information by some third party, either public or private. Suppose, too, that
the nondisclosure is unlawful. If a plaintiff sues to obtain the information,
there is injury in fact, and the plaintiff meets the redressability requirements
under Akins. Now instead suppose that the information has been disclosed
190 Akins, 118 S. Ct. at 1786.
656 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
after the filing of the complaint but before the judgment, and that the plain-
tiff seeks declaratory relief or the imposition of monetary penalties. The
problem is far from hypothetical. Congress sometimes allows plaintiffs to
impose financial burdens on both those who have failed to disclose infor-
mation191 and polluters (and others) who sometimes disclose information
only after a lawsuit has been threatened or instituted. Is there a standing
The easiest case for the plaintiff would involve monetary penalties that
would go directly to the plaintiff. If a plaintiff stands to receive compensa-
tion for information unlawfully withheld, then the case is akin to many con-
ventional cases in which a plaintiff seeks damages for illegality, and there is
no standing question at all. If the plaintiff stands to receive a "penalty" not
representing compensation but taking the form of a bounty, then the prob-
lem is a little harder, but there should be no problem here either. A poten-
tial award of a penalty or a bounty would make the case akin to several old
prerogative writs, such as quo warranto, informer's actions, and qui tam ac-
tions.192 In Lujan, the Court suggested that a grant of a bounty to the citi-
zen-plaintiffs would solve the constitutional difficulty,193 and there is sup-
port for this idea in the qui tam action, as suggested by early congressional
practice and in several Supreme Court decisions.194
Suppose, however, that a plaintiff stands to gain no monetary relief at
all suppose that the plaintiff is entitled only to a declaratory judgment, with
appropriate fines going to the U.S. Treasury. In a case of this kind, the
Court recently held that there can be no informational standing. Steel Co. v.
Citizens for a Better Environment involved a complaint, by a
organization, that Steel Company failed to disclose its toxic releases, in
191 See EPCRA, 42 U.S.C. ?
(1994) (imposing civil and administrative penal-
ties for failing to meet the reporting requirements of EPCRA).
192 See Sunstein, supra note 137, at 168-79 (describing the history of standing in the
English and American systems).
193 See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 572-73 (1992) (distinguishing Lu-
jan from the simple case where standing exists because Congress has provided "a cash bounty
for the victorious plaintiff').
194 See, e.g., Act of May 19, 1796, ch. 30, ? 18, 1 Stat. 469, 474 (awarding private citi-
zens bounties for informing the U.S. government of violations of the Act) Act of Mar. 22,
1794, ch. 11, ? 4, 1 Stat. 347, 349 (offering a
to persons who prosecute violations of
the Act) Act of Feb. 20, 1792, ch. 7, ? 1 Stat. 232, 235 (granting one half of the penalties
collected to the person "informing and prosecuting" the violation) Act of March 3, 1791, ch.
15, ? 44, 1 Stat. 199, 209 (providing one half of all penalities collected for violation of the Act
to the person who discovers the violation) United States ex rel. Marcus v. Hess, 317 U.S.
537, 541 n.4 (1943) (supporting the Court's assertion that "[q]ui tam suits have been fre-
quently permitted by legislative action") Marvin v. Trout, 199 U.S. 212, 225 (1905) (assert-
ing the standing of the plaintiffs to sue in qui tam actions).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 657
plain violation of EPCRA.195 All sides agreed that Steel Company had not
done what it was legally obliged to do. Soon after Citizens for a Better En-
vironment sent Steel Company a statutory notice of intent to sue, however,
the company filed the overdue forms and disclosed the relevant information.
The plaintiff claimed that the statute entitled it to various kinds of "appro-
priate" relief: a declaratory judgment that the company violated EPCRA,
civil fines (of $25,000 per day) that would be paid to the government, an
award of costs, and an order requiring the company to provide them with
copies of all compliance reports submitted to the EPA.196
Nonetheless, the Court denied standing. It did not reach the question of
whether "being deprived of information that is supposed to be disclosed un-
der EPCRA-or at least being deprived of it when one has a particular plan
for its use-is a concrete injury in fact that satisfies Article III."197 (Akins
answers that question affirmatively, though without the approval of Justice
Scalia, who wrote the opinion in Steel Co.) Instead the Court simply con-
cluded that the plaintiff could not meet the requirements for redressability.
If the plaintiff won, how, exactly, would its injury be remedied? The Court
explained that "[n]one of the specific items of relief sought, and none that
we can envision as 'appropriate' under the general request, would serve to
reimburse respondent for losses caused by the late reporting, or to eliminate
any effects of that late reporting upon respondent."198 The result might have
been different if the civil penalties could be "viewed as a
tion or redress to" the plaintiff, but the fact that the penalties would go to the
Treasury suggested that the plaintiff instead sought "not remediation of its
own injury. . . vindication of the rule of law."199
Steel Co. is important because it suggests a significant obstacle to in-
formational standing: a plaintiff must show not only that there has been a
deprivation of information, but also that the plaintiff stands to gain some-
thing from a
in its favor. To be sure, it is reasonable to doubt the
Court's decision, which was, on the constitutional issue, quite cavalier.200
As a matter of first principles, or as a matter of constitutional text and his-
tory, why is Congress prohibited from concluding that citizens who have
suffered an injury should be allowed to require violators of the law to pay
appropriate penalties to the government? The history suggests a far broader
195 118 S. Ct. 1003 (1998).
196 See id. at 1018.
200 See id. at 1027-30 (Stevens, J., concurring) (noting the Court's substantial departure
from its previous treatment of cases without redressability).
658 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
understanding of legislative power.201 Nonetheless, Steel Co. is consistent
with the thrust of the Court's recent redressability holdings. It thus suggests
that a plaintiff seeking information must show that if the suit is successful,
the plaintiff will receive something for its trouble. If the plaintiff would re-
ceive the information, there is no problem. There is also probably no prob-
lem if the plaintiff would receive compensation or a
the plaintiff stands to gain nothing else, standing will be denied.
The outcome in Steel Co. was presaged by an intriguing court of ap-
peals case raising a similar problem of informational standing in a
ferent setting. In Common Cause v. FEC, the court of appeals rejected a
claim of standing on behalf of the plaintiff, a well-known organization in-
terested in campaign finance issues.202 Common Cause alleged that in the
1988 Senate election in Montana, the Montana Republican Party and the
National Republican Senatorial Committee had violated federal campaign
election law by making excessive contributions and expenditures and by
failing to accurately report these contributions. The latter claim suggested
an interest in obtaining information. In denying standing, the court said that
the mere fact of deprivation of knowledge as to whether there had been a
violation of the law could not, by itself, create standing this, according to
the court, would be equivalent "to recognizing a justiciable interest in the
enforcement of the law."203 But if Common Cause was "asserting an inter-
est in knowing how much money a candidate spent in an election," then it
would have standing to protect that "legally cognizable injury in fact."204
(This point is very much in line with the conclusion in Akins.)
Here, however, Common Cause sought investigation and the imposition
of monetary penalties, rather than disclosure itself. Thus, a central problem
for standing was that the monetary penalties would not benefit Common
Cause at all. Concurring, Judge Sentelle stressed this point and its connec-
tion to the problem of redressability. In his view, the imposition of mone-
tary penalties would only speculatively produce future compliance with the
law-penalties themselves would not redress any injury.205 But Judge Sen-
201 See Sunstein, supra note 137, at 173-74 (discussing the suggestion of a historical sur-
vey that "the public action-an action brought by a private person primarily to vindicate the
public enforcement of public obligations-has long been a feature of our English and Ameri-
can law" (citation and internal quotations omitted)).
202 108 F.3d 413 (D.C. Cir. 1997).
203 Id. at 418.
205 See id. at 419 (Sentelle, J., concurring) ("If the injury alleged were the cognizable
deprivation of information upheld in Akins, administrative discipline of the alleged wrongdo-
ers would not remedy that injury.")
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 659
telle also acknowledged that the "redressability requirement can be satisfied
by requesting that the wrongfully withheld information be disclosed."206
We may thus draw several conclusions. There is no problem with re-
dressability if the plaintiff seeks to obtain information, compensation for in-
formation withheld, or (though this is less clear) a bounty for information
withheld. But a problem of redressability will arise if Congress grants citi-
zens standing to seek declaratory judgments, attorney's fees, or penalties to
be paid to the Treasury for information withheld. If Congress wants to al-
low standing in cases like Steel Co. and Common Cause, then it should
amend the relevant statutes to provide a financial benefit not only to the
Treasury, but also to the plaintiffs, in the form, perhaps, of fixed or sched-
uled compensation for information withheld, and also (or instead) a small
bounty for the trouble of bringing suit. This would be easy to do. Although
the question is not entirely settled, a statute of this kind probably would,207
and certainly should,208 be upheld.
C. Generalized Grievances Within the Zone?
The Akins Court dealt with a statute that, in its view, unambiguously
granted standing to the plaintiffs. But many informational standing cases
involve the APA, and therefore involve ambiguity about the issue of stand-
ing. The APA grants standing to any "person suffering legal wrong because
of agency action, or adversely affected or aggrieved by agency action within
the meaning of a relevant statute."209 What does this provision mean in the
context of a
for information? Here there is a question of statutory
interpretation and recall that the Akins Court suggested that there remains a
prudential barrier to "generalized grievance[s]."210 Thus there is a further
question about how prudential barriers are to be understood when people
seek to obtain information from government or private persons.
The best way to approach this complicated problem is by examining a
series of cases in the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals. The basic suggestion
in these cases is that if the governing statute is ambiguous, then standing
will be denied in informational cases where the plaintiff is one of a very
large group of people. The denial is based on prudential rather than Article
III grounds, and hence Congress can, in these cases, grant standing if it
206 Id. at 420 (Sentelle, J., concurring).
207 See supra note 194 (providing statutory and case support for such a bounty system).
208 See Sunstein, supra note 137, at 173-79, 232 (discussing the historical support for,
and the substantial merits of, a
209 5 U.S.C. ? 702 (1994).
660 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LA WREVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
chooses. The question is whether, and to what extent, this line of argument
makes sense in general or after Akins in particular. To answer this question
it is necessary to investigate the cases in some detail.
The initial case, and the origin of the doctrinal developments, did not
principally involve informational standing. In Haitian Refugee Center v.
Gracey, the plaintiff organization claimed that it had an interest in counsel-
ing and representing Haitians who had been interdicted from entering the
United States.211 The court concluded that this interest was not within the
zone of rights created by the relevant laws, and therefore, that the plaintiff
lacked standing to protect the relevant rights.212 This conclusion applied to
the plaintiffs particular claim that it should have been allowed to receive
pertinent information from the interdicted Haitians:
If any person or organization interested in promoting knowledge, enjoyment,
and protection of the rights created by a statute or by a
has an interest that falls within the zone protected or regulated by the statute or
constitutional provision, then the zone-of-interest test is not a
The court insisted in particular that the zone of interests test should be
read in the light of the ban on standing based on a "generalized griev-
ance" 214 if a
claiming to be within the zone was a member of a
large class, then standing should be denied. This was of course not a "pure"
information case, since it did not involve a
that required disclosure of
information. But it has turned out to be quite important in such cases.
In the first case using this kind of reasoning to deny informational
standing, the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals refused to allow the Hazardous
Waste Treatment Council to assert an unambiguous informational injury.215
The Council sought to sue on the ground that regulated third parties were
exempted from certain statutory reporting requirements under a hazardous
waste statute.216 The Council claimed that the exemption would make it
harder for the Council to advance its "educational and promotional activi-
ties."217 In denying standing, the court did not deny that there was an injury
in fact. Instead it said that the Council's goals did not fall within the rele-
211 809 F.2d 794 (D.C. Cir. 1987).
212 See id. at 813-16 (examining the zone of interests that is created by the relevant laws).
214 Id. (citing Schlesinger v. Reservists Comm. to Stop the War, 418 U.S. 208 (1974),
and United States v. Richardson, 418 U.S. 166 (1974)).
215 See Hazardous Waste Treatment Council v. EPA, 861 F.2d 277, 287 (D.C. Cir. 1988)
(holding that a plaintiff cannot attain standing for a generalized grievance simply by forming
an organization that has as its goal furtherance of the interest at the heart of the grievance).
2 See id. (summarizing the plaintiff's argument).
217 Id. at 286-87.
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 661
vant statute's zone of interests, beyond a "general coincidence of goals."218
In so concluding, the court implied that it would read the prudential barrier
in light of the additional prudential barrier that operated against generalized
grievances.219 Thus the court suggested that the two prudential barriers
would have a kind of synergy, preventing members of large classes from
claiming information unless there was a clear indication that Congress in-
tended them to be able to do so.
This line of thinking was extended in Animal Legal Defense Fund v.
Espy.220 In that case, the Animal Legal Defense Fund and the Humane So-
ciety of the United States challenged the government's relatively narrow
definition of "animal" for purposes of the Animal Welfare Act.221 More
specifically, they complained that "the exclusion of birds, rats, and mice
from the definition of 'animal' [would] hamper[] their attempts to gather
and disseminate information on laboratory conditions for those animals."222
A broader definition would require laboratories to provide more information
about their treatment of animals to the government, which would mean that
such information would be included in an annual report to Congress. The
relevant organizations contended that they would use this report in "public
education and rulemaking proceedings."223 In addition, the narrow defini-
tion of "animal" would make it harder for the organizations to educate the
laboratories about "the humane treatments of birds, rats, and mice."224 The
Animal Legal Defense Fund thus urged that it had standing to ensure that
the information was disclosed, especially because the information would be
central to its activities.
The court concluded that "informational injury, without more, does not
fall within the zone of interests of the statute under which suit is
brought."225 The key point was that the Animal Legal Defense Fund was
not attempting to promote its members' own legal rights, but "simply to
educate all those who desire to promote the statute's substantive pur-
218 Id. at 287.
219 See id. (arguing that if any organization could secure standing by showing a general
coincidence of goals with a statute, anyone could secure standing to challenge any action
taken by the agency implementing that statute).
F.3d 426 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (finding standing for someone claiming an aesthetic interest in ob-
22 See Espy, 23 F.3d at 498 (describing the plaintiffs' grievance).
222 Id. at 501.
662 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LA WREVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
poses."226 To have informational standing under the zone of interests test,
an organization must show far more than a "general corporate purpose to
promote the interests to which the statute is addressed .... [I]t must show a
congressional intent to benefit the organization or some indication that the
organization is 'a peculiarly suitable challenger of administrative ne-
glect.'"227 Here, an unusual provision of the statute itself prohibited any
such showing. The Animal Welfare Act creates an oversight committee
consisting of private citizens designed to ensure compliance with the Act.228
In the court's view, "on the face of the Act the organizations are not the in-
tended representatives of the public interest in animal welfare."229
This holding is quite insecure after Akins it should be contrasted with
an important case in which organizations were held to have fulfilled the
prudential requirements for informational standing. In Action Alliance of
Senior Citizens v. Heckler,230 the court permitted a
citizens' group to
challenge regulations that restricted the flow of reports from third parties
involving compliance with the Age Discrimination Act. The Action Alli-
ance contended that these regulations would interfere with its basic mission.
The court agreed, noting that the regulations would make it harder for the
plaintiff organization to help elderly people now and to protect their legal
interests in the future.231 In the court's view, this injury was well within the
statute's zone of interests. The distinction between Action Alliance of Sen-
ior Citizens and Espy is thin. The best argument would stress the existence
of a special private institution designed to ensure compliance with the Ani-
mal Welfare Act, but it is far from clear that this is a convincing distinc-
To what extent must an organization seeking information connect its
interest to the substantive purposes of the statute? This question was not
humane handling, care, treatment, and transportation of animals").
231 See id. at 937-38 (identifying added expense and difficulty as the likely results of the
restrictions on information).
232 See infra text following note 244 (arguing that Congress's creation of a citizen review
board in conjunction with the Animal Welfare Act does not adequately explain the preclusion
of suit by the Animal Legal Defense Fund) see also Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v.
Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 445 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (noting that the Animal Welfare Act did not
establish private citizen committees to oversee animal exhibitions, but "anticipated the con-
tinued monitoring of concerned animal lovers to ensure that the purposes of the Act were
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 663
pressed in the cases just discussed, all of which involved a close connection
between the plaintiff's interests and the statute's basic concerns. In the
leading case, Competitive Enterprise Institute v. National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration,233 two organizations, the Competitive Enterprise In-
stitute and Consumer Alert, brought suit to challenge the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration's ("NHTSA") decisions that lowered the
minimum Corporate Average Fuel Economy ("CAFE") standards for pas-
senger cars. Both organizations complained of NHTSA's failure to produce
an EIS discussing the adverse safety effects of the CAFE standards. They
argued that the absence of such a statement made it harder for them to ob-
tain and disseminate information that was central to their organizational ac-
tivities. In the abstract, their complaint had a high degree of plausibility in-
sofar as fuel economy standards may have adverse safety effects-a point
that, it is reasonable to think, deserves public attention when an agency is
deciding how much to require in the way of fuel economy.234
The court held that an informational injury would be a legitimate basis
for federal jurisdiction when the information is "essential to the injured or-
ganization's activities" and when "the lack of the information will render
those activities infeasible."235 To meet this standard, the organization "must
assert a plausible link between the agency's action, the informational injury,
and the organization's activities."236 The court, however, held that the
plaintiff organizations did not have standing under this test to contest the
agency's failure to provide an EIS. This was because there was no showing
of "how the lack of that assessment from NHTSA ha[d] significantly
harmed their ability to educate and inform the public about highway
safety."237 The court acknowledged that, under previous cases,238 NEPA
had been held to have created a right to information about the environmental
effects of government action, and that a denial of that information "consti-
234 See John D. Graham, Saving Gasoline and Lives, in RISK VERSUS RISK: TRADEOFFS
IN PROTECTING HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT 87, 98-102 (John D. Graham & Jonathan
Baert Wiener eds., 1995) (discussing the important role of the Insurance Institute for Highway
Safety in bringing the safety risks associated with stricter CAFE standards into the public
235 Competitive Enter. Inst., 901 F.2d at 122.
238 See National Wildlife Fed'n v. Hodel, 839 F.2d 694, 712 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (finding
that the "elimination of the opportunity to see and use an EIS prepared under federal law does
constitute a constitutionally sufficient injury on which to ground standing"), rev'd on other
grounds sub nom. National Wildlife Fed'n v. Lujan, 928 F.2d 453 (D.C. Cir. 1991) Scien-
tists' Inst. for Pub. Info. v. Atomic Energy Comm'n, 481 F.2d 1079, 1091 (D.C. Cir. 1973)
(finding that NEPA requires EISs for technology development programs).
664 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LA W REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
tutes a constitutionally cognizable injury, without further inquiry into cau-
sation or redressability."239 In such cases, however, it would be necessary
to show that the information sought involved a specifically environmental
harm "there is a critical difference between seeking an EIS for the purpose
of disseminating information about potential environmental harm and seek-
ing an EIS as a vehicle for obtaining or disseminating information on a
nonenvironmental issue."240 The court emphasized that the plaintiffs, who
did not invoke environmental concerns, were not within NEPA's zone of
interests, which involved strictly environmental consequences of govern-
With respect to the application of prudential requirements to informa-
tional actions, the lower court rulings thus reflect considerable complexity.
But three propositions seem to underlie the rulings, and we can organize the
law in the following way. First: An organization may sue to obtain infor-
mation when that information is important to protect its members' (nonin-
formational) statutory legal rights, at least if the injury is not widely gener-
alized. This premise is the basic point of Action Alliance of Senior Citizens.
Second: When an organization seeks information and when its interests are
very widely shared, the courts will deny standing on prudential grounds, ap-
parently even if the information is important to the organization's mission.
Third: Under NEPA (designed to safeguard environmental goals) and other
statutes designed to protect interests that are not purely informational, an
organization can bring suit to require an EIS or otherwise to obtain infor-
mation essential to its activities if the reason for bringing suit is to protect
interests that are specifically environmental or otherwise in line with the
statute's substantive goals. This third proposition, however, is subject to
qualification from the second. With suitable amendments, these proposi-
tions appear to apply to individuals as well.
Akins does not say a great deal either to undermine or to support these
conclusions-Akins suggests only (what the lower court cases do not deny)
that Congress can grant purely informational standing if it chooses. If the
lower court cases remain good law, then most of the doctrinal work in chal-
lenging attempts to bring suit for information will be prudential. Courts will
ask (1) whether the plaintiff falls within the statute's zone of interests (2)
whether the plaintiff is part of a very large class and (3) whether the infor-
mation is relevant to the organization's activities in protecting independent
legal interests (for example, the interest in environmental quality or freedom
239 Competitive Enter. Inst., 901 F.2d at 123.
241 See id. (stressing that standing under NEPA has only been granted when the plaintiffs'
interests relate to environmental interests protected by NEPA).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 665
from age discrimination). It is relevant in this regard whether the zone of
interests test is generally meant to be strict or lenient the Court's most re-
cent pronouncement in National Credit Union Administration v. First Na-
tional Bank & Trust Co.,242 suggests great leniency, in line with the basic
thrust of other Supreme Court decisions.243
For those who believe, as Akins itself suggests, that the key standing is-
sue is whether Congress has authorized the suit, the problem in all of these
cases is simple to pose: Is this the kind of plaintiff whose interests are safe-
guarded by the legal provision at issue? If this is the proper question, then
perhaps standing should have been allowed in all of the cases above, with
the exception of Competitive Enterprise Institute, in which the plaintiffs'
complaint lay far outside the domain of statutory concerns. Thus, there is
reason to think that some or many of the lower court cases should not sur-
Consider, for example, the Animal Welfare Act. If an ordinary citizen
concerned with animal welfare sought to require the regulations at issue in
Espy, a response might be that the ordinary citizen should not be allowed to
sue unless she can show a distinctive personal or professional interest in the
protection of animals or in the use of the relevant information otherwise,
the case would seem to involve an interest in law enforcement for its own
sake. Espy itself, however, was quite different. The Animal Legal Defense
Fund had a special and particularized interest in the relevant information
and in disseminating it, as a way of protecting the legal rights protected by
the Animal Welfare Act. Thus, the Animal Legal Defense Fund was well
within the statute's zone of interests and had no widely generalized injury.
The best justification for the lower court's conclusion in Espy is that
Congress implicitly precluded the suit by creating a citizen review board.
This would suggest that the outcome was a narrow one, based on the dis-
tinctive structure of the Animal Welfare Act. Perhaps one could argue not
118 S. Ct. 927, 938 (1998) (finding that the "interest [of competing financial institu-
tions] in limiting the markets that [federal] credit unions can serve" is within the statute's zone
of interests) see also Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 444 (D.C.
Cir. 1998) (stating that "the zone of interests test is generous and relatively undemanding").
See Clarke v. Securities Indus. Ass'n, 479 U.S. 388, 396 (1987) (finding that the trade
association has standing because its interests are "arguably within the zone of interests to be
protected") Association of Data Processing Serv. Orgs., Inc. v. Camp, 397 U.S. 150, 154
(1970) (noting that "the trend is toward enlargement of the class of people who may protest
administrative action"). But see Air Courier Conf. v. American Postal Workers Union, 498
U.S. 517, 517-18 (1991) (arguing that the union's interests were outside the zone of interests
because the monopoly statute's purpose was to give an economic advantage to the Postal
Service and not to protect postal jobs, and, therefore, holding that postal workers have no
standing to challenge the Service's decision to allow competition in international remailing
services despite its statutory monopoly).
666 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
that there was a prudential barrier to standing, but instead, that Congress
implicitly had prohibited the suit. Such an argument is analogous to the rea-
soning of Block v. Community Nutrition Institute, in which the Court denied
standing on similar grounds.24 If the creation of the review board did in
fact represent a decision not to allow private supervision in the form of suits
by people within the zone of interests, a denial of standing would be per-
fectly appropriate. As a matter of statutory interpretation, however, this ar-
gument is fragile. Why should we view the review board and the courtroom
as competing rather than complementary? Since the plaintiffs had a dis-
tinctive organizational interest in the relevant information, standing should
have been granted.
The analysis would be similar with respect to informational standing
under NEPA. Note first that in the ordinary NEPA case, the plaintiff seeks
not information but a delay in the completion of a project until an EIS is
produced hence, the plaintiff must show, as a matter of interpretation of
NEPA, that he has a distinctive stake, usually environmental, in the ac-
tion.245 For example, a citizen of Wyoming who complains about the failure
to compile an EIS about a
in New York must show that the
development would in some way affect his aesthetic, recreational, or mate-
rial interests. This citizen should ordinarily be denied standing because no
interest protected by NEPA supports his action. But a question remains.
After Akins, might the citizen of Wyoming contend, not that he sought an
EIS to protect his environmental interests in New York, but that he sought
an EIS in order to receive information about important issues bearing on his
duties and activities as a voter?
The best answer is that the citizen of Wyoming could not so contend.
The mere fact that the relevant EIS would produce information of personal
or professional interest is not enough-not, it must be added, as a matter of
Article III, but as a reading of congressional instructions and concerns in
244 467 U.S. 340, 348 (1984) (holding that consumers may not obtain judicial review of
milk market orders under the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act because the Act does not
contemplate such suits).
standing because it failed to show "individualized harm to itself or its members"). According
to this view, the holding in Sierra Club is largely an interpretation of NEPA. There is no in-
jury in fact because NEPA created no legal interest! If this formulation seems odd, consider
its similarity to the analysis in Akins. Akins had an injury in fact because he had a legal inter-
est. Extending this analysis, Sierra Club is very similar to United States v. Richardson, 418
U.S. 166 (1974), in which the Court held that the taxpayer did not have standing because he
failed to show an injury or immediate danger of legally cognizable injury. In both cases,
standing was denied because the relevant provision of law did not create individual rights.
1999] INFORMA TIONAL STANDING 667
enacting NEPA.246 It is here that the zone of interests test and the prudential
barrier to generalized grievances meet-not as inferences from Article III or
even the APA, but as a somewhat crude and indirect way of getting at the
key question, which relates to the text and purposes of the statute pursuant
to which the plaintiff initiates suit. Thus, the appropriate conclusion is that
when a court denies standing to a
on the ground that its interest is
both highly generalized and not within the zone of statutory interests, it is
really saying that the underlying statute is best read not to allow suits by
plaintiffs of that sort. As we have seen, this is the best defense of the "in-
jury in fact" and "redressability" standards as well. And the best defense of
the lower court cases denying standing on this rationale is that when the in-
jury is highly generalized, there should be a presumption against standing
on the ground that such injuries are best redressed politically. Congress can
overcome that presumption if it chooses to do so.
With these basic conclusions, we can assess a series of stylized cases,
drawing on the discussion thus far.
1A. A group of workers in a plant in Detroit brings suit against the
plant for failing to disclose workplace risks. They seek full information
about those risks, as is required (in their view) by the governing law. This
is an easy case. Standing should be granted, even in the absence of an ex-
plicit statute authorizing standing. The plaintiffs have shown both injury
(nondisclosure of information undoubtedly relevant to them) and redress-
ability, and no problem exists under the prudential requirements.
1B. Cereal consumers bring suit against General Cereal for false and
incomplete statements involving the nutritional content of food. They seek
full disclosure and compensatory damages. Standing should be granted,
even in the absence of an explicit statute. The case is slightly harder, but
basically the same as case 1A. The strongest argument against standing is
that the class of plaintiffs is very large and, hence, that the grievance is gen-
246 If Congress allowed anyone to bring suit to require compliance with NEPA-not be-
cause of any specifically environmental interests but because of a
interest in the in-
formation at stake-there would probably be no Article III issue. The strongest opposing ar-
gument would be that it is necessary to have a distinctly environmental interest in the
backdrop, as in a case in which people located near a proposed causeway challenge the failure
to prepare an EIS. As NEPA now stands, an environmental interest is indeed a requirement,
and this view is best justified as a reading of NEPA itself, perhaps informed by prudential
668 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYL VANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
eralized, triggering a prudential barrier against standing. But since the
plaintiffs are unambiguously within the relevant zone of interests, and since
the difference from case 1A is only one of degree, standing is available un-
der Akins. The class of plaintiffs is not so extremely large as to trigger any
1C. Television viewers bring suit against the American Broadcasting
Company ("ABC"), complaining that ABC has failed to rate its programs
adequately and thus failed to comply with the Telecommunications Act of
1996. As in example 1B, the strongest argument against standing is that the
grievance is widely generalized and, hence, that standing should be denied
on prudential grounds. If the plaintiffs consist of television viewers as
such-which is to say the vast majority of Americans-standing should
probably be denied for that reason. The case would be different if brought
by parents of school age children, a more limited group whose members fall
squarely within the zone of interests protected by the Telecommunications
Act. The case would also be different if the plaintiff was an organization
particularly interested in the content of television programming in that case,
it would closely resemble 1B, and standing should be granted.
2A. A group of citizens in New York and Connecticut complains to
OSHA that firms in Illinois have not been required to disclose workplace
risks. In the face of OSHA inaction, the citizens in New York and Con-
necticut bring suit, contending that the information would help them in their
capacity as citizens if they learn about workplace risks, then they will know
more about how to vote and about what political activities would be most
worthwhile. Standing should be denied. The plaintiffs do not fall within the
zone of interests protected by the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
2B. Citizens for Safe Workplaces ("CSW"), a
zation, brings suit against OSHA, contending that it has failed to require
disclosure of workplace risks in Detroit. CSW has no members in Detroit,
but its members include many people interested in promoting workplace
safety and workers in various states. CSW seeks disclosure of the informa-
tion on the ground that CSW could use that information in its various edu-
cational and political activities. This is a hard standing case. The best ar-
gument against CSW is that CSW does not include Detroit workers and
therefore is not within the zone of interests protected by the statute, a con-
clusion that could be fortified by invoking the prudential barrier to general-
ized grievances. Because CSW would use the information in activities di-
rectly related to workplace safety, however, it stands out from the public at
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 669
large, and CSW should be permitted to bring suit. This conclusion is con-
sistent with the analysis of NEPA in Competitive Enterprise Institute.247
3. Citizens for a
Environment, an environmental organi-
zation based in California, attacks the adequacy of an EIS produced in con-
nection with a
power plant to be built in Massachusetts. The or-
ganization contends that an adequate statement would be extremely helpful
in its political and educational activities. This is also a hard standing case,
and it would be reasonable to deny standing on the ground that the interest
is highly generalized and that only those in Massachusetts, with environ-
mental interests at stake, should be permitted to bring suit. Probably the
better conclusion, however, is that informational standing should be granted
on the theory that the plaintiffs are well within the zone of interests pro-
tected by NEPA Competitive Enterprise Institute supports this conclu-
4. Consumers in Los Angeles challenge a Los Angeles water supplier's
failure to provide adequate information about its performance in connection
with the Safe Water Drinking Amendments of 1996.249 They seek the rele-
vant information, which they contend is relevant to their behavior as con-
sumers of water in the local area. This is an easy standing case it is akin to
case 1A above.
5A. A reporter for The Washington Post brings suit against the De-
partment of Health and Human Services, complaining that his work has
been hindered by the government's unlawful failure to require disclosure of
certain practices under the Medicaid statute. The plaintiff contends that the
relevant information would be extremely valuable in his professional activi-
ties. Standing should probably be denied on the ground that reporters are
not within the zone of interests protected by the Medicaid statute.
5B. The Gray Panthers, a group dedicated to the welfare of elderly
people, brings the same suit as in 5A, contending that it needs the informa-
247 See 901 F.2d 107, 122-24 (noting that, even under the more liberal standing require-
ments used in NEPA-related cases, a "right to specific information under NEPA has so far
been recognized for standing purposes only when the information sought relates to environ-
mental interests that NEPA was intended to protect").
248 See id. at 122 (stating that standing is granted to those who have suffered "[an] injury
to an interest within the zone of interest protected by [NEPA]").
249 42 U.S.C. ? 300j-21 (1994 & Supp. II 1996) (outlining additional requirements to Ti-
tle XIV of the Public Health Service Act, regulating drinking water).
670 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LA WREVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
tion in order to perform its various public interest activities and in order to
promote the well-being of its members. Standing should be granted because
the injury is not so highly generalized, and because the group contains
members who are unambiguously within the zone of interests protected by
5C. A daughter of an elderly woman receiving Medicaid brings the
same suit as in 5A, contending that she would like to see the relevant infor-
mation in order to ensure that her mother is being treated in accordance with
the law. This is a very hard case. On the one hand, the interests at stake are
those of a beneficiary of the Medicaid program, and the child of a benefici-
ary has a distinct and not merely ideological interest in the problem. On the
other hand, the beneficiary of the program is not the plaintiff (compare with
5B) and a large number of people might reasonably claim that they are in-
terested, financially or otherwise, in the legality of the government's be-
havior under the Medicaid statute. Clearly, Congress could grant standing
in this case if it chose to do so, but if there is no express grant, then standing
should probably be denied on the ground that the case is somewhat closer to
5A than to 5B.
E. The Implications of Informational Standing for Noninformational
Standing: A Brief Note
How does all this bear on standing in general? Several important points
are clear. So long as there is an injury, Congress can grant standing to
plaintiffs even if their injuries are very widely shared. Whether there is an
injury depends largely on what the law says. In addition, whether the case
involves information or something else, there is no redressability problem
even if an agency, having lost on the legal question at issue, might have dis-
cretion to do what it originally did on some other ground. Thus a majority
of the Court has repudiated the plurality opinion in Lujan insofar as it con-
cluded that there would be a serious problem with redressability.250
The most interesting questions involve Congress's authority to create
novel legal interests and to give people the power to bring suit to protect
those interests in court. Congress might, for example, give everyone an in-
terest in information of a certain sort (as it did in both FOIA and FECA, and
might do in other contexts as well) Akins plainly says that this is constitu-
tional. If Congress can do that, perhaps it also has a great deal of room to
250 See Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 568-71 (1992) (noting that the
plaintiffs, in challenging a
level of government action," failed to present a case
for the redressability of their specific injuries in fact).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 671
create novel interests that do not involve information. Perhaps Congress
could give all citizens a property interest in the continued existence of en-
dangered species (making each of us beneficial owners of a particular sort),
or in maintaining certain land in a pristine state, or in clean air in certain re-
gions of the country, or in a certain kind of telecommunications market.
After Akins, why is Congress forbidden from saying that all Americans have
a property interest in clear skies above the Grand Canyon, a
est that exists regardless of whether the citizens in question actually visit the
A possible answer-not ruled out by current law-is that such a statute
would be unconstitutional because those who do not visit the Grand Canyon
lack an "injury in fact."252 The same might be said about the hypothesized
cases involving endangered species, land, and telecommunications. But if
Congress says that they have an injury in fact, why should courts disagree?
Note that "existence value" is often treated as a
of property interest for
purposes of environmental valuation 253 it is now conventional in contingent
valuation studies to consider the amount that people are willing to pay in
order to maintain a certain state of affairs. This very practice treats the con-
tinued existence of that state of affairs as a kind of property interest. Why
can't Congress do the same thing? In any case, a property interest often is
no more, and no less, than a cause of action. If Congress attempts to create
a cause of action in a certain state of affairs and grants that cause of action
to all Americans, there appears to be no constitutional barrier, especially
after the Akins Court's unambiguous holding that the obstacle to generalized
grievances is merely prudential.
Justice Kennedy presaged this judgment with his cautionary notes in
Lujan, quoted as the first epigraph to this Article: "Congress has the power
to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a
case or controversy where none existed before."254 Justice Kennedy joined
the Lujan opinion only because in creating citizen standing under the En-
251 People are often willing to pay a good deal for the "existence" of certain environ-
mental amenities, and that existence value often plays a role in contingent valuation studies.
See DAVID W. PEARCE & R. KERRY TURNER, ECONOMICS OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND
THE ENVIRONMENT 137-40 (1990).
252 Cf Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560 ("[T]he plaintiff must have suffered an 'injury in
fact' ... which is (a) concrete and particularized and (b) 'actual or imminent ...."' (citations
omitted)) Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. 727, 735 (1972) (holding that the Sierra Club had
failed to demonstrate how any of its members would be affected by the challenged develop-
253 See supra note 251 see also Ohio v. United States Dep't of the Interior, 880 F.2d 432,
464 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (upholding contingent valuation that allows use of "existence value" and
254 Lujan, 504 U.S. at 580.
672 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
dangered Species Act, Congress failed to "identify the injury it seeks to vin-
dicate and relate the injury to the class of persons entitled to bring suit."255
FECA is quite different on this count. Congress clearly identified the rele-
vant interest, which was unambiguously related to the grant of standing to
citizens. Thus, Akins vindicates Justice Kennedy's point and his concern
about the breadth of Lujan insofar as it shows that Congress may recognize
an entirely new (and highly generalized) legal interest, one foreign to the
common law, and give all citizens standing to vindicate that interest in
court. After Akins, whether a deprivation of information counts as an injury
(in fact!) depends on whether it is (alleged to be) against the law. And after
Akins, it does not matter if that injury is shared by most or all citizens-at
least to the extent that Congress says this does not matter.
If this is true with information, why is it not true with many other inter-
ests? Why, for example, is Congress not permitted to give standing to all
drivers to challenge acts that increase the risk of accidents on highways 256
or to give standing to parents of children in schools undergoing desegrega-
tion plans to allow them to challenge the grant of tax deductions to segre-
gated schools 257 or to give standing to automobile purchasers and environ-
mental organizations to ensure that the EPA enforces statutory requirements
for fuel economy standards?258 The best answer is that Congress is indeed
permitted to do these things.259 To the extent that similar cases have come
out unfavorably to plaintiffs, it is because the governing statutes, interpreted
in the light of relevant prudential requirements, reflect no effort by Congress
to do so. Akins would not have had standing if Congress had denied him
standing. Because of the prudential barrier to generalized grievances, Akins
would probably not have had standing if FECA had merely incorporated the
APA's standing provision. Denials of standing in cases involving novel in-
terests foreign to the existing legal culture are therefore best understood as
interpretations of the underlying statute. Congress's challenge for the fu-
ture-if it genuinely seeks to grant standing-is to think of imaginative
256 See International Bd. of Teamsters v. Pefia, 17 F.3d 1478, 1483-87 (D.C. Cir. 1994)
(holding that the union had standing to challenge the Memorandum of Understanding between
the United States and Mexico regarding recognition of foreign commercial drivers' licenses).
the IRS's failure to fulfill its obligation to deny tax exempt status on racially segregated
schools failed to demonstrate a judicially cognizable injury).
258 See supra note 140 and accompanying text.
1998) (recognizing an aesthetic interest in observing animals).
1999] INFORMATIONAL STANDING 673
ways to create legal interests in the rights it intends to protect.260 With this
point, we end where we began: an assertion of the primacy, for purposes of
Article III, of legislative instructions.
In this Article, I have attempted to outline the range of statutes that at-
tempt to use information as a regulatory tool to understand their rationale,
their potential value, and their potential pathologies to see when citizens
are, and should be, granted standing to obtain information and to under-
stand how all these points bear on the general law of standing. We have
seen that American government frequently, and increasingly, avoids both
market and command-and-control solutions by using information disclosure
as a regulatory tool. Sometimes informational strategies attempt to improve
the ordinary operations of markets by ensuring that workers and consumers
are adequately informed. Initiatives involving tobacco products, the nutri-
tional content of food and drink, and worker safety are primary examples.
Sometimes information is required as part of moral suasion and in order to
trigger political safeguards. EPCRA and FECA are the chief examples here.
Typically information, once provided to one or a few, is also provided
to many or all and very frequently information is required as a way of pro-
tecting against a
shared injury. In the political context, the injury
from nondisclosure may be suffered by a
number of citizens. After
Akins, this is not an obstacle to standing, and properly so-assuming that
Congress has concluded that it ought not be. Nothing in the Constitution
forbids Congress from authorizing groups of citizens to bring suit to obtain
information that they believe is relevant to their interests. Nor does any-
thing in the Constitution forbid Congress from granting citizens a legal right
to information and allowing them to vindicate that right in court. This
holding-a crucial part of Akins-is a vindication of Justice Kennedy's
highly suggestive concurring opinion in Lujan, allowing Congress to create
injuries quite foreign to the common law.
Things are more complicated with respect to redressability. In Akins it-
self, the injury-a lack of information-would have been redressed by a fa-
260 Examples are briefly given above involving endangered species and visibility. More
particularly, Congress might say, for example, that Americans have a shared property interest
in the continued existence of endangered species, an interest that is violated whenever the fed-
eral government acts unlawfully under the Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S.C. ?? 1531-34
(1994), and an interest that can be protected by citizen suits. A statute of this kind might be
strengthened by reference to the role of "existence value" in ordinary cases of environmental
valuation. I do not suggest that Congress should do this as a matter of policy the answer to
that question depends on context.
674 UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA LAW REVIEW [Vol. 147: 613
vorable decree. The information itself need not have been linked to any in-
dependent interest. Nor was it important that the FEC might ultimately
have exercised its discretion unfavorably to the plaintiffs. This conclusion
offers an important lesson about the nature of procedural injuries: proce-
dures are designed to structure decisions and to create incentives, not to
command particular outcomes, and an injury to a procedural interest need
not be tied to a
outcome. It follows that courts should be
careful and self-conscious about characterizing the injury of which the
plaintiff complains. I suggest that Akins may be the first step toward a more
explicit confrontation, on the Court's part, with that important question.
What about the prudential limitations? When Congress has not explic-
itly granted standing to those who seek information, it is important to know
what the relevant law says. In many cases involving informational standing,
there is no difficult question about whether the plaintiffs fall within the zone
of interests protected by the statute. It is possible, however, to imagine cases
in which those who seek information are attempting to vindicate interests,
economic or ideological, that have little to do with the statute's substantive
goals. In such cases, the prudential limits on standing are properly invoked
and the plaintiffs should be held to be outside the zone of statutory interests.
Furthermore, if the plaintiff is a member of a large group, or is hard to dis-
tinguish from other citizens generally, the argument for invoking prudential
barriers is strengthened. We have examined a range of possible cases to see
how this analysis might work. The simplest point is that if an injury is very
widely shared, then there is reason to deny standing if the case is, with re-
spect to the zone of interests test, otherwise in equipoise.
Beyond these doctrinal points, the Akins decision deserves a more gen-
eral celebration. It is the first case in a long while to place the law of
standing on a solid foundation-an understanding of the particular statutory
and constitutional provisions that are said to give rise to a legally cognizable
injury. But there is a more particular point, involving the relationship of in-
formation to regulatory law. In the same period in which the American
economy increasingly has become based on the production and exchange of
information, American government has increasingly attempted to control
public and private conduct-not via command-and-control regulation, but
by requiring disclosure of information. And in the same period in which in-
formational regulation has become a hallmark of American government, in-
formational standing has increasingly emerged as a central problem in ad-
ministrative law. There is nothing constitutionally problematic about a
congressional judgment that a
of information counts as legally
cognizable injury. The question is whether Congress has made that judg-
ment. In the area of informational standing, as in the law of standing gener-
