Testimony before the U. S. House Judiciary Committee
Author(s): Gary L. McDowell, Bruce Ackerman, Samuel H. Beer, Matthew Holden Jr. and Cass
R. Sunstein
Source: PS: Political Science and Politics, Vol. 32, No. 1 (Mar., 1999), pp. 24-38
Published by: American Political Science Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/420747 .
Accessed: 14/06/2014 02:39

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

American Political Science Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
PS: Political Science and Politics.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

From the Halls  of Congress 
Political Scientists Testify before the 
House Committee on the Judiciary 
during the Hearing on Impeachment 
Inquiry Pursuant to H. Res. 581* 

Gary L. McDowell 
University of London 
November 9, 1998 

Testimony Before the U.S. 

Editor's Note: This excerpt from Professor 
McDowell's testimony 
concluding section, titled "Oaths 
and Perjury." 

is taken from the 

The use of oaths in legal proceed- 
ings in which evidence is given is an 
ancient part of the common law. Sir 
Edward Coke noted that the "word 
oath is derived from the Saxon word 
eoth." The oath is nothing less, said 
Coke, than "an affirmation or deni- 
all by any Christian of anything law- 
full and honest, before one or more, 
that have the authority to give the 
same for advancement of truth and 
right, calling Almighty God to wit- 
ness that his testimony is true" 
(1809, 165).1 Yet there is evidence 
that the use of oaths extends back to 
Roman times, where the law of the 
Twelve Tables provides that "Who- 
ever gives false evidence must be 
thrown from the Tarpeian rock" 
(Stephens 1883, 1: 11). And Cicero 
in De Officiis argues that "in taking 
an oath it is our duty to consider 
not what we may have to fear in 
case of violation but wherein its ob- 
ligation lies: an oath is an assurance 
backed by religious sanctity; and a 
solemn promise given, as before 
God as one's witness, is to be sa- 
credly kept" (1991, III:  104, 383). As 
Samuel Pufendorf emphasized, oaths 
were not simply the preserve of 
Christians: 

An oath the very Heathens look'd 
on as a thing of so great force, 
and of so sacred authority, that 
they believed the sin of perjury to 
be punished with the severest ven- 
geance; such as extended itself to 
the posterity of the offender, and 
such as might be incurr'd by the 
bare thought and inclination with- 
out the act. (1717, IV. II. 1, 117) 

The significance of the oath in 

Bruce Ackerman 

Yale University 
December 7, 1998 

Good morning, Mr. Chairman, 
and the distinguished members of 
this Committee. My name is Bruce 
Ackerman. I am Sterling Professor 
of Law and Political Science at Yale. 
I request the Chair's permission to 
revise and extend these remarks. 
Since you have already heard so 
much on the subject of constitu- 
tional standards for impeachment, I 
would like to concentrate on three 
big mistakes that have characterized 
the discussion up to now. 

The first big mistake centers on 
the power of this Committee and 
the present House of Representa- 
tives to send a case to trial in the 
Senate. People seem to be assuming 
that once the present Committee 
and the full House vote for a bill of 
impeachment, the stage will be set 
for a trial in the Senate during the 
coming year, and that the next 
House will not have to take any fur- 
ther actions on the matter. 

Nothing could be further from the 
truth. As a constitutional matter, the 
House of Representatives is not a 
continuing body. When the 105th 
House dies on January 3, all its un- 
finished business dies with it. To 
begin with the most obvious exam- 
ple, a bill passed by the 105th House 
that is still pending in the 105th  Sen- 
ate on January 3rd cannot be en- 
acted into law unless it once 
meets the approval of the 106t 
House. 

again 

This is as it should be. Otherwise 
lame-duck Congresses would have a 
field day in situations like the 
present, where the old House major- 
ity has had a setback in the polls. 
Recognizing that its political power 
is on the wane, the dominant party 

Five APSA members testified be- 
fore the U.S. House Judiciary Com- 
mittee's impeachment hearings dur- 
ing the fall session of the 105th 
Congress-Bruce Ackerman of Yale 
University, Samuel Beer of Harvard 
University, Matthew Holden of the 
University of Virginia, Cass Sunstein 
of the University of Chicago, and 
Gary McDowell of the University of 
London. 

All or portions of reformatted 

versions of their statements are 
printed here to illustrate political 
scientists "speaking truth to power." 
The statements of the five scholars 
are their own and do not represent 
the positions of either their institu- 
tions or the American Political Sci- 
ence Association. 

The editors of PS encourage other 
APSA members participating in fed- 
eral and state policy processes in all 
substantive areas to notify PS of 
their activities. This information will 
be shared with journal readers in 
future issues. 

Robert J-P. Hauck, Editor 

* House Resolution 581, officially titled 
"H. Res. 581: Authorizing and directing the 
Committee on the Judiciary to investigate 
whether sufficient grounds exist for the im- 
peachment of William Jefferson Clinton, 
President of the United States," made official 
the resolution that: "the Committee on the 
Judiciary, acting as a whole or by any sub- 
committee thereof appointed by the chairman 
for the purposes hereof and in accordance 
with the rules of the committee, is authorized 
and directed to investigate fully and com- 
pletely whether sufficient grounds exist for the 
House of Representatives to exercise its con- 
stitutional power to impeach William Jeffer- 
son Clinton, President of the United States of 
America. The committee shall report to the 
House of Representatives such resolutions, 
articles of impeachment, or other recommen- 
dations as it deems proper." 

24 

PS  March 1999 

continued on page 26 

continued on page 29 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

House Judiciary Committee 

Samuel  H. Beer 

Harvard University 
December 7, 1998 

Matthew  Holden  Jr. 
University of Virginia 
November 9, 1998 

Cass  R. Sunstein 

University of Chicago 
November 9, 1998 

My concern is the political and 
constitutional consequences of im- 
peachment rather than its legal and 
judicial aspects. The process is judi- 
cial in form, impeachment by the 
House being like indictment by a 
grand jury, and trial and conviction 
by the Senate being like trial and 
conviction by a court. In fact, how- 
ever, the consequences of successful 
impeachment do not resemble the 
usual consequences of a judicial 
trial, for instance, punishment by 
fine and/or imprisonment. As Article 
I, section 3, paragraph 7 provides, 
punishment of that kind would be 
invoked after the president had be- 
come a private citizen by resigna- 
tion, removal, or expiration of his 
term of office. 

Removal from office, the grand 
and forbidding consequence of suc- 
cessful impeachment, distinguishes 
this process radically from the 
judgement of a court. It resembles 
rather a vote of no confidence in a 
legislature, such as the British par- 
liament. By such a vote the House 
of Commons can bring to an end 
the life of a government. In 1841, 
Sir Robert Peel summed up this 
fundamental convention of the Brit- 
ish Constitution when he success- 
fully moved that "her Majesty's Min- 
isters do not sufficiently possess the 
confidence of the House of Com- 
mons to enable them to carry 
through the House measures which 
they deem of essential importance 
to the public welfare." 

Like a vote of no confidence, im- 
peachment brings to an end a presi- 
dent's administration. Like a vote of 
no confidence, it relates not merely 
to some specific failure, but is a 
judgment on his record and promise 
as a whole with regard to those 
"measures which he deems of essen- 

Editor's Note:  This excerpt from Profes- 
sor's Holden's testimony is taken from the 
concluding section, titled "Impeachment is 
a Caged Lion: Should it Be Loose in 
the Streets?" 

Editor's Note: This excerpt from Profes- 
sor's Sunstein's testimony is taken from 
the concluding section, titled "How Should 
We Understand Impeachment Today?" 

Someone, at a responsible level, 

must face up to the fact that im- 
peachment is a caged lion, and ask 
seriously, and without prejudice, 
whether letting that lion loose in the 
streets will leave anyone safe. 

The House of Representatives is 
placed by the constitutional prescrip- 
tion in the role analogous to that of 
the prosecutor. When is it necessary 
to go forward? In the narrower do- 
main of ordinary criminal law, the 
criminal prosecutor considers many 
factors in deciding whether to bring 
charges. Among others, the prosecu- 
tor considers "the strength of the 
evidence, the suspect's background 
and characteristics, the costs and 
benefits of obtaining a conviction, 
and the attitude of the community 
toward the offense the suspect is 
believed to have committed" (Miller 
et al. 1991, 695). 

The discussion for the past four 
years, and especially for the past ten 
months, has not gotten to this, the 
nexus of the most serious issue. The 
discussion has focused upon atti- 
tudes toward the person who now 
occupies the office of president, and, 
secondarily, upon what people be- 
lieve is the evidence. But the most 
serious issue is different. There has 
been a continual avoidance of the 
costs and benefits of impeachment 
when considered in relation to the 
whole political system. 

There is some discussion of the 
attitude of the community, often in 
puzzlement as to the difference be- 
tween opinion reflected in mass poll 
data and opinion expressed by those 

Thus far I have suggested that 
both the original understanding and 
historical practice converge on a 
simple principle. The basic point of 
the impeachment provision is to al- 
low the House of Representatives to 
impeach the president of the United 
States for egregious misconduct that 
amounts to the abusive misuse of 
the authority of his office. This prin- 
ciple does not exclude the possibility 
that a president would be impeach- 
able for an extremely heinous "pri- 
vate" crime, such as murder or rape. 
But it suggests that outside of such 
extraordinary (and unprecedented 
and most unlikely) cases, impeach- 
ment is unacceptable. The clear im- 
plication is that the charges made 
thus far by Judge Kenneth Starr and 
David Schippers do not, if proved, 
make out any legitimately impeach- 
able offenses under the Constitution. 
In the present context, it would be 

possible to respond to this sugges- 
tion in two different ways. First, it 
might be urged that actual or possi- 
ble counts against President Clinton- 
-frequent lies to the American pub- 
lic, false statements under oath, 
conspiracy to ensure that such false 
statements are made, perhaps per- 
jury, interactions with his advisers 
designed to promote further false- 
hoods under oath, and so forth-are 
very serious indeed and that if these 
very serious charges are deemed a 
legitimate basis for impeachment, 
little or nothing will be done to alter 
the traditional conception of im- 
peachment. Perhaps some of these 
possible counts, involving interac- 
tions with his advisers designed to 

continued on page 33 

continued on page 34 

continued on page 37 

PSOnline www.apsanet.org 

25 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Gary L. McDowell 
continued from page 24 
courts of law was explained by 
James Wilson in his law lectures: 
"The courts of justice, in almost ev- 
ery age, and in almost every country, 
have had recourse to oaths, or ap- 
peals to heaven, as the most univer- 
sal and the most powerful means to 
engage men to declare the truth. By 
the common law, before the testi- 
mony of a witness can be received, 
he is obliged to swear, that it shall 
be the truth, the whole truth, and 
nothing but the truth." 

The purpose, Wilson concluded, is 

to secure truthful evidence: 

Belief is the end proposed by evi- 
dence of every kind. Belief in tes- 
timony is produced by the sup- 
posed veracity of him who 
declares it. The opinion of his ve- 
racity . 
is shaken, either when, 
in former instances, we have 
known him to deliver testimony 
which has been false; or when, in 
the present instance, we discover 
some strong inducement which 
may prevail on him to deceive. 
(McCloskey 1967, 2: 7O2-03)2 

Wilson took his moral and histori- 

cal bearings on the necessity of 
oaths to getting at the truth from 
William Paley, whose Principles of 
Moral and Political Philosophy (1788) 
was an influential work of consider- 
able prominence among the early 
Americans. Wilson praised Paley as 
an authority of "high reputation," a 
"sensible and ingenious writer," who 
was "no undiscerning judge of the 
subject" of the administration of 
justice (McCloskey 1967, 1: 310, 240, 
325). Joseph Story was similarly im- 
pressed with Paley as a writer of 
"practical sense" whose analyses of 
political institutions displayed "great 
skill and ingenuity of reasoning." 
Throughout his celebrated Commen- 
taries on the Constitution of the 
United States (1851), Story relies of- 
ten on the "excellent writings" of 
Paley.3 

For Paley, the issue of oaths and 
perjury was one of morality as well 
as of law; he expressed views not 
unlike that of Cicero who warned 
that "people overturn the fundamen- 
tal principles established by nature, 
when they divorce expediency from 
moral rectitude" (1991, III:  101, 

26 

184). In Paley's view, the entire 
question of perjury rested on the 
definition of a lie: "A lie is a breach 
of promise: for whoever seriously 
addresses his discourse to another, 
tacitly promises to speak the truth, 
because he knows that the truth is 
expected." And the effects of lying 
are not simply private; they are pub- 
lic in the deepest and most impor- 
tant sense: 

[T]he direct ill consequences of 
lying . . . consist, either in some 
specific injury to particular individ- 
uals, or the destruction of that 
confidence, which is essential to 
the intercourse of human life: for 
which latter reason, a lie may be 
pernicious in its general tendency, 
and therefore criminal, though it 
produce no particular visible mis- 
chief to anyone. (1788, 1: 184) 

Given this public aspect to the 
damages that come from lying, it is 
necessary that oaths never be made 
"cheap in the minds of the people." 
Since "mankind must trust to one 
another" there is no more effica- 
cious means than through the use of 
oaths: "Hence legal adjudications, 
which govern and affect every right 
and interest on this side of the 
grave, of necessity proceed and de- 
pend upon oaths." As a result, lying 
under oath is far more serious than 
merely lying; perjury is, Paley notes, 
"a sin of greater deliberation," an 
act that "violates a superior confi- 
dence" (1: 193-197). 

Because a witness swears that he 

will "speak the truth, the whole 
truth, and nothing but the truth, 
touching the matter in question," 
there is no place where a person 
under oath can cleverly lie and not 
commit perjury. The witness cannot 
legitimately conceal "any truth, 
which relates to the matter in adju- 
dication" because to so conceal "is 
as much a violation of the oath, as 
to testify a positive falsehood; and 
this whether the witness be interro- 
gated to that particular point or 
not." It is not enough, Paley ob- 
served, for the witness afterward to 
say that he was not forthcoming "be- 
cause it was never asked of me"; an 
oath obliges to tell all one knows 
whether asked or not. As Paley 
notes, "the law intends ..  . to re- 
quire of the witness, that he give a 

complete and unreserved account of 
what he knows of the subject of the 
trial, whether the questions pro- 
posed to him reach the extent of his 
knowledge or not" (1: 200-01). 

Nor is it sufficient an excuse that 
"a point of honor, of delicacy, or of 
reputation, may make a witness 
backward to disclose some circum- 
stance with which he is acquainted." 
Such a sense of shame or embar- 
rassment cannot "justify his conceal- 
ment of the truth, unless it could be 
shown, that the law which imposes 
the oath, intended to allow this in- 
dulgence to such motives" (1: 201). 
Similarly, linguistic contortions 
with the words used cannot legiti- 
mately conceal a lie or, if under 
oath, perjury. Paley's argument on 
this point merits a complete hearing: 

As there may be falsehoods which 
are not lies, so there may be lies 
without literal or direct falsehood. 
An opening is always left for this 
species of prevarication, when the 
literal and the grammatical signifi- 
cation of a sentence is different 
from the popular and customary 
meanings. It is the willful deceit 
that makes the lie; and we willfully 
deceive, where our expressions are 
not true in the sense in which we 
believe the hearer apprehends 
them. Besides, it is absurd to con- 
tend for any sense of words, in 
opposition to usage, for all senses 
of words are founded upon usage, 
and upon nothing else. (1: 188- 
89)4 

Thus, the most common terms of 
oaths sworn include a promise not 
only to tell the truth, but the 
broader promise to tell the whole 
truth and nothing but the truth. 
Willful deceit is the key to whether 
a witness commits perjury or not, 
whatever the means chosen.5 The 
moral and legal inheritance of the 
founding generation included the 
belief that the violation of an oath 
was nothing less than "treachery" 
(Sidney [1698] 1990, 225). 

None of the major writers with 
whom the founders were intimately 
conversant saw perjury as anything 
but one of the most serious offences 
against the commonwealth.6 In his 
widely cited Treatise on the Pleas of 
the Crown, for example, William 
Hawkins explained that there were 
certain kinds of offences that were 

PS  March 1999 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

"infamous, and grossly scandalous, 
proceeding from principles of down 
right dishonesty, malice or faction"; 
and it was under this rubric that he 
included "perjury and subornation 
of perjury." Indeed, he went further 
is of all 
arguing that 
"perjury... 
crimes whatsoever the most infa- 
mous and detestable" ([1724-26] 
1972, 1: 

318-19).7 

Perjury was, in the first instance, 
tied to jurors who might give a false 
verdict and "for several centuries no 
trace is to be found of the punish- 
ment of witnesses for perjury." And, 
even after it originated in the Star 
Chamber, it was only by "slow de- 
grees [that] the conclusion that all 
perjury in a judicial proceeding is a 
crime was arrived at" (Stephens 
1883, 3: 241, 247). In 1562-63 there 
came the first statute providing pen- 
alties for those who committed both 
perjury and subornation of perjury 
(Holdsworth 1966, 4: 515-18). Thus 
were human punishments made to 
augment the fear of divine ven- 
geance for lying under oath.8 This 
was, in Pufendorf's view, absolutely 
essential, as he noted by quoting 
Demosthenes: "Those who escape 
your justice, leave to the vengeance 
of the gods; but those on whom you 
can lay hands, never consign over to 
Providence without punishing them 
yourselves" (1717, IV. II. 2, 118). 
It was by this joint power of the 

sacred and the secular that men 
could put their faith in oaths as a 
means of securing truthful testimony 
from those sworn to give it. And by 
such oaths and the punishments to 
be meted out for perjury, the com- 
monwealth could secure the proper 
administration of justice within the 
courts of law. Perjury was no longer 

just a sin; it was a crime. 

Based on the foregoing analysis 
and review of the historical record, 
the conclusion seems inescapable, 
based on the expressed intent of the 
framers, the wording of the Consti- 
tution, the writings of the principal 
legal authorities known to the fram- 
ers, and the common law, that per- 
jury would certainly be included as a 
"high Crime and Misdemeanor" in 
an impeachment trial under the 
United States Constitution. Further, 
the record fails to support the claim 
that impeachable offences are lim- 
ited to only those abuses that occur 
in the official exercise of executive 
power. As seen in the authorities, 
impeachable offences, in both Eng- 
lish and American history, have 
been understood to extend to "per- 
sonal misconduct" (Story 1851, 2: 
274), "violation of . 
son 1916, 144 n. 6), and "immorality 
or imbecility" (Curtis 1854-60, 2: 
260) among other charges. 

trust" (Simp- 

There is no power granted to the 
House of Representatives more for- 
midable than "the sole power of im- 
peachment." Knowing as they did 
the dangers of subjecting those in 
high office to the mere passion and 
caprice of the moment, the founders 
sought to create a power to impeach 
that would be capable of "displacing 
an unfit magistrate," but within the 
confines of a written and ratified 
Constitution of enumerated and lim- 
ited powers. Thus did they limit the 
reasons for which an impeachment 
could be undertaken to "Treason, 
Bribery, or other high Crimes and 
Misdemeanors." 

The success of the founders in 
creating the impeachment power to 
be both politically effective and safe 

to the demands of republican gov- 
ernment is seen most clearly in how 
few have been the instances of its 
use. Lord Bryce described the power 
of impeachment over a century ago 
as "the heaviest piece of artillery in 
the congressional arsenal" and thus 
"unfit for ordinary use." The process 
seeking to remove a president, he 
said, "is like a hundred-ton gun 
which needs complex machinery to 
bring it into position, an enormous 
charge of powder to fire it, and a 
large mark to aim at" (Bryce [1893] 
1995, 1: 190). The constitutional 
provisions for impeachment were 
intended, in part, to secure the chief 
executive from being driven from 
office for mere partisan reasons. To 
get rid of a president-or to try to - 
Congress has to have good cause. As 
Bryce said, one does not use im- 
peachment for light and transient 
causes, "as one does not use steam 
hammers to crack nuts" (1: 190). 

In the end, the determination of 

whether presidential misconduct 
rises to the level of "high Crimes 
and Misdemeanors," as used by the 
framers, is left to the discretion and 
deliberation of the House of Repre- 
sentatives. No small part of that de- 
liberation, guided as it must be by 
the history and meaning of "high 
Crimes and Misdemeanors," must 
address what effect the exercise of 
this extraordinary constitutional 
sanction would have on the health 
of the republic, as weighed against 
the necessity of making clear that in 
America no one is above the law. In 
the end, that is what matters most 
and must bear most heavily on the 
members of the House of Represen- 
tatives as they consider what they 
must do in the weeks ahead. 

Notes 

1. This view has been expanded upon by 
John Wigmore in his treatise on evidence, in 
which he notes that the idea of an oath came 
from Germanic law: "The employment of 
oaths takes our history back to the origins of 
Germanic law and custom when, as in all 
early civilizations, the appeal to the supernat- 
ural plays an important part in the adminis- 
tration of justice" (1976, V: Sec. 1815, 380). 
James Bradley Thayer observed that the 
"Normans ...  found that much of what they 
brought [to England] was there already; for 
the Anglo-Saxons were their cousins of the 

Germanic race, and had, in a great degree, 
the same legal conceptions and methods only 
less worked out" (1891, 45, 58). This ex- 
tended to the use of oaths. 

2. Wilson was not alone in his view of the 
importance of oaths. For example, Justice 
Jacob Rush, the brother of Benjamin Rush, 
expressed views much like those of Wilson 
in a pamphlet published in 1796, The Na- 
ture and Importance of an Oath-the Charge 
to a Jury (Rutland, Vermont): "An oath is a 
very serious transaction . .  . the nature [of 
which] . .  . is the solemn appeal to God-it 

is engaging to speak the truth, and calling 
upon Him to witness our sincerity, that con- 
stitute the oath and obligation." Thus is it 
important that civil society maintain a due 
attention to "the religious sentiment upon 
which an oath is founded"; to allow that 
sentiment to relax will be "injurious to soci- 
ety" (Hyneman and Lutz 1983, 2: 1015- 
1017, 1018). 

3. See Story (1851), especially Sec. 587, II: 

69; Sec. 584, II: 65; Sec. 1603, III: 467. See 
also, for examples, Secs. 522, 547, 558, 572, 
575, 579, 581, 584, 587, and 1338. 

PSOnline  www.apsanet.org 

27 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

4. Pufendorf was of a similar mind: Wit- 
nesses, he said, should not have "an opportu- 
nity by insidious or equivocal expressions to 
evade the force of their obligations." Should 
they so break their oath they will discover the 
truth that God is the "avenger of perjury" 
(1717, IV. II. III, 121, 119). 

5. As Thomas Wood put it, "it cannot be 
presumed that one would commit perjury 
without design" (1730, II. 10, xiv, 288-89). 

6. For a helpful compilation of many of the 
common law sources on "oaths" and "perju- 
ry" see under those heads in Giles Jacob 
(1772). 

7. Pufendorf put it even more strikingly: 
"Perjury appears to be a most monstrous sin, 
in as much as by it the forsworn wretch shews 
that he at the same time condemns the divine 
and yet is afraid of human punishment; that 
he is a daring villain towards God, and a 

sneaking coward towards men" (1717, IV. II. 
2, 118). 

8. "The two expedients of the oath and the 
perjury penalty are similar in their operation; 
that is, they influence the witness subjectively 
against conscious falsification, the one by re- 
minding him of ultimate punishment by a su- 
pernatural power, the other by reminding him 
of speedy punishment by a temporal power" 
(Wigmore 1976, V: Sec. 1831, 432). 

References 

Bryce, James. [1893] 1995. The American 

Commonwealth. 2 vols. Indianapolis: Lib- 
erty Fund. 

Cicero, Marcus Tullius. 1991. De OfJiciis. Trans. 
and ed. M.T. Griffin and E.M. Atkins. Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Coke, Edward. 1809. The Third Part of the Insti- 
tutes of the Laws of England: Concerning 
High Treason, and Other Pleas of the Crown. 
London: W. Clarke, and Sons. 

Curtis, George Ticknor. 1854-60. History of 

the Origin, Formation, and Adoption of the 
Constitution of the United States: With No- 
tices of Its Principal Framers. New York: 
Harper. 

Hawkins, William. [1724-26] 1972. A Treatise 
of the Pleas of the Crown; or, A System of 
the Principal Matters Relating to that Sub- 
ject, Digested under Their Proper Heads. 
New York: Arno Press. 

Holdsworth, William Searle. 1888. A History 

of English Law. London: Methuen. 

Hyneman, Charles S., and Donald S. Lutz, 

eds. 1983. American Political Writing dur- 
ing the Founding Era, 1760-1805. 2 vols. 
Indianapolis : Liberty Press. 

Jacob, Giles. 1772. A New Law-Dictionary: 

Containing the Interpretation and Definition 
of Words and Terms Used in the Law; as 
also the Law and Practice, under the Proper 
Heads and Titles. 9th. ed. London: Strahan 
and Woodfall. 

Paley, William. 1788. The Principles of Moral 
and Political Philosophy. London: R. Faul- 
der. 

Pufendorf, Samuel. 1717. Of the Law of Na- 
ture and Nations. Trans. Basil Kennet. 
London: R. Sare. 

Sidney, Algernon. [1698] 1990. Discourses 
Concerning Government. Ed. Thomas 
West. Indianapolis: Liberty Classics. 
Simpson, Alexander. 1916. A Treatise on Fed- 

eral Impeachments. Philadelphia. 

Stephens, James Fitzjames. 1883. A History of 

the Criminal Law of England. 3 vols. Lon- 
don: Macmillan. 

Story, Joseph. 1851. Commentaries on the 
Constitution of the United States: With a 
Preliminary Review of the Constitutional 
History of the Colonies and States, before 
the Adoption of the Constitution. 2nd ed. 
Boston: C.C. Little and J. Brown. 
Thayer, James Bradley. 1891. "The Older 
Modes of Trial." Harvard Law Review 
5:45-58. 

Wigmore, John Henry. 1976. Evidence in Tri- 
als at Common Law. 10 vols. Ed. J.H. 
Chadbourn. Boston: Little, Brown. 
Wood, Thomas. 1730. A New Institute of the 

Imperial or Civil Law. With Notes, Shewing 
in Some Principal Cases, amongst Other 
Observations, How the Canon Law, the 
Laws of England, and the Laws and Cus- 
toms of Other Nations Differ from It. In 
Four Books. London: R. Sare. 

28 

PS  March 1999 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Bruce Ackerman 
continued from page 24 
will predictably use its lame-duck 
months to pass lots of controversial 
legislation on to the Senate in defi- 
ance of the judgment made by the 
voters. 

This abuse was very common dur- 
ing the first 150 years of the Repub- 
lic. Until the Twentieth Amendment 
was passed in 1933, a newly elected 
Congress ordinarily waited 13 
months before it began its first 
meeting in Washington. In the 
meantime, lameducks did the na- 
tion's business for a full session, of- 
ten in ways that ran against the 
grain of the last election. This might 
have been an acceptable price to 
pay in the eighteenth century, when 
roads were terrible and it took time 
for farmer-representatives to ar- 
range their business affairs. But as 
the centuries passed, the operation 
of lame-duck Congresses proved to 
be an intolerable violation of demo- 
cratic principles, and they were basi- 
cally abolished by the Twentieth 
Amendment in 1933. 

This amendment anticipates that 
new Congresses will begin meeting 
as soon as possible after the elec- 
tions-the text specifies January 3. 
In enacting it into our fundamental 
law, Americans believed they were 
reducing the lame-duck problem to 
vestigial proportions (Nagle 1997). 
Perhaps some grave national emer- 
gency might require decisive action, 
but the old Congress would normally 
fade away as the nation enjoyed a 
respite from politics between 
Thanksgiving and New Year's Day. 
Generally speaking, lame-duck 
Congresses have proved faithful to 
this expectation. For example, dur- 
ing the 65 years since the Twentieth 
Amendment became part of our 
higher law, no lame-duck House has 
ever impeached an errant federal 
judge, much less a sitting president. 
Such matters have been left to the 
judgment of Congresses that were 
not full of members who had been 
repudiated at the polls or were retir- 
ing from office. 

These proceedings, then, are ab- 
solutely unprecedented in the post- 
lame-duck era. Despite this fact, I 
do not question the raw constitu- 

tional power of the current lame- 
duck House to vote out a bill of im- 
peachment. But I do respectfully 
submit that the Constitution treats a 
lame-duck bill of impeachment in 
precisely the same way it treats any 
other House bill that remains pend- 
ing in the Senate on January 3. Like 
all other bills, a lame-duck bill of 
impeachment loses its constitutional 
force with the death of the House 
that passed it. 

This point was rightly ignored be- 
fore the election, since everybody 
expected the new Congress to be 
more Republican than its predeces- 
sor. On this assumption, it was per- 
fectly plausible for this distinguished 
Committee to proceed in earnest-if 
the 105th  House voted to impeach, 
there was every reason to suppose 
that the 106th House would quickly 
reaffirm its judgment, and send the 
matter on its way to the Senate. But 
now that the voters have spoken, the 
constitutional status of lame-duck 
impeachments deserves far more 
attention than it has been given. 

Worse yet, we cannot rely much 
on the past for guidance. The closest 
precedent comes from the 1988 im- 
peachment of federal district judge 
Alcee Hastings. The 100th  House 
had impeached Hastings, but both 
sides wanted to delay the Senate 
trial to the 101st session, and the 
Senate Rules Committee granted 
their request (U.S. Senate 1988). 
The Senate's perfunctory six-page 
report, however, does not resolve 
any of the key issues raised by the 
present case. 

Judge Hastings wanted to delay 
his Senate trial as long as possible, 
and did not even try to argue that 
his bill of impeachment expired on 
January 3 for fear that his Senate 
trial would be expedited. What is 
more, Hastings was a judge not a 
president; and he was impeached 
during a normal session of Congress, 
not by a Congress of lameducks. As 
a consequence, the Senate commit- 
tee understandably failed to consider 
any of the crucial constitutional is- 
sues raised by the present case. It 
did not even pause to consider the 
fact that the people decisively 
sought to limit the capacity of lame- 
duck Congresses by solemnly enact- 
ing the Twentieth Amendment. If 

we take this amendment seriously, it 
means that a lame-duck House 
should not be allowed to relieve its 
freshly elected successor of its sol- 
emn obligation to determine 
whether the nation's political life 
should be disrupted by a lengthy 
trial of the president in the Senate. 
In short, whatever decision is 
reached by this Committee and this 
House this month, the Constitution 
requires the newly elected House to 
reconsider impeachment afresh in 
January. 

Moreover, if the next House of 
Representatives tries to evade its 
fundamental constitutional responsi- 
bility, the Senate will not be free to 
dispense with the problem of lame- 
duck impeachment by a simple ref- 
erence to its 1988 decision in Judge 
Hastings' case. Not only does this 
report fail to confront the basic is- 
sues, but the Senate Rules Commit- 
tee, which authored the report, will 
not even be the final judge of the 
matter this time around. Instead, the 
constitutionality of a lame-duck im- 
peachment will be the first question 
confronting Chief Justice Rehnquist, 
the designated presiding officer at 
the Senate trial. Following the pre- 
cedent established by Chief Justice 
Chase before and during the trial of 
President Andrew Johnson, the chief 
justice will rightly assert his author- 
ity to rule on all procedural issues 
(Ackerman 1998, 467-68). And the 
first of these should undoubtedly be 
a motion by the president's lawyers 
to quash the lame-duck impeach- 
ment as constitutionally invalid un- 
less reaffirmed by the 106th House. 

Now, Chief Justice Rehnquist is in 

fact a scholar of the impeachment 
process, having written an entire 
book on the subject. I am sure that 
he will be fully aware of the histori- 
cal importance of his conduct of the 
proceeding, and will quickly grasp 
the obvious dangers of lame-duck 
impeachment. Moreover, there are 
many strands in the chief justice's 
jurisprudence which will lead him to 
give great weight to the idea that it 
is only a truly democratic House, 
and not a collection of lameducks, 
that has the constitutional authority 
to proceed against a man who has 
been fairly elected to the presidency 
by the people of the United States. 

PSOnline www.apsanet.org 

29 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Without any hint of partisanship, he 
would be well within his rights to 
quash the lame-duck impeachment 
and remand the matter back to the 
House. 

Since the status of lame-duck im- 

peachments has never before been 
briefed and argued in the modern 
era inaugurated by the Twentieth 
Amendment, it is impossible to 
make a firm guess as to the way the 
chief justice will rule on the matter. 
Only one thing is clear. It would be 
far better for the country and the 
constitution if the chief justice is 
never put to this test. As Alexander 
Bickel, my great predecessor in the 
Sterling Chair at Yale, frequently 
reminded us, the health of our con- 
stitutional system is not measured by 
the number of "hard cases" that 
have been resolved by clear rulings. 
It is measured instead by the num- 
ber of statesmen in our history who, 
seeing a hard case on the horizon, 
act in sensible ways so as to avoid 
ever precipitating a constitutional 
crisis. 

If this Committee and the present 

House choose to go forward and 
vote in favor of a bill of impeach- 
ment, I respectfully urge the new 
Speaker of the 106th Congress to do 
the right thing, and remit the matter 
once again for consideration by the 
new House. Suppose, however, he 
does not do so; suppose further that 
the chief justice, when pressed, up- 
holds the continuing validity of the 
lame-duck impeachment despite the 
expiration of the 105th  Congress. 
Even then, the new House of Rep- 
resentatives will not be able to es- 
cape the need for another up or 
down vote to determine whether a 
majority of members continue to 
favor impeachment. 

To see why, consider that the 
House must select a group of its 
members, called "impeachment 
managers," to present its case 
against the president at the Senate 
trial. Without the energetic prosecu- 
tion of the case by the managers, 
the Senate trial cannot go forward. 
No managers, no trial; but only the 
new House can appoint the manag- 
ers. This was done in Judge Hast- 
ings' case, and it certainly should be 
required in the case of a sitting 

president facing a lame-duck im- 
peachment. 

Thus, even if the new House lead- 

ership chooses to rely on a lame- 
duck impeachment, and refuses to 
allow another vote on a fresh bill 
before sending the matter to the 
Senate, there is no way it can avoid 
the need to test the majority senti- 
ment of the new House. By voting 
against the slate of managers, a ma- 
jority of the new House will be in a 
position to stop the impeachment 
process dead in its tracks. 

It is a big mistake, then, for the 
distinguished members of this Com- 
mittee and this House to suppose 
that they are the final judges of the 
bill of impeachment. To be sure, the 
recommendations of this Committee 
and the vote of the entire House 
deserve serious consideration by the 
members taking office next month. 
But so do the judgments of the vot- 
ers, as expressed at the elections in 
November. I respectfully urge you to 
consider this point as you determine 
your present course. 

To put my point in operational 
terms: If you don't believe that a bill 
of impeachment or the election of 
impeachment managers will gain the 
majority support of the next House, 
the wise thing to do is to stop the 
process now. While it may be em- 
barrassing to reverse gears after so 
much momentum has been gener- 
ated in favor of a bill of impeach- 
ment, the leadership of the next 
House will confront a much more 
embarrassing situation if it becomes 
evident that its slender proimpeach- 
ment majority has vanished over the 
Christmas recess. 

II 

So much for the first big mistake. 
A second mistake involves a persis- 
tent confusion about impeachment 
standards. People keep on talking as 
if the standards that apply to judges 
also apply to presidents. But a 
glance at the constitutional text is 
enough to establish that this is a 
mistake. Under Article III of the 
Constitution, any federal judge may 
be deprived of his lifetime job if he 
fails the test of "good Behavior." 
Thus, the House and Senate may 
remove a judge even if his "bad" 

behavior would not otherwise 
amount to a "high Crime and Mis- 
demeanor." 

In contrast, the Constitution does 
not allow presidents to be removed 
for want of "good behavior"-for the 
obvious reason that he does not 
serve for life, but is under regular 
electoral scrutiny by the people. 
Moreover, there should be no doubt 
that the Framers were serious in 
restricting themselves to high crimes 
and misdemeanors. In contrast to 
the impeachment clause, other tex- 
tual references to crime do not con- 
tain similar emphasis on high crime. 
Thus, the Extradition Clause applies 
to anyone who commits "Treason, 
Felony or other Crime," and Article 
I, Section 6 gives every congressman 
an immunity from arrest except in 
cases of "Treason, Felony, and 
Breach of the Peace." This stands in 
sharp contrast to the high crimes 
required of presidents, and the mere 
breaches of good behavior required 
in the case of judges. It is a bad mis- 
take, then, to assume that the rela- 
tively low impeachment standard 
applied to judges also applies to the 
president. The mere fact that they 
are undoubtedly removable for per- 
jury does not imply that the presi- 
dent is also impeachable for the 
same offense. 

Which leads me to the third and 
last mistake. Perhaps because of the 
role of the special prosecutor in this 
case, there has been a constant 
temptation to imagine that what we 
are doing here is considering 
whether you should issue something 
similar to a criminal indictment. 
This is a mistake today, even though 
there was a time long ago when this 
view was plausible. When impeach- 
ment began in the English parlia- 
ment five hundred years ago, this 
medieval assembly still thought of 
itself as a High Court, and often 
subjected the victims of impeach- 
ment to dire criminal punishments. 
But the Framers of our Constitu- 

tion self-consciously rejected these 
medieval precedents. They carefully 
limited the sanctions for impeach- 
ment to removal from political of- 
fice, and the like. Once a president 
departs, he is fully subject to the 
rigors of criminal prosecution. 
Rather than standing above the law, 

30 

PS  March 1999 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

of President Andrew Johnson in 
1868. Though this impeachment ef- 
fort barely failed to gain two-thirds 
support in the Senate, it drained 
effective power from the presiden- 
cy-to the point where Woodrow 
Wilson, writing in 1885, could de- 
scribe our system as "congressional 
government." And it could readily 
happen again. Imagine, for example, 
that the political wheel turns and 
that a Democratic Congress con- 
fronts a Republican president in the 
year 2001. Can there be any doubt 
that enterprising members of the 
House will be tempted to use the 
Clinton precedent to unseat the next 
Republican president at the first po- 
litically propitious opportunity? 
My study of history and human 
nature convinces me that once such 
an abusive cycle of impeachments 
has begun, it will be very difficult to 
keep the bitter disagreements gener- 
ated by our often-divided govern- 
ment under control. 

Let me emphasize that, though 
the lawyers for President Clinton 
asked me to testify today, I would 
be equally emphatic in my opposi- 
tion to any future effort by a Demo- 
cratic Congress to impeach a Re- 
publican president for anything short 
of an outright assault on the founda- 
tions of the Republic. But it is a far, 
far better thing to cut short a cycle 
of incivility before it starts. I re- 
spectfully urge the distinguished 
members of this Committee to defer 
further action on impeachment to 
the next session of Congress, when 
our newly elected representatives 
will be in a much better position to 
decide on the kind of action-ranging 
from impeachment to censure to 
nothing-that is most appropriate in 
this case. 

William Jefferson Clinton probably 
runs a greater risk of an indictment 
for perjury in the year 2001 than any 
other American citizen alive today. 
This committee does not sit as a 
grand jury of the District of Colum- 
bia, but as a grand inquest repre- 
senting the nation. It should not fo- 
cus on the details of a particular 
crime, but ask itself a very different 
question: Does the conduct alleged 
in this case constitute such a threat 
to the very foundations of the Re- 
public that it is legitimate to deprive 
the people of their freely elected 
choice as president? 

For two centuries, the Congress 
has shown great restraint in dealing 
with this question. From the era of 
George Washington to that of Ro- 
nald Reagan, presidents have often 
stretched their constitutional author- 
ity to the very limits, making unpop- 
ular decisions which have often 
proved to be in the larger interest of 
the nation. And yet only one Presi- 
dent-Andrew Johnson-has been 
impeached, and only one-Richard 
Nixon-has resigned under threat of 
impeachment. The presidential con- 
duct involved in both cases 
amounted to an assault on the very 
foundations of our democracy. An- 
drew Johnson sought to block the 
enactment of the Fourteenth 
Amendment, and its guarantees of 
equal protection and due process to 
all American citizens (Ackerman 
1988, chap. 8). Richard Nixon 
sought to undermine the very foun- 
dations of the two-party system. 
Once we lower the impeachment 
standard to include conduct that 
does not amount to such clear and 
danger to our constitutional order, 
we will do grievous damage to the 
independence of the presidency. 
James Madison saw this. At the 
[Constitutional] Convention, he op- 
posed the addition of any language 
which would water down the solemn 
requirement of a "high Crime and 
Misdemeanor." A lower standard, 
he said, would transform the Presi- 
dency from an office with a fixed 
four-year term to one "whose term 
will be equivalent to a tenure during 
the pleasure of the Senate" (Far- 
rand 1996, 550). Indeed, when the 
Founders voted on the impeachment 
standard, they did not, in fact, vote 

on the provision that appears in the 
text today. Instead, they actually ap- 
proved a standard that required the 
proof of a "high crime and misde- 
meanor against the state" [emphasis 
added]. These last three words were 
later eliminated by the Committee 
on Style, which had absolutely no 
authority to change the substance of 
any provision. Thus, the Committee 
must have thought that the text's 
insistence on "high crime and misde- 
meanors" already included the re- 
quirement of an assault on the foun- 
dations of the American state. 

And as we have seen, this is the 
standard that has, in fact, consis- 
tently governed the House's actions 
over the past two centuries. If the 
House had been operating under 
any lower standard, our history 
books would have been littered with 
many, many bills of impeachment, 
and not only two. When judged 
against this consistent history of re- 
strained congressional interpretation 
of the impeachment clause, there 
can be little doubt that the present 
case falls far short of the standard 
set by the Framers when they in- 
sisted on "high crimes and misde- 
meanor against the state." 

Indeed, if the Committee does 
find President Clinton's conduct im- 
peachable, it will be setting a prece- 
dent that will haunt this country for 
generations to come. Under the new 
and low standard, impeachment will 
become an ordinary part of our po- 
litical system. Whenever Congress 
and the presidency are controlled by 
different political parties, the Con- 
gress will regularly use impeachment 
as a weapon to serve its partisan 
purposes. 

After all, presidents are often 
called upon to make fateful deci- 
sions of the first importance, and, in 
the short term at least, these deci- 
sions can be very unpopular. Once 
the House's centuries-long tradition 
of constitutional restraint has been 
destroyed, its future political leader- 
ship will be sorely tempted to re- 
spond to unpopular decisions by reg- 
ularly seeking to force the president 
from office. The result would be a 
massive shift toward a British-style 
system of parliamentary government. 
This is in fact what happened in 
the aftermath of the impeachment 

PSOnline  www.apsanet.org 

31 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1. This is a leitmotiv linking Bickel's early 
works like The Least Dangerous Branch 

(1962) to his posthumous The Morality 
of Consent (1975). 

Note 

References 

Ackerman, Bruce. 1998. We the People. Cam- 
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Bickel, Alexander. 1962. The Least Dangerous 
Branch: The Supreme Court at the Bar of 
Politics. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill. 
-.  1975. The Morality of Consent. New Ha- 

ven: Yale University Press. 

Farrand, Max. 1986. The Records of the Fed- 
eral Convention of 1787. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 

Nagle, John Copeland. 1997. A Twentieth 

Amendment Parable." New York University 
Law Review 72(May): 470-94. 

U.S. Senate. Senate Rules Committee. 1988. 
S. Rept. 100-542, 100th  Cong., 2nd Sess., 
Sept 22. 

32 

PS  March 1999 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Samuel  H. Beer 
continued from page 25 
tial importance to the public wel- 
fare." Because of these broad and 
weighty consequences, impeachment 
is primarily a political, not a judicial, 
act. 

As a political act, impeachment, 
like a vote of no confidence, passes 
judgement on and enforces responsi- 
bility on the executive power. In the 
British system, that responsibility 
runs directly to the legislature. In 
the American system, on the con- 

trary, that responsibility runs to the 
legislature only secondarily and in 
special circumstances. For us, the 
responsibility of the president is es- 
sentially and directly to the voters. 
The legislature, as a separate office, 
separately elected, likewise is held 
accountable by the voters. This sepa- 
ration of powers is fundamental in 
our constitutional design and is a 
main point of distinction from the 
British system. The direct responsi- 
bility of both branches to the voters 
expresses the sovereignty of the peo- 
ple as the ultimate authority of our 
constitution and of the government 
established under it. 

As the framers struggled to give 
expression to this principle, they ran 
into a problem. How were our liber- 
ties to be protected against misuse 
of power by the executive between 
quadrennial elections? At the Phila- 
delphia convention during the sum- 
mer of 1787, they explored various 
possibilities, such as appeals to the 

Supreme Court and similar bodies. 
The states, likewise, we may note, 
experimented in theory and practice 
with a variety of methods of bridg- 
ing this gap. At the last moment, the 
framers incorporated a structure 
almost exactly in the form then be- 
ing used in England in the impeach- 
ment of Warren Hastings. This de- 
vice, although it had ancient roots, 
had come to special prominence in 
the seventeenth and eighteenth cen- 
turies when Great Britain also for a 
time displayed a separation of pow- 
ers, as a still powerful and indepen- 
dent monarch faced off against the 
rising assertions of the parliament. 
In those circumstances, impeach- 
ment was adopted by the parliamen- 
tarians as a means of enforcing re- 
sponsibility on the monarch through 
action against his ministers. When, 
finally, the monarch was eased out 
of politics the old fusion of execu- 
tive and legislative power was taken 
over by a committee of the parlia- 
ment-the cabinet. Now, the interim 
method of getting a hold on the ex- 
ecutive was dropped in favor of a 
vote of confidence which performed 
more effectively the function of en- 
forcing responsibility on parliament. 
At the same time that impeachment 
was dying out in Britain, it was 
taken up by Americans, who found 
in it a way of supplementing the 
principal mechanism of democratic 
responsibility by quadrennial elec- 
tions. The broad scope of impeach- 
ment was embodied in a very differ- 
ent system. 

Where the ultimate sovereign is 
the people, the interference of one 
power, the legislature in its exercise 
of such a dire responsibility as re- 
moval of a popularly elected presi- 
dent imposes severe duties on the 
legislature. The Congress itself, not 
the primary source of authority, but 
only a creature of the people, must 
act in lieu of the people between 
quadrennial elections. At their best, 
the legislators will do what the peo- 
ple, at their best, would do, weigh- 
ing the pluses and minuses of the 
record and the promise as a whole, 
asking, "Does the national interest 
require the removal from office of 
this president?" In the case of Presi- 
dent Clinton, the American people 
have twice answered that question 
by electing him to the American 
presidency. If we seek further light 
on the American mind, surveys of 
opinion continue to confirm that 
answer which also in no way is dis- 
turbed by the outcome of the recent 
midterm elections. 

The failure to consider the whole 

record of Clinton's presidency in 
foreign and domestic affairs could 
have severe long-run costs. The re- 
moval of a president, thanks to such 
neglect in judgement, could damage 
our democratic system. Consider the 
temptations which this precedent 
would excite in a Congress of a dif- 
ferent party against a future presi- 
dent of a different party. As a great 
historian, Henry Adams, said, on the 
failed attempt of the Jeffersonians to 
remove Justice Chase, impeachment 
is not a suitable activity for party 
politics. 

PSOnline 

www.apsanet.org 

33 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Matthew H. Holden Jr. 
continued from page 25 
commentators whose profession it is 
to express opinion. I can recall a 
television commentary, in August 
1998, when panelists were asked 
about the reason that public audi- 
ences generally did not have the 
same intense feelings about the 
Clinton-Lewinsky information as the 
television journalists. One panelist 
said: "We'll just have to educate 
them." Such commentary fails to 
consider that the general public may 
already have made its judgments, 
however rough, that the "cost" of 
further action against the president 
may exceed the "benefit" to the po- 
litical system. The general public has 
good reason to believe that, on the 
basis of past performance, its evalu- 
ation of such a cost-benefit ratio 
may be more clear-minded than that 
of many reporters and editors from 
whom they have heard. 

To initiate an impeachment ([an] 
accusation of asserted "high crime" 
or "high misdemeanor") against the 
president would impose far too 
heavy a burden upon the political 
system since no reasonable person 
argues that the acts under discussion 
in any way disable, or potentially 
disable, the Congress. Neither Con- 
gress nor [the] courts [are] disabled, 
or under any potentiality of being 
disabled, or the president would not 
now be on the defensive. Impeach- 
ment and conviction of a president 
would mean replacing an entire ad- 
ministration. 

Within the parameters of the 
Constitution, some significant insti- 
tutional features have developed, 
and it is to their interrelationships 
that the idea of the "system" refers. 
Our ability to operate under this 
Constitution, with a strong presi- 
dency, has given the United States a 
remarkably stable government. If, 
for example, the United States had a 
parliamentary regime, President Re- 
agan probably would have had to 
yield in 1982 under the pressure of 
economic recession. If that were so, 
he could never have evolved to a de 
facto partnership, as some see it, 
with Gorbachev toward winding 
down the arms race. 

The president has a unique com- 

bination of formal and informal 
powers that revolve around his cen- 
trality to the executive branch, his 
role as the prime leader in national 
security policy, his leadership of one 
of the political parties, and his twen- 
tieth-century role in legislative lead- 
ership, [are] strongly affected by all 
his other powers, but grounded in 
his possession of the veto, which 
effectively makes him one-third of 
the legislative process. 

The president does not prevail all 
the time in these domains, or even 
in any one of them. But the presi- 
dent's role in several of them is al- 
most always critical, and is so even 
now.1 

The normal requirement of Amer- 

ican government engages all these 
resources, as presidents work with, 
against, and around a variety of al- 
lies and opponents. If any president 
were to be removed, no other per- 
son could exercise equivalent leader- 
ship until the successor had devel- 
oped his own relationships. 

The level of cost to the system 
goes far beyond this. It is in the in- 
tense animosity that almost surely 
will have developed. 

These seventeenth-century cases 

that I mentioned earlier are not 
mere decoration, but have direct 
application. Lawyers, of course, use 
them to trace the very meaning of 
the law itself (U.S. House of Repre- 
sentatives 1974). These historical 
cases help me to state a simple hy- 
pothesis: Whatever new weapon is 
introduced into the political battle 
tends soon to become domesticated, 
even banalized, so that its use is 
more and more common judgment. 
It will be adapted and adopted by 
many other groups. James J. Kil- 
patrick was not talking about im- 
peachments, but about [having] ... 
the Supreme Court hold the Paula 
Jones law suit out until the conclu- 
sion of the president's term. But his 
statement [that] the decision "is 
likely to encourage trumped-up ha- 
rassments of future presidents on 
down the line" (1998, 46) is appo- 
site. 

Impeachment investigations, 
trumped-up and otherwise, will vir- 
tually be mandated by going forward 
on this one. Richard H. Tawney, 
who wrote an account of the govern- 

mental career of Lionel Cranfield, 
also wrote that "The resurrection of 
(this) antiquated weapon  .  .  . pro- 
duced some forty impeachments be- 
tween 1621 and 1688" (1958, 248). 
That is sixty-seven years (67) times 
twelve months (12) for a sum of 
eight hundred and four months 
(804). Divided by forty (40), the 
number of impeachments, the result 
is, on a straight-line average, one 
impeachment every twenty months. 
In fact, of course, these impeach- 
ments came in clusters, rather than 
on a straight-line average basis. But 
the echoes from seventeenth-century 
England, with its fifteen to twenty 
impeachments during a three year 
period, with numerous impeach- 
ments on slender evidence (Holds- 
worth 1924, 260), are not to [be] 
taken lightly. In the slow-moving 
seventeenth century, factions 
brought each other to the test- 
whether routinely over long periods 
or more intensely in periodic bursts. 
We should not expect an impeach- 
ment in 1999 or 2000 to let the 
United States slip back into political 
tranquillity. 

The better hypothesis is that we 

should expect more turmoil. The 
twentieth century has been, since 
World War II perhaps, somewhat 
similar to the seventeenth century in 
one respect: intense ideological an- 
tagonisms. Even in the past twenty 
years, when it might have been 
thought to decline, there are intense 
ideological battle groupings, easily 
activated. The resultant turmoil will 
be made far worse by an impeach- 
ment on the grounds that we now 
know. Massive distrust will feed it. 
Ideological antagonism will feed it. 
Well-financed political entrepre- 
neurs will feed it. Instantaneous 
communication of information, dis- 
information, and misinformation will 
feed it. Impeachment as technique 
will increasingly be domesticated as 
legal defense funds, political action 
committees, and many other tech- 
niques have been domesticated. Pri- 
vate groups will urge their congres- 
sional friends to initiate calls for 
independent counsels or other pro- 
cedures to inquire into whether 
there might be a basis for determin- 
ing that someone has violated, or 
conspired to violate, some law. 

34 

PS  March 1999 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Those who urge this resurrection 
should, if they believe that the polit- 
ical system concern is worthwhile, 
have a public duty to weigh carefully 
whether the result they achieve is 
the result they want to achieve. 
It is thus likely that we will see 
attempts to initiate impeachment 
actions against other presidents. In 
each instance, one may assume that 
such effort will be made by people 
who genuinely believe their charges, 
and who believe they have credible 
cases. Since all successful efforts de- 
pend upon coalitions, explicit or de 
facto, such efforts will become suc- 
cessful only as varieties of other 
groups and persons join the efforts 
on a variety of grounds. There must 
be a number of upwardly mobile 
congressmen, senators, and gover- 
nors-Republican as well as Demo- 
cratic-who should expect to find 
themselves absorbed in such contro- 
versies over the next two, three, or 
four presidential cycles. Congres- 
sional leaders know that impeach- 
ment does not have to stop with a 
president. The same provision (Arti- 
cle II, Section 4) also applies to "the 
Vice President, and all civil Officers 
of the United States." Cabinet offic- 
ers and sub-cabinet officers are also 
civil officers. There is no reason for 
adversaries not to seek to invoke the 
process whenever they are deeply 
angry, or simply calculatedly ration- 
al, about some action. Is it beyond 
the imagination that, as many peo- 
ple genuinely believe that abortion is 
an ultimate evil, impeachment at- 
tempts would not be initiated 
against some secretary of Health 
and Human Services on the basis 
that he or she is conducting policies 
favorable to this perceived evil? Is 
there any reason to believe that 
some attorney general, even the 
present one, might not be the object 
of attempted impeachment actions if 
he (or, in the present case, she) 
were resolutely to decline to initiate 
some independent counsel investiga- 
tion desired by Senate leaders? Is 
there any reason to suppose that 
such an attorney general would be 
even more at peril for limiting, or 
exercising the legal discretion to ter- 
minate, an independent counsel in- 
vestigation if the independent coun- 
sel were to wish to continue? Is the 

independent counsel, as a civil offi- 
cer, also within the scope of Article 
II, Section 4, if there are those who 
are motivated to make the effort? 
Even regulatory commissioners, 

beyond presidential direction, are 
also civil officers, are they not? 
What reason is there for affected 
interests not to use this newly avail- 
able weapon? While the impeach- 
ment of federal judges does not pro- 
vide much to go on, as to standards 
for evaluating presidential impeach- 
ments, there is one response in 
which the reverse situation becomes 
part of the system threat. The Arti- 
cle III courts [are also] subject to 
the same threats of punitive im- 
peachment actions-regardless of 
whether they succeed-if someone 
becomes dedicated to making their 
lives miserable. 

This is, again, not to be taken 
lightly. Even under the stricter stan- 
dards that apply to Article III 
judges. There are members of Con- 
gress who have, within the past 
three years, been known to argue 
that judges making "wrong" deci- 
sions should be impeached.2 Will 
this approach be withheld if federal 
trial judges depart from what [have] 
been thought [of as] conventional 
procedures? For example, a trial 
judge had appointed a special mas- 
ter to conduct certain proceedings 
involving the Justice Department's 
current litigation against Microsoft. 
In due course, he was obliged to 
dispense with the special master by 
virtue of an appeals court decision. 
The judge has reportedly "told law- 
yers for both sides that he may ask 
[this dismissed special master] to 
write a 'friend of the court' brief 
summarizing his views on the case." 
Is it beyond reasonable belief that, 
under intense conditions, someone 
would choose to impeach such a 
judge in such a case? 

Clearly, my approach is framed, as 
stated in the first place, in political 
system terms. This does not imply 
that impeachment should never be 
employed. It does, however, suggest 
a balancing test: specifically, that the 
gravity of the presidential offenses 
should be weighed against the po- 
tential of far greater costs to the 
whole country. The assigning of 
some behavior to the category of 

PSOnline 

www.apsanet.org 

those "other high Crimes and Mis- 
demeanors"-parallel to treason and 
bribery-should be done only with 
utmost seriousness, and assessed 
with maintaining the essentials of 
the political system (or "the struc- 
ture of government" or "institutional 
stability") as the prime purpose. 

The maintenance of this kind of 
seriousness will be increasingly prob- 
lematic, in somewhat the same way 
of maintaining a high level of dignity 
has already proved problematic. 
House leadership has, presumably 
with all seriousness, urged dignity. 
But since the beginning of 1998, ev- 
ery level of the inquiry has become 
more raucous than anyone in the 
leadership predicted before. It will 
continue to go beyond control unless 
there is some clear decision that 
produces the contrary. Alexander 
Hamilton was right to say in Federal- 
ist 65 (423): "The prosecution of 
[actions deemed impeachable] ... 
will seldom fail to agitate the pas- 
sions of the whole community, and 
to divide it into parties more or less 
friendly or inimical to the accused." 
That tells us that such matters 
should be approached with prudence 
and wisdom. 

The impeachment process lends 

itself to the persistent conflict of 
factions. Each of which will seek to 
use the process to advance its own 
material goods and its own revered 
symbols, to pursue vengeance and 
feud as if they were Capulet and 
Montague. Case in point: On Octo- 
ber 8, 1997, during the House de- 
bate on the resolution to launch an 
impeachment inquiry into the con- 
duct of President Clinton, one man 
from Alabama called the CNN con- 
servative phone line to say that what 
he enjoyed was frustration and de- 
feat in the eyes of the liberals who 
had been having it all their way, 
having been in power for 40 years. 
Such a statement should be seen as 
the cloud no bigger than a man's 
hand. Again, to cite Hamilton: "In 
many cases it will connect itself with 
the pre-existing factions, and will 
enlist all their animosities, partiali- 
ties, influence, and interest on one 
side or on the other; and in such 
cases there will always be the great- 
est danger that the decision will be 
regulated more by the comparative 

35 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

strength of parties, than by the real 
demonstrations of innocence or 
guilt." 

The importance of prosecution, 

with impeachment as its leading 
case, as a weapon of recurrent 
group conflict becomes more impor- 

tant as each side disputes the moral- 
ity and the methods of the other. 
Political leaders have already lost 
too much of the lessons of how to 
trade with each other and learned 
instead to turn each conflict into a 
dramatic morality play, or to an oc- 

casion of political vengeance. The 
magnification of conflict is some- 
thing we have seen before. Congress 
should [do] nothing further to let 
this lion loose in the streets. Pru- 
dence and wisdom argue for termi- 
nating this process. Close the cage. 

* Communication, substantive or technical, 

on this statement should be directed to the 
author at: Department of Government and 
Foreign Affairs, University of Virginia, Room 
232 Cabell Hall, Charlottesville, VA 22903; 
Fax: 804-924-3359; Email: mh3q@virginia.edu. 

1. This is reflected in Republican protests 

about the farm bill, which they have had to 
accept much more on President Clinton's 
terms than they wish, even as he faces the 
impeachment proceeding. 

2. The references in support of this are not 

immediately at hand, but they will be found 
in the ABA Journal and in the National Law 
Journal. 

Notes 

References 

Holdsworth, William. 1924. A History of Eng- 

lish Law. Boston: Little, Brown. 
Federalist 65. [1787]1937. New York: The 

Modern Library. 

Kilpatrick, James J. 1998. "U. S. v. Clinton." 

National Review, September 28. 

Miller, Frank W., Robert O. Dawson, George 

Dix, and Raymond Parnas. 1991. Prosecu- 
tion and Adjudication. 4th ed. Westbury, 
CT: The Foundation Press. 

Tawney, Richard H. 1958. Business and Poli- 

tics under James I: Lionel Cranfield as Mer- 
chant and Minister. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

U. S. House of Representatives. Committee 
on the Judiciary. 1974. Impeachment: Se- 
lected Materials on Procedure. 93rd Con- 
gress, 2nd Sess. Washington, DC:  Govern- 
ment Printing Office. 

36 

PS  March 1999 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass  Sunstein 
continued from page 25 
promote lies or continued proce- 
dural objections to the underlying 
inquiry, even amount to abuse of 
power. Second, it might be said that 
whatever history and past practice 
show, we should understand the 
Constitution's text to allow the Pres- 
ident to be impeached, via the dem- 
ocratic channels, whenever a serious 
charge, of one sort or another, is 
both made and proved. I take up 
these two responses in sequence. 
If the first claim is that certain 
kinds of falsehoods under oath, per- 
jury, conspiracy to lie, and so forth, 
could be a legitimate basis for im- 
peachment, there can be no objec- 
tion. A false statement under oath 
about a practice of using the IRS to 
punish political opponents would 
almost certainly be an impeachable 
offense; so too about a false state- 
ment about the acceptance of a 
bribe to veto legislation. Thus, false 
statements under oath might well be 
a legitimate basis for impeachment. 
Indeed, lying to the American peo- 
ple may itself be an impeachable 
offense if, for example, the president 
says that a treaty should be signed 
because it is in the best interest of 
the United States when in fact he 
supports the treaty because its signa- 
tories have agreed to give him a lot 
of money. But it does not diminish 
the universal importance of telling 
the truth under oath to say that 
whether perjury or a false statement 
is an impeachable offense depends 
on what it is a false statement about. 
The same is true for "obstruction of 
justice" or interactions with advisers 
designed to promote the underlying 
falsehood. 

Anyone can be prosecuted for 
violating the criminal law, and if the 
president has violated the criminal 
law, he is properly subject to crimi- 
nal prosecution after his term ends. 
But it does not make sense to say, 
for example, that an American presi- 
dent could be impeached for false 
statements under oath in connection 
with a traffic accident in which he 
was involved, or that a false state- 
ment under oath, designed to pro- 
tect a friend in a negligence action, 
is a legitimate basis for impeach- 

ment. Probably the best general 
statement is that a false statement 
under oath is an appropriate basis 
for impeachment if and only if the 
false statement involved conduct 
that by itself raises serious questions 
about abuse of office. A false state- 
ment about an illicit consensual sex- 
ual relationship, and a "conspiracy" 
to cover up that relationship, is not 
excusable or acceptable; but it is not 
a "high Crime or Misdemeanor" 
under the Constitution. The same is 
true for the other allegations made 
thus far. It trivializes the criminal 
law to say that some violations of 
the criminal law do not matter, or 
matter much. But it trivializes the 
Constitution to say that any false 
statement under oath, regardless of 
its subject matter, provides a proper 
basis for impeachment. 

Of course people of good faith 
could say that the president has a 
special obligation to the truth, espe- 
cially in a court of law, and that it is 
therefore reasonable to consider im- 
peachment whenever the president 
has violated that obligation. It is cer- 
tainly true that as the nation's chief 
law enforcement officer, the presi- 
dent as a special obligation to the 
truth. Perhaps such people also be- 
lieve that false statements under 
oath, and associated misconduct, are 
genuinely unique and that impeach- 
ment for such statements and such 
misconduct would therefore fail to 
do damage to our historical practice 
of resorting to impeachment only in 
the most extreme cases. But this po- 
sition has serious problems of its 
own. Even if it would be possible, in 
principle, for reasonable people to 
confine the current alleged basis for 
impeachment, it is extremely doubt- 
ful that the line could be held in 
practice. Thus, a judgment that the 
current grounds are constitutionally 
appropriate would set an exceed- 
ingly dangerous precedent for the 
future, a precedent that could 
threaten to turn impeachment into a 
political weapon, in a way that 
would produce considerable instabil- 
ity in the constitutional order. 

Consider, for example, the fact 
that reasonable people can and do 
find tax evasion more serious than 
false statements about a consensual 
sexual activity, and that reasonable 

PSOnline 

www.apsanet.org 

people can and do find an alleged 
unlawful arms deal more serious, 
from the constitutional standpoint, 
than either. Here is the underlying 
problem. Whenever serious charges 
are made, participants in politics 
may well be pushed in particular 
directions by predictable partisan 
pressures. The serious risk is there- 
fore that, contrary to the constitu- 
tional plan, impeachment will be- 
come a partisan tool, to be used by 
reference to legitimate arguments by 
people who have a great deal to 
gain. 

A special risk of a ready resort to 
the impeachment instrument is that 
it would interact, in destructive 
ways, with existing trends in Ameri- 
can democracy. Those trends-to- 
ward an emphasis on scandals and 
toward sensationalistic charges-have 
characterized the conduct of mem- 
bers of both parties in the last de- 
cades. For those who love this coun- 
try and its institutions, the use of 
impeachment, in such cases, is quite 
ominous-not least because of the 
demonstrable good faith of many of 
those who are recommending it. 

From the standpoint of the consti- 

tutional structure, it is far better to 
try a kind of line in the sand, one 
that has been characteristic of our 
constitutional practice for all of our 
history: A practice of invoking im- 
peachment only for the largest cases 
of abuse of distinctly presidential 
authority. 

Text, history, and longstanding 
practice suggest that the notion of 
"high Crimes and Misdemeanors" 
should generally be understood to 
refer to large-scale abuses that in- 
volve the authority that comes from 
occupying a particular public office. 
Thus a president who accepted a 
bribe from a foreign nation-or who 
failed to attend to the public busi- 
ness during a war-would be legiti- 
mately subject to impeachment. Per- 
jury, or false statements under oath, 
could certainly qualify as impeach- 
able offenses if they involved (for 
example) lies about using the Inter- 
nal Revenue Service to punish one's 
political opponents or about giving 
arms, unlawfully, to another nation. 
But the most ordinary predicate for 
impeachment is an act, by the presi- 
dent, that amounts to a large-scale 

37 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

abuse of distinctly presidential au- 
thority. 

If there is ever to be impeach- 
ment outside of that category of 
cases, it should be exceedingly rare. 

The current allegations against Pres- 
ident Clinton do not justify a depar- 
ture from our traditional practices. 
Such a departure would be not trivi- 
ally but profoundly destabilizing; it 

would be far wiser to adhere to our 
traditions and to leave the hardest 
constitutional problems for another, 
and better, occasion. 

38 

PS  March 1999 

This content downloaded from 185.2.32.89 on Sat, 14 Jun 2014 02:39:06 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

