Article 3 The Wages of Stardom: Law and the Winner-TakeAll Society: A Debate Robert H. Frank Sherwin Rosen Cass R. Sunstein Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable Recommended Citation Frank, Robert H.; Murphy, Kevin M.; Rosen, Sherwin; and Sunstein, Cass R. (1999) "The Wages of Stardom: Law and the WinnerTake-All Society: A Debate," The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable: Vol. 6: Iss. 1, Article 3. Available at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable/vol6/iss1/3 This Article is brought to you for free and open access by Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. Each year The Roundtable sponsors symposia on topics in which law and some other academic or social interest intersect. "The Wages of Stardom: Law and the Winner-Take-All Society" is our first symposium of 1999, and it focused on how the "Winner-Take-All" phenomenon affects lawyer salaries and faculty hiring and how both relate to the overall legal profession, legal representation, income inequality, and other issues. Roundtable Rosen started the academic debate on our topic with his article "The Economics of Superstars" in The Ameican Economic Review. Kevin M. Murphy is the George Pratt Shultz Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business. In 1997, The American Economic Association awarded Professor Murphy the John Bates Clark Medal, a prize given every two years to the best American economist under the age of forty. He is widely recognized as one of the top economists in the world for his work on the causes and consequences of income inequality, unemployment and economic growth, and his research on labor, minimum wages, human capital and education are considered groundbreaking. 1. Sherwin Rosen, "The Economics of Superstars," 71 American Economic Review 845 (Dec Law &'y The Winner-Take-All Sodety they look sad or happy? [Laughtej The statements will be about ten to fifteen minutes each. We'll begin with Professor Frank. As Wendy pointed out, Sherwin wrote a very important article in the American Economic Review in 1981 called 'The Economics of Superstars." He picked up on an idea that Alfred Marshall had actually developed in the late 19t century and the idea is a very important and simple idea. In the 19th century most of us listened to music in person. I heard an interesting statistic on an NPR program about a year ago that in the State of Iowa alone in the year 1900 there were 1300 opera houses. I had to get on the Intemet the next day to make sure that I had heard right. After a little digging, I came to find out that the program director didn't mean opera houses in the traditional sense, but more like live music halls. In the State of Iowa this is still a very impressive number in such a small, largely rural state. That was the difference: if you wanted to hear music back then, you went to hear it live. Everyone at that time would have been delighted to hear the best soprano, no doubt, but the best soprano couldn't be everywhere at once. So there was a very brisk market for hundreds, literally thousands of sopranos. The best earned more, to be sure, but the ones down in the ranking around 2,000 were actually able to make a living because of the demand. Roundtable ample, if you look at the return to education, college graduates earn a larger return on their degrees than they did in the seventies. But even if you look within the distribution of college graduates, you will see that the college graduates at the top are doing very well and those at the bottom are struggling to hold their own, even losing ground. It is clearly better to be in some fields rather than others. If you are a computer scientist, then you have done well over the last fifteen years. If your master's degree was in English literature, then it has been a tougher struggle for you. There was a New Yorker cartoon that I clipped about two or three years ago--there are two young men standing in a field on sticks, scarecrows essentially, one calling out to the other, "English Lit, how about you?" as in, what is your major? But slice it a different way, look at the English literature majors. Those who are making it in that field are making it in a way that people didn't in the past. What we see in the law is that there are similar expansions. It is in the law, I think, less due to any technological breakthroughs that allow people to expand their reach and just more of a case of the stakes being so much higher in many important legal arenas. Thus a lawyer who once sued on behalf of a client with a stiff neck for $10,000, now heads up a class action where there may be two or three billion dollars at stake. The mergers and acquisitions lawyers now arrange deals not in the tens of millions of dollars but in the tens of billions of dollars and the crumbs from that cake add up to real money. Roundtable at the point were you are now. It is very hard to claim the moral high ground from where you sit. Sure you've worked hard, but why do you work hard? That is explained by genes and environment. We don't know what mix of genes and environment explains why you are here, but it is some mix of those two and which of those two do you think you are morally entitled to claim great credit for? So rather than protect these seven figure salaries to the last breath, consider what might be done with them in the public arena. in Hyde Park." We are all world-famous here. [aughterj We had a nice Ph.D. dissertation last year by Mark Fisher, who also has a law degree. From either here or Harvard. He gathered some nice data, for those of you who are lawyers, about earnings among lawyers in top law firms. He himself is working at Sullivan & Cromwell, which pays among the highest salaries. An average associate there earns about $150,000. This figure does not just reflect the new hires but the associates as a whole group. The average partner income, profit per partner, is about $1.5 million. book, anyway? [Laughter] I bet it isn't so much, but it is still a great book. Law & The Winner-Take-All Soaety FRANK- Wouldn't pay the interest on their loans. [More laughtej ROSEN: One hour of a lawyer's time-pretty good! Once you write the book-all of the cost in writing it is in the first copy. Then the marginal cost of producing another copy is basically zero. I was reading in The New York Times that there is a movie in China that Disney is showing. It is a story taken after Chinese legend, and it was thought that the Chinese government wouldn't let it into China, but they finally did. However, nobody is paying to watch it in Shanghai because it was pirated before they allowed it in. Now you can buy a copy of this movie for two bucks, which is much less than the price that they are charging to let people at the theater see it. Now for lawyers, I think it is in the size of the claims. The top lawyers work on big claims. The people at Sullivan & Cromwell, Kirkland & Ellis and those firms that you are going to enter if you go into that line of work are handling enormous claims because they are probably the most talented people as far as anyone can tell. Roundtable what sustains the high lawyer population here, which is higher than anywhere else in the world. But other than that, I do not have many thoughts on the matter. This is the reason, I guess, that the story I try to tell people is that the growth in inequality is really a much broader phenomenon than what everyone typically talks about It is not a story of the super-rich; and it is not a story of the underclass. Rising income inequality is really a story in which the higher up the income ladder you are the better you have done, and the lower down you are the worse you have done. If I were to make a graph--and those of you who have been in my class have seen this graph--and I put what income percentile you are in, from the first percentile to the 99th percentile, on this axis [drawing an imaginay Xa~ds], and how much your wages have gone up over the past thirty years on this axis [drawing an imaginay Y-axis], you would basically get a straight line. You would see that wage growth has been highest at the top and lowest at the bottom, but there has been expansion between the guy at the 25th percentile and the 75th percentile; expansion between the guy at the 50th and the 10th. While we might think that the superstar phenomenon is relevant in certain places, it is dearly not the whole story. There is a much broader set of phenomena going on out there than the superstar phenomenon. 10 Roundtable of-people margin without congestion on the other resources margin that really is the game being played in the superstar phenomenon. Law &The Winner-Take-AllSoiey 11 to do; we learned how to do it in a different way which allowed us to substitute other resources-economists call it capital-for our own human resources. I am going to talk about the broadcasting market. What I am going to suggest in particular is that there ought to be not a law but a code. There oughta be--"ou-g-h-t-a"-be a code, by which broadcasters engage in self-regulation; they cartelize themselves. This shouldn't be a violation of the antitrust laws. The Justice Department should be thrilled. But the National Association of Broadcasters, the trade organization, hated the idea. They came within half-an-inch of killing it. As they hated it, they said, with a big smile in their face, this would violate the antitrust laws. The second and related puzzle is that one way of making legal controls on this market, with winner-take-all features, less damaging to profits is to tell ABC or CBS or Fox you can do something good for the culture or you can pay if you are not going to, thus providing an economic incentive. You can provide some educational programming for kids or, if not, you give some money to PBS. That would be a replacement for current legal regulation, which is rigid. It is "play." It is not "play or pay." The oddity was that most of the broadcasters on the committee didn't like play or pay. They liked play. Now why was that? I mean here to try to untangle those two puzzles. Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodety 13 very poorly. And by objective measures, in America it is worse, not better, than in European nations. A code is less intrusive than direct regulation, and it would be a way of controlling the problems just identified without getting bureaucrats involved in dictating content. We could think off-hand of what it would look like. It might say, for example, there should be four hours of educational programming each week. The code would be administered by the National Association of Broadcasters. It might say that in the two months before a Presidential election, each week there shall be two hours of free broadcasting time for candidates for public office. You could imagine vaguer provisions dealing, with, let's say, gratuitous or sexualized violence-especially, but maybe not only, at times when children are likely to be in the audience. That actually borrows from the old N.A.B. code. Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodey 15 On the other hand, what they were frightened by is the prospect that their competitors wouldn't be bound by the obligation that government currently imposes. A pay or play option would give their competitors, who are not civicminded, an opportunity to "pay," maybe not them, but maybe PBS. And the good broadcasters would be stuck "playing" with a lower audience share. It makes perfect sense for them to reject pay or play options on the grounds that it puts them at a competitive disadvantage compared to "pay"! Exclamation point! Just as it makes perfect sense for them to favor a code, or at least not to be disturbed by a code, when the industry itself is unhappy with it. ROSEN: This is winner-take-all [Laughte] MURPHY: This is the first time that Sherwin and I have been on the left. SUNSTEIN: The last suggestion is that it is unclear whether American government will emerge with anything like a third way between unrestricted-let's call it Reaganism---and command and control government of the sort that arose in the Johnson era. My suggestion is that cooperation of the kind discussed can, in winner-take-all contexts, provide such a third way between frequently disastrous competition on the one hand and excessive bureaucratic mandates on the other. QUESTION: Professor Sunstein, you mentioned that one of the bad things about winner-take-all is that there is overcrowding in the industry. How do you define overcrowding and could you elaborate on that, and then could the other panelists say whether they think that overcrowding in fact exists and whether that is a good or a bad thing? SUNSTEIN: I'd be happy to take that but since it is Professor Frank's argu ment, probably he could best answer... FRANK: Okay, you don't automatically get overcrowding in a winner-take-all market, and by winner-take-all market I guess we understand that we mean that it is a market where your reward depends in large measure on your relative performance in addition to perhaps your absolute performance. If contestants in a winner-take-all market get paid the value of what they produce, then there is a general set of conditions that does result in overcrowding in the market. ]Law &The Winner-Take-All Sodey 17 million people, that's not a small difference. It's a small difference to any one person, but it's still cumulative. That ten cents every day I'm worth to ten million people is still a million dollars a day in value that is being created! So don't think that it is only ten cents better, so why am I getting a million dollars a day? No, I'm a million dollars better, and I'm getting a million dollars a day to pay for it! The fact that other people are not going to collect, the fact that we don't havewhat was it, how many thousand people singing in Iowa?-is probably a great thingl [Laughted I think that the fact that we all are listening to the CD in the car and not having to trudge down there and listen to some awful person singing in Podunk, Iowa is a good idea. [Laught] Second, we often talk about arms races. Now, arms races are arms races. It doesn't matter if we're competing to have the best general, or if we're seeing who can amass the biggest pile of foot soldiers--either way it's a wasteful race. But it's not a wasteful race because it's being fought by who has the best general rather than being fought by who can pile up the most men in a trench, either way it's wasteful. 18 Roundtable strange grounds about free speech and so on. I don't see that it is related to winner-take-all. Maybe I missed something.. .maybe we should regulate rap music. It is right that we should separate the efficiency argument from the inequality argument, but we shouldn't disparage the inequality argument because it isn't an efficiency argument. That would be hasty. The inefficiency argument... SUNSTEIN: That's a possible solution. The inefficiency argument has to do with arms races on the one hand and overcrowding on the other. Those are the two points. With respect to the code and communists-that wouldn't be unconstitutional. The lawyers in the room know, because the constitution only applies to the government and I can report that no one has suggested that any kind of political control of that sort should be a part of any code... Law &The Winner-Take-All Socdie That doesn't mean that there is an over-fishing problem in the creating of restaurants or cutting hair. I ... suming the thing depends on the ranking per se. FRANK- There is, I think, less disagreement then it sounds like at least on some issues. I think that Kevin is totally right that the fact that we all can listen to the best soprano now is a good thing. If you had a relative with a serious illness and you could turn to the reigning expert on the planet for advice about what to do, you would count yourself lucky for that-rather than have to go to the expert at the Tompkins Community Hospital [in Ithaca, New York], which is where we go when we get sick. If you can go on-line and send the data to London and that is where the person who knows the most is, and you can get that advice, then that is exactly what you want and there is enormous value in that. So the fact that technology allows the best performers to extend their reach is a terrific thing. There is no quarrel about that. pie-because of the technology. However, the inefficiency associated with competition for that pie would be there independent of whether it was that technology or the other one. ROSEN: Then you're going to get some efficiency from allocating these... spend too much. Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodety 21 FRANK- It was price fixing, absolutely! But by that fact alone we can't con dude necessarily that it was contrary to the public interest, which is my point. SUNSTEIN: And why is it so dear to you that that is a bad argument? 22 Roundtable clear what we're arguing. MURPHY: I'm just making a point. You guys decide. I'm just trying to make SUNSTEIN: There may be better ways to help poor people than allowing MURPHY: Yes, that's probably the best answer to that! See, I didn't even FRANK: On the justice thing, I think that the framework that most people argue about this is in terms of the standard Rawlsian thought experimentwhere you've got people who don't know how good they are at the outset. They go behind a "veil of ignorance" that shields them from the knowledge of whether they'll come in first or second in the race. They're supposed to cook up rules behind the veil about how the pie should be split up once they find out who's got what talents. MURPHY: You won't be collecting much. [Laughter] Law & The Winner-Take-All Society FRANK- I can't believe I just heard it! I'm going to walk away and say no more! The debate is over. [More laughtej ROSEN: The question is, what is the elasticity of supply? It's not zero. If it's not zero, then the optimum tax is not a hundred percent. FRANK: ... if we measure hours worked-than American aspiring CEOs. So I think that it is true that you need to pay the talent, if you don't want to lose the talent to a rival bidder. So yes, what you pay is critically important for getting the job done, but if the reward were lower by two percent for everyone there's no evidence that people would put forth significantly less effort in their attempt to become CEO. There's just absolutely no evidence for that. MURPHY: I think that there is a big thing that is being missed here. Which is one of the things that in economics is pretty clear-that when you get the superstar phenomenon.. .now, we're talking real superstars here! Remember, a big part of the growth in inequality has not much to do with the guys making $8 million. It has to do with the guys making $65,000 rather than $60,000 or the guys making $13,000 rather than $15,000. FRANK- Kevin, do you think that if the top rate had been 42 percent, he would have made a different career choice or expended any less effort to win? MURPHY: Yeah, a little bit. He would have put in a little less effort to have been "Michael Jordan." That's the point-it doesn't have to be a big jump. they're going to retire. FRANKI Sherwin had it right-he said, when it's a rent, you can tax it and it will still be offered. Law &The Winner-Take-All Sodety MURPHY: No-that is the same argument that people do not respond to raising it [the price of a computer] by a nickel. Nobody's going to walk into a computer store and say, "Yeah, I'd buy it for $1,000 but a $1,000 and a nickel, no way!" [Laughter But the problem is that this argument falls down because if the nickel doesn't matter, let's go two nickels, ten nickels, a thousand nickels. We'll raise it a nickel at a time-pretty soon we're at a million dollars, and it had to matter at some point The same is true of tax rates. The argument that going from 40 percent to 40.01 percent doesn't matter, does not imply that it is logically inconsistent to say that it matters going from 40 to 50. beyond which you wouldn't push. ROSEN: Well, we see it in law. When wages in law went up, you've had enormous entry into law. For instance, a lot of smart women now come in and displaced a lot of dumb men. You've had an enormous increase in talent coming into it. The elasticity of supply into law is very high. 26 Roundtable going to tax capital. As a result, I'm going to get a lot of capital created and I'm going to tax it once. ROSEN: But it's inelastic-it's inelastic at that point, but never again. That's kind of the argument we're having here. It seems crazy. FRANK If the vertical leap becomes a foot smaller, then yes. We take pleasure in watching Michael Jordan, in part, because of the absolute height of his vertical leap, but more prominently because he hangs in the air longer than anyone else. The characteristics that define his being noteworthy are strictly positional. Law &The Winner-Take-All Sodep 27 If the best movie is terrible, then I don't want to see it, right? I want to see agood movie. The same analogy that you could make for a basketball player wouldn't apply, for example, to actors-would not apply to TV performers-because in those cases it is not that I sit down and say, "Boy, this person's terrible, but they're the best so I love-it!" [Laughter You get my point? SUNSTEIN: Isn't that local news? You just described local news. [Laughter MURPHY: I cheer for the local high school team because they're going to win, and that's because the competition in the contest is part of the product That's not the same as in a lot of other areas that are, quote, "winner-take-all." That's my point FRANK. Two quick responses. It's not just places like sports where competition is the defining feature. This is not an isolated thing. You want a car, that's all you want-something to get you from point A to point B, or there are other things that you care about Most people like a stylish car and a car that performs well. 28 Roundtable service a larger client base. As a result, slightly better salesmen are knocking off slightly worse salesmen all the way down the ladder. You're getting this leverage effect-it's not just at the very top that it's pervasive. It's all through the labor market. QUESTION: Back to a legal perspective here-I'm not really seeing the direct tie to the superstars, that is, if the case is worth $50 billion, then a percentage of that increases in absolute terms as the value of the cases increase over time. The other question is, suppose that we have five top-tier law schools putting out a thousand students a year, does that period of entry have an effect on overcrowding, have an effect on the superstars within the thousand and then the thousand versus the rest? Law &The Winner-Take-All Sodey 29 ROSEN: The question is why are there five? That's the thing that is troubling me. I guess I'm closer to Bob on this than I'd like to admit [aughtej But there's free entry into high-quality law schools. There are no barriers there. It's not a cartel. It's not a group. Cass doesn't meet with Harvard, Yale professors like he wants to do for the broadcasters, to keep people out. ROSEN: Right, but why is the information so centralized? FRANK- Many of these things are very path dependent. Once you get good, it is easier to get better. Students are choosing you based on how good you are, then, if you get a little better, more people choose you. Then you can become more selective, which causes still more people to choose you and better faculty to want to work for your university and so there is enormous comparative advantage to the people who got there first and established reputations. It's not to say that they're impregnable. There have been movements in the rankings in academia, but if you aspire to be a top five law school, which of those five schools do you think that you're going to knock off, if you're the number 25 school? It's real tough prospect to think about knocking them off. On the other hand, I would expect there to be more supply-more spaces to become available-to reflect that greater sorting. QUESTION: I'd be curious to know how your economic and legal models deal with almost what seems like a psycho-social phenomenon, sort of a cult of personality that seems to occur in a lot of these superstars. In the sense that David Copperfield does a card trick that is not ridiculously different than if someone else does a card trick, except that Copperfield makes $70 million a year. It's not just in the entertainment industry-Jerry Seinfeld or whatever. I'm just very curious about that. It seems to be almost more of a psycho-social phenomenon that almost goes back to ancient ideas of kingship where people are really excited about a personality, and that there's a lot of effort in creating that personality. SUNSTEIN: It's a very good question. Part of it is that you can talk to others about the fact that you saw Michael Jordan or David Copperfield-they all know who he is. Thus, part of it is it is not just the experience of seeing, that it may be a magic trick that is not much better than others, but it's someone everyone else has heard of and that's part of the reason you pay for it. ROSEN: ... The Closing of the American Mindwas such a book? I mean, nobody ever read that book... Impossible to read... [Laughter] MURPHY: This also gets back to a point that Bob Frank made a bit ago, which is this question about when somebody else's car goes faster and that Law & The Winner-Take-AllSodety lead makes me want a faster car, too. It's true that those models can to.. .models... and that's a problem that I've studied a lot. In fact, Bill [Landes] and Gary [Becker] and some other people have worked on problems like that and it turns out that relative position isn't the key feature. The question of whether you get too fast a car is not a question of whether me having a faster car makes you want to have a faster car, but the mode with which that operates. Does me having a faster car make you better off, or does me having a faster car make you worse off? It's not the complement between the speed of my car and the speed of your car that leads to inefficiency, even though that's what leads to the ars race element of it. I could have a case in which you having a faster car makes me want a slower car and that would be inefficient. There is no necessary connection between those two things. MURPHY: We have to study that. [More laughter] FRANK: I'm just not aware that there is any serious argument to the effect that when cars get faster generally, people enjoy having a slow car more. FRANK If you care about speed, then, yes, you enjoy it less. Yes, period. then that's just the answer. [Laughted ROSEN: [Gestuwing towards Mur'p~] Remember, he likes "The Simpsons." MURPHY: The point is, if I care about speed is saying one thing. But saying that you having a faster car makes me unhappy, is a different thing. true. I mean there are a few things that we do know. MURPHY: Well, it could be if the method on which they competed didn't independently create value. That's the question. In the war case, in fact, it's doubly bad because the method in which they competed created negative value, not only not independent value. In this case, it's not clear at all that in factremember, they don't collect the full amount of that value and that's... kill each other off. QUESTION: There seems to be another way that superstars might work, like Michael Jordan. Michael Jordan brought the whole NBA industry up. There was a sort of an initial phase in which Michael Jordan had to create interest again in basketball, like the home run race in baseball. I think that after that there's sort of another thing happening-that once people are interested again in basketball or baseball, that perhaps the superstars are not as necessary? I mean, we will still be watching basketball or baseball after Michael Jordan or Mark McGwire. Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodety MURPHY: I think that what you are pointing to is a sort of diminishing returns to having superstars and that maybe superstars are very relevant when we're falling to a point where there's a critical level, a point at which we're going to fall from the public eye. There may be an element of that, but I think that also bolsters the view that Michael Jordan didn't collect a big part of the value that he created-neither did Mark McGwire or Sammy Sosa. Even though they're getting a lot in endorsements and the like, it's unlikely that they collect even a significant part of the value that they created in terms of the renewed interest in baseball. that I saw, value added. SUNSTEIN: Do you think if it's anonymous that you might get a different result? Note that this is very robust. It is not just about expected performance in a class. With respect to the incidence of cancer, heart disease, divorce--any bad thing that you can mention that people have control over-they think that they are less likely than most people to experience it. In fact, the only class of people with a realistic sense of their own capacities and what's going to happen to them and of what other people think of them-the only people who are realistic-are the clinically depressed. QUESTION: But there seems to be concerns about winner's purses and people bidding on things-there seems to be evidence that we aren't making mistakes. is that it translate into behavior-not that it translate into expectations. compete in a high variance market, but fewer should compete on a welfare... then, is too small relative to what it should be. mating your odds of winning steers you towards competing, and it shouldn't. can cut it off. There's an option value... Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodey SUNSTEIN: That's a very helpful clarification because there the two are quite different We may not have a problem of overcrowding, at least with respect to certain classes of lawyers, because those who end up not making partner still add value and do great. But, with respect to boxers, it's possible that they've invested a lot of wasted time in learning how to box instead of getting skills that... FRANK: This is not a claim that there is more or less entry. The question is, would it be better if there was less entry? If there are a lot of good magicians who can do card tricks and all you care about is watching the best known among them, then you don't increase the size of the pie by doubling the number of people in that competition. You get to see the best known of how many there are out there, if that's what you care about And I think to an extent that is what we care about, primarily, in the case of sopranos when we're talking about the kinds of differences among contestants in this market As Sherwin has noted, it's very hard for a trained listener to detect quality differences among the top 100 sopranos. MURPHY: There's an issue, then, in the question of why I wouldn't buy for $12 the CD of that person who is slightly less talented when the better person's CD sells for $13. Clearly that seems to be contradicted by the facts. People think that that CD sitting in the bargain rack over there for $4.99 doesn't sell like the one for $13 from the person who is a little bit better. FRANK Again, we don't know whether that's because what they cared about was listening to the best known soprano. If that's what they care aboutper se-if they want to see Copperfield rather than another magician who does it just as well, because they know Copperfield-then you get that difference explained not because the extra quality is worth more, but by the fact that it is by the bestknown performer. You're going to get a best known performer anyway, however many people you have competing. That's the distinction there. lege basketball players who think that they'll be in the NBA, something like... FRANK. A percent and a half, about. ROSEN: What do you do about it? I mean, suppose you're right-then what do you do? Do you regulate it? SUNSTEIN: You say one and a half percent. It's easy. ROSEN: Everybody knows that hardly anyone makes it into the big-time sports. think it-is that what you think? ROSEN: Maybe they think they're in the one percent. Law &The Winner-Take-All Sodey 37 FRANK- They're wrong--at least some of them are wrong. ROSEN: But doyou know that they're wrong? about it? SUNSTEIN: I'll tell you one ingenious advertising campaign that we want to know what its effects were. Here the government was alert. If you look at their drug advertisements and their drunk-driving advertisements, you will find that they are quite alert to this. Ninety percent of drivers think that they are safer than the average driver and less likely to be involved in an accident. The government's response wasn't to tax anybody or to have new laws. It said, "Drive defensively! Watch out for the other guy!" ROSEN: Make cars like tanks. Everybody bought SUVs. 38 Roundtable FRANK. There does seem to be a going rate for basketball players, for CEOs, and as each new frontier is breached the amount paid to others in the wake of... SUNSTEIN: That's a good note on which to end. We should thank the pan elists, especially Bob.