 Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics Nondelegation Canons Cass R. Sunstein Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Nondelegation Canons" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 82, 1999). Nondelegation Canons Cass R. Sunstein This paper can be downloaded without charge at: The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Publications/Working/index.html The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=179651 Nondelegation Canons Cass R. Sunstein* I. Introduction It is often said that the nondelegation doctrine is dead.1 According to the familiar refrain,2 the doctrine was once used to require Congress to legislate with some clarity, so as to ensure that law is made by the national legislature rather than by the executive. But the nondelegation doctrine—the refrain continues—is now merely a bit of rhetoric, as the United States Code has become littered with provisions asking one or another administrative agency to do what it thinks best.3 While this is an overstatement, it captures an important truth: Since 1935, the Supreme Court has not struck down an act of Congress on nondelegation grounds, notwithstanding the existence of a number of plausible occasions.4 But is the nondelegation doctrine really dead? On the contrary, I believe that the doctrine is alive and well. It has been relocated rather than abandoned. Federal courts commonly vindicate not a general nondelegation doctrine, but a series of more specific and small, though quite important, nondelegation doctrines. Rather than invalidating federal legislation as excessively open-ended, courts hold that federal administrative agencies may not engage in certain activity unless and until Congress has expressly told them to do so. The relevant choices must be made legislatively rather than bureaucratically. As a technical matter, the key holdings are based not on the delegation doctrine but on certain “canons” of construction. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Jack Goldsmith, Jill Hasday, Richard Posner, and Adrian Vermeule for valuable comments on a previous draft. 1 See John H. Ely, Democracy and Distrust 131-33 (1981). 2 See id. at 131-34. 3 See David Schoenbrod, Power Without Responsibility (1995). 4 See below for a brief overview. modern public law. These are nondelegation canons for the simple reason that they forbid administrative agencies from making decisions on their own.5 Consider a few examples. Congress must affirmatively authorize the extraterritorial application of federal law6; agencies cannot exercise their ordinary discretion, under an ambiguous statutory provision, so as apply national law outside of American borders. A clear congressional statement to this effect is required. Administrative agencies are not permitted to construe federal statutes in such a way as to raise serious constitutional questions; if the constitutional question is substantial, Congress must clearly assert its goal of venturing into the disputed terrain.7 When treaties and statutes are ambiguous, they must be construed favorably to Native American tribes; the agencies’ own judgment, if it is an exercise of discretion, is irrelevant.8 As we will see, there are many more examples, including a recent canon forbidding agencies to impose high costs for trivial gains. 5 Some canons are described as “clear statement” principles, so labeled because they require a clear statement from Congress. See, e.g., William Eskridge, Dynamic Statutory Interpretation 282-83 (1995). The nondelegation canons are all clear statement principles; but many clear statement principles are not nondelegation canons, because they do not involve agencies at all. See note infra. 6 EEOC v. Arabian American Oil, 499 US 244 (1991) (extraterritoriality). 7 See Bowen v. Georgetown Univ Hospital, 488 US 204 (1988). 8 Muscagee Nation v. Hodel, 851 F.2d 1439 (DC Cir 1988) (construction in favor of Native Americans). Nondelegation Canons democratic pedigree.9 Indeed, the nondelegation canons turn out to be a contemporary manifestation of the founding effort to link protection of individual rights, and other important interests, with appropriate institutional design.10 In certain cases, Congress must decide the key questions on its own. This is the enduring function of the nondelegation doctrine, and it is endorsed, not repudiated, by current law. Despite its exceptionally infrequent use, the conventional nondelegation doctrine—the doctrine that has been displaced by the contemporary nondelegation canons—should be quite familiar. In a nutshell, it requires Congress to state an “intelligible principle” by which to guide and limit agency action.12 The motivating idea is that Article I, section 113 vests legislative power in the Congress and that this vesting cannot be waived, even if Congress and the public want to waive it. If Congress gives the executive a “blank check,” or states no intelligible principle, it has violated Article I. Sometimes the nondelegation doctrine is thought to diminish the risk of rentseeking, or legislation that reduces social welfare, by requiring a legislative consensus on details before permitting the enactment of law. 9 On minimalism and democracy-forcing minimalism generally, see Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999). 10 See Williams Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason 5-27 (1995). 11 In this section I draw on a companion paper, Cass R. Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional?, Michigan Law Review (forthcoming November 1999), which focuses on issues of EPA discretion and regulatory policy, and which offers a brief discussion of the basic claims of this essay. 12 See, e.g., Amalgamated Meat Cutters v. Connally, 337 F. Supp. 737 (DC 1971) 13 U.S. Const., Art. 1. Section 1. perceived national needs.14 But this view is much too simple. There is no unambiguous textual barrier to delegations—no constitutional provision says that the legislative power is nondelegable—and in fact there is no explicit evidence that the framers and ratifiers of the original Constitution believed that it contained a nondelegation doctrine.15 Actually the early practice suggested considerable willingness to “delegate” authority. In the very first year of the Republic, Congress gave the President the power to grant licenses to trade with the Indian tribes “under such rules and regulations as the President shall prescribe.”16 The first Congress also provided for military pensions “under such regulations as the President of the United States may direct.”17 In neither case did Congress issue standards by which to limit the President’s discretion. Nondelegation Canons hence for the first 138 years of the nation’s existence—as well as the last 64 years—no Supreme Court decision struck down a statute on nondelegation grounds. By way of preface to the contemporary nondelegation canons, let us briefly explore the two decisions of 1935, the conventional nondelegation doctrine’s only good year. Commission Act and the Federal Communications Act, partly by reference to the procedural safeguards provided by those statutes. “What are ‘unfair methods of competition’ are thus to be determined in particular instances, upon evidence, in the light of particular competitive conditions and of what is found to be a specific and substantial public interest. To make this possible, Congress set up a special procedure.”28 Fourth, the statute at issued covered the entire economy, no mere sector, and thus placed the economy itself at the mercy of decisions essentially unlimited by legislative instructions. Nondelegation Canons administrators.35 As we will see, Justice Stevens’ plurality opinion created a fresh nondelegation canon, one that fits well with my general thesis here, and one that carries considerable independent importance. A. What, If Anything, Is The (Conventional) Nondelegation Doctrine The opinions of Justice Rehnquist and the plurality in the Benzene Case have spurred renewed interest in the conventional nondelegation doctrine, and many observers have argued for its revival.40 There has thus been a spirited debate over what purposes, democratic, economic and otherwise, that such a revival would serve, and whether, in light of those purposes, a revival would be justified.41 I briefly discuss that debate, principally to show fatal problems with any large-scale judicial use of the doctrine, and to pave the way toward an understanding of the nondelegation canons as the far superior alternative. Nondelegation Canons bargaining, and accountability that comes from a guarantee that government power cannot be brought to bear on individuals unless diverse representatives, from diverse places, have managed to agree on the details. It is notable here that the President emerges from a “winner-take-all” contest, a sharp contrast to Congress, where local majorities, but national minorities, are allowed to have some say in lawmaking. Consider, as an extreme contrast, the early decision by the German legislature to confer on Adolf Hitler the power to rule by “decree”; this delegation made possible lawmaking exercises that would otherwise have been extremely cumbersome, and hence removed an important check on arbitrary rule.44 A closely related point has to do with the extent to which law and particularly national legislation sometimes amount to an infringement on liberty. If no law may be brought to bear against the public unless diverse members of Congress have been able to agree on a particular form of words, then there is, on one view, an important safeguard of freedom. The underlying idea is that people may not be subject to national legal constraints unless and until there has been specific legislative authorization for the constraints. This idea can in turn be associated with social contract theory, allowing people to maintain certain private law rights unless there has been explicit authorization for what would otherwise be a common law wrong.45 Indeed, a prominent if now largely discredited46 canon of 44 See David Currie, The Constitution of the Republic of Germany 109 (1995). 45 See Stephen Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 27 (4th ed. 1999). There is, however, a problem with this conception of freedom, a particular problem in the aftermath of the New Deal: Why should we think that the status quo embodies freedom, and that the new law at issue would threaten to abridge freedom? It is far from clear, for example, that the common law system for regulating pollution—itself a regulatory system, and anything but prepolitical—should be taken as an embodiment of liberty, and that a Clean Air Act is a liberty-threatening abridgement of that freedom. Compare the area of discrimination: Is a law forbidding discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or disability something that threatens liberty, such that it is crucial to obtain legislative agreement on its details, lest liberty be threatened? Or might the discriminatory status quo be the real threat to freedom? Questions of this kind seem to me to raise serious doubts about the idea that a strictly enforced nondelegation doctrine would promote liberty, properly conceived. On the general topic of status quo neutrality, see Cass R. Sunstein, The Partial Constitution (1993). construction—requiring express legislative authorization for interference with common law rights47—is a close cousin of this idea; it qualifies as the core nondelegation canon of the early twentieth century. Nondelegation Canons discretionary authority of enforcement officials, who might otherwise act abusively or capriciously. These points can be collected with the suggestion that the conventional nondelegation doctrine reflects the Constitution’s commitment to dual-branch lawmaking—a commitment that limits arbitrary power, and promotes deliberation as well as accountability, by ensuring that governmental authority can be exercised only when both the legislature and the executive (ordinarily authorized to decline enforcement) have made a particular decision to that effect. As we will see, this commitment underlies the nondelegation canons as well. be aware of the existence of rapidly changing circumstances, which may make any particular approach increasingly anachronistic. For a multimember body, there are serious problems in achieving closure on any particular course of action; the result can be to push law in the direction of incompletely specified abstractions.51 These points are independent of the phenomenon of delegating to escape the political consequences of specificity, a phenomenon that undoubtedly plays a large role as well.52 The latter point is often taken as a reason for invigorating the nondelegation doctrine in the name of accountability53; but Jerry Mashaw has raised the possibility that administrators should be making political decisions, precisely on grounds of accountability.54 As Mashaw notes, agencies are themselves politically accountable through their relationship to the President. Indeed, public choice theory may well suggest that Congress is more, not less, susceptible to factional power than bureaucrats acting under the arm of the President. There is evidence that factions are most influential precisely when Congress legislates with particularity.55 There is no evidence that social welfare is more likely to be produced via specific instructions rather than via general ones. 51 See Aranson et al., supra note; Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions, Ethics (forthcoming 1999); Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996). 52 See Aranson et al., supra note. 53 See id.; Schoenbrod, supta note. 54 See Mashaw, supra note. 55 See Bruce Ackerman and William Hassler, Clean Coal/Dirty Air (1983). Nondelegation Canons not clear that from any point of view, things have gone systematically better when Congress is clear than when Congress is not.56 3. A general conclusion In light of these considerations, there is no plausible case for a broad-scale revival of the nondelegation doctrine. A reinvigoration of the conventional doctrine would pose serious problems of judicial competence, and it would not be a sensible response to any of the problems and pathologies of the modern administrative state.57 There is no reason to think that such a reinvigoration would ensure better regulatory policy, or even that it would mark a significant improvement in terms of democratic values. III. Hidden Nondelegation Principles Let us turn now to a question that bears directly on the current status of the nondelegation doctrine: What is the authority of administrative agencies to interpret the law? When Congress has spoken clearly, everyone agrees that agencies are bound by what Congress has said. The disputed question has to do with the authority of agencies to act when Congress has not spoken clearly. Of course a strong version of the nondelegation doctrine would suggest that agencies can, in such cases, do nothing, because the underlying grant of power is effectively void. But short of this conclusion, what is the allocation of authority to agencies? A. The Chevron Canon: Aggravating the Delegation Problem? The place to start is of course Chevron v. NRDC,59 the decision that dominates modern administrative law.60 There the Supreme Court held that unless Congress has decided the “precise question at issue,” agencies are authorized to interpret ambiguous terms as they see fit, so long as the interpretation is reasonable.61 Chevron creates a familiar two-step inquiry. The first question is whether Congress has directly decided the precise question at issue. The second question is whether the agency interpretation is reasonable. Indeed, Chevron establishes a novel canon of construction62: In the face of ambiguity, statutes mean what the relevant agency takes them to mean. Nondelegation Canons would—it might be claimed—fit better with nondelegation principles, for under such a regime, agencies would lack the power to construe statutory terms on their own. On this view, the key point, explicitly recognized in the case and by its most enthusiastic defenders, is that Chevron holds that statutory ambiguities are implicit delegations of interpretive (realistically, law-making) authority to agencies.65 The opposing view—that ambiguities are not delegations at all—would fit better with the constitutional structure. is plain, however, that a variety of canons of construction—what I am calling nondelegation canons—trump Chevron itself.66 In other words, the agency’s interpretation of law does not, under current doctrine, prevail if one of the nondelegation canons is at work. These canons impose important constraints on administrative authority, for agencies are not permitted to understand ambiguous provisions to give them authority to venture in certain directions; a clear congressional statement is necessary. The nondelegation canons fall in three principal categories. An important qualification: I do not mean endorse each of the canons here. The goal at this stage is descriptive, not normative—to see how they operate as a constraint on administrative power and to understand how they are justified in practice. It does not matter if particular canons would turn out, on reflection, to be indefensible. Belonging in the same category is the idea that administrative agencies will not be allowed to interpret ambiguous provisions so as to preempt state law.70 The constitutional source of this principle is the evident constitutional commitment to a federal structure, a commitment that may not be compromised without a congressional decision to do so—an important requirement in light of the various safeguards against cavalier disregard of state interests created by the Nondelegation Canons system of state representation in Congress.71 Notice that there is no constitutional obstacle to national preemption; Congress is entitled to preempt state law if it chooses. But there is a constitutional obstacle of a sort: the preemption decision must be made legislatively, not bureaucratically.72. 71 See Herbert Wechsler, The Political Safeguards of Federalism, 54 Colum L. Rev 543 (1954), for the classic discussion. A recent treatment is Larry Kramer, 100 Colum. L. Rev. (forthcoming 2000). 72 It is not entirely clear whether an agency might be able to decide the question if Congress expressly said that the agency is permitted to do so. This raises a general point about the nondelegation canons: What would happen if Congress attempted to bypass them by a clear statement of delegation? I take up this question below. 73 Bowen v. Georegtown Univ. Hosp., 488 US 204 (1988). 74 Id. at 208. 75 The notion is defended in Richard Epstein, Takings (1985). 76 See Usery v. Turner Elkhorn Mining, 438 US 1 (1976). defendants. One function of the lenity principle is to ensure against delegations. Criminal law must be a product of a clear judgment on Congress’ part. Where no clear judgment has been made, the statute will not apply because merely it is plausibly interpreted, by courts or enforcement authorities, to fit the case at hand. The rule of lenity is inspired by the due process constraint on conviction pursuant to open-ended or vague statutes. While it is not itself a constitutional mandate, it is rooted in a constitutional princple, and serves as a time-honored nondelegation canon. Nondelegation Canons United States, and indeed statutory ambiguity cannot be used by agencies as a basis for waiver, which must be explicit in legislation.79 Sovereign immunity is a background structural understanding, defeasible only on the basis of a judgment to that effect by the national legislature. In decisions of particular importance for the modern regulatory state, agencies are sometimes forbidden to require very large expenditures for trivial or de minimis gains.83 If Congress wants to be “absolutist” about safety, it is permitted to do so by explicit statement.84 But agencies will not be allowed to take ambiguous language in this direction. This is a novel nondelegation principle, a creation of the late twentieth century. It is an evident response to perceived problems in modern regulatory policy.85 4. Barriers, catalysts, and minimalism How intrusive are the nondelegation canons? What kind of judicial role do they contemplate? Canons of this sort might well be understood not as barriers but as catalysts, allowing government to act so long as it does so through certain channels. The effort is to trigger democratic (in the sense of legislative) processes and to ensure the forms of deliberation, and bargaining, that are likely to occur in the proper arenas. Cosle, 636 F,2d 323, 36-61 (DC Cir 1979); Monsanto Co v. Kennedy, 613 F.2d 947, 955-56 (DC Cir 1979). In a famous essay, Karl Llewellyn contended that the canons of construction were indeterminate and unhelpful, see Karl Llewellyn, Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules of Canons about How Statutes Are To Be Construed, 3 Vand. L. Rev. 395 (1950). There has been a vigorous debate over whether Llewellyn was right, see, e.g., Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (1998) (rejecting Llewellyn’s claim). Even if Llewellyn is right, his argument does not undermine the nondelegation canons, which go in a single direction: against agency discretion. Of course it will be possible that other canons, for example those involve syntax, will support the agency’s view of the statute. 84 See Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F2d 1108 (DC Cir 1987) (finding no de minimis exception under the Delaney Clause). 85 See Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle 10-17 (1993) (discussing the problem of “the last 10%”). 86 Compare Hampton v. Mow Sun Wong, 426 US 88 (1976), holding that the Civil Service Commission could not decide to exclude aliens from the civil service, but leaving open the question whether Congress or the President could do so. 87 On minimalism generally, see Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999). Nondelegation Canons government action, the conventional nondelegation doctrine itself is a form of minimalism insofar as it requires Congress to speak with clarity and does not disable the government entirely. And because the nondelegation canons are narrower and more specifically targeted—requiring particular rather than general legislative clarity—they are more minimalist still. important point. Nondelegation canons are barriers, and not merely catalysts, with respect to purely administrative (or executive) judgment on the matters in question. They erect a decisive barrier to certain discretionary decisions by the executive. In this respect, at least, the relevant institutions are blocked. decision has had no progeny, and outside of very unusual circumstances,91 the Court would be most unlikely to say that Congress cannot delegate to agencies the power of decision, even in sensitive areas, if it chooses to do so expressly. But notice that Congress must take the political heat that would undoubtedly be generated by any such explicit delegation, a point that helps account for Congress’ failure to delegate authority of that kind. And notice too that in cases in which a constitutional right is plausibly at stake, the Court might invoke Hampton and strike down the delegation on due process grounds. A. Judicial Administrability and Congressional Lawmaking Canons of the sort I have defended here are highly controversial. Judge Posner, for example, fears that some of them create a “penumbral Constitution,” authorizing judges to bend statutes in particular directions even though there may in fact be no constitutional violation.92 But if the argument here is correct, there is a simple answer to these concerns: The relevant canons operate as nondelegation principles, and they are designed to ensure that Congress decides certain contested questions on its own. If this idea is a core structural commitment of the Constitution, there can be no problem with its judicial enforcement. Nondelegation Canons unacceptable delegations is a judicially underenforced norm, and properly so.94 From the standpoint of improving the operation of the regulatory state, it is also far from clear that general judicial enforcement of the doctrine would do much good; for reasons given above, it might even produce considerable harm. basic account—above all, perhaps, the idea that agencies may not raise serious constitutional questions on their own. There are some important limitations to the argument here. Of course many canons, including those here, operate even when Nondelegation Canons agencies are not involved.96 Nothing I have said operates as a defense of canons except insofar as they operate as checks on agency authority. It would be necessary to look elsewhere to justify canons that do not involve an exercise of discretion by administrative agencies. If we lean very hard on the notion of judicially underenforced constitutional norms, we might be able to begin such a justification97; but that is a different topic. conclude that the nondelegation canons achieve far too little. My basic response to this objection is that the nondelegation canons are far preferable, because they are easily administrable, impose a much less serious strain on judicial capacities, and promise to do more good while also producing less harm. Nondelegation Canons and in that way threaten to produce a complex legal system, one that imposes costs on litigants and those seeking to know the context of the law. By contrast, a simple version of the Chevron principle, allowing agencies to interpret ambiguous provisions, promises to hold down decision costs and also to promote planning. As a general rule, this is an important point about any system of multiple “canons,” and it may argue in favor of greater simplicity, and more clarity, than current law provides. In practice, however, the existing system of nondelegation canons does not leave a great deal of uncertainty, except perhaps in the decision (inevitably complex in some cases) whether the statute at issue is ambiguous. In contemporary administrative law, the real lack of clarity comes not from nondelegation canons, but from general uncertainty about Chevron itself, which different courts, and panels, apply with noticeably different degrees of enthusiasm. In this Essay I have argued on behalf of recognizing nondelegation canons as a distinctive feature of modern public law. The function of these canons—the modern nondelegation doctrine—is to ban Congress from authorizing administrative agencies, or the executive branch, from making certain decisions.102 These canons do not merely operate as nondelegation principles; they are the thing itself. They show that the nondelegation doctrine is alive and well. It has merely been relocated and left unnamed. 102 As noted, it is unclear whether the ban is constitutional in status or whether it is merely presumptive, a tool of construction. See above. safeguards, and not via the executive alone. In this way the nondelegation canons take their place as one of most prominent domains in which protection of individual rights, and of other important interests, occurs not through blanket prohibitions on governmental action, but through channeling decisions to particular governmental institutions, in this case Congress itself.103 Nondelegation Canons This is a preliminary draft, dated 08/31/99, of a manuscript forthcoming in the University of Chicago Law Review. All rights reserved. Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 1. William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 4. Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of 7. Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 12. Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 18. William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 21. Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle 22. Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the 23. William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). American Business Enterprise (April 1995). and Biotechnology (November 1995). Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) 61. Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of 62. David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in 63. Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) 64. John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 65. Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: 66. Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of 67. Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) 68. Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic 69. Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 70. Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? 71. Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 72. Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost 73. John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 74. Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 75. Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It 76. William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) 77. Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 78. Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) 81. David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 82. Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999)