University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein Robert E. King
DOING WITHOUT SPEED LIMITS
A. Some Relevant Facts .................................................. 157 B. The Fall and Rise of the Basic Rule ................................ 158 A. What Montanans Did and Did Not Do ............................. 162 B. Tourists and Speed Magnets ......................................... 164 C. A Note on Coordination .............................................. 167 D . Early R esults ........................................................... 167 A . Safely .................................................................... 17 1 B. Fuel Efficiency ......................................................... 171 C . A ir Pollution ........................................................... 172 D . Tourism .................................................................. 173 E . R ep utation .............................................................. 174 F. A Note on Benefits ..................................................... 175 A . In G eneral .............................................................. 178 B. Administering Standards ............................................. 181 C. Rule of Law Values .................................................... 184
In late 1995, Montana became the first and only state to eliminate a numerical daytime speed limit on its interstate highways. Instead, the state adopted a "Basic Rule" of "reasonable and prudent" daytime driving. The law produced a heated debate about its consequences, the relationship be-
affecting primary conduct. Montana's endeavor to regulate drivers' conduct without a numerical speed limit offers an intriguing opportunity to explore the role of social norms in regulating behavior, the importance and feasibility of cooperation, and the possibility of controlling behavior through relatively open-ended law.
In this essay, we investigate the consequences of Montana's daytime driving rules. We examine the law itself, its effects on driving behavior and law enforcement, and recent attempts to overturn the law. Specifically, we evaluate the law's impact on the motoring public and Montana as a whole. We also consider the Basic Rule's effect on legal standards: Does the law's subjective nature promote arbitrary and ineffective enforcement? We explore the effect of the law on so-called "rule of law" values of both drivers and police officers. In late 1998, the Montana Supreme Court invalidated the Basic Rule on due process grounds, and the ultimate fate of the "reasonable and prudent" rule remains unclear. In Part VI, we offer a brief discussion of that issue.
Our basic findings are as follows:
1. In the short term, the change in the speed limit had few consequences for the driving behavior of Montana citizens, in terms of overall speed and safety. Most citizens appeared to coordinate their behavior around a certain area of appropriate speed, both during the period of an official 55 mile-perhour (mph) limit and after the return of the Basic Rule. This point suggests the possibility that driving habits may outstrip the law. Indeed, we suspect that much of driving behavior is governed by informal norms. Those norms govern speed as well as many other topics, and have a far greater degree of flexibility and specificity than any law. Of course these norms operate against a backdrop set by speed limits in other states and past limits in Montana. It is hard to know how fast Montanans would drive without this backdrop. 2. The change in the speed limit had the significant consequence of encouraging very fast and somewhat reckless driving by tourists. Many of these drivers appeared to be attracted to Montana by virtue of its Basic Rule. This point also has an important implication a state that allows very fast driving (because of a high speed limit in the form of a rule or standard) may find itself becoming a "speed magnet," which may produce unanticipated dangers. 3. Partly as a result of (2), aggregate mortality and morbidity rates on the interstate highways of Montana increased after the switch to the Basic Rule. Both statistics, however, generally remained within historical fluctuating ranges, and a sharp upward spike in 1997 does not offer any unambiguous lesson. 4. Even taking (2) and (3) into account, the aggregate motor vehicle accident rate did not increase enormously in Montana, perhaps because the Basic Rule encouraged drivers to use the interstate highways, which are relatively safe. This point suggests a final important implication one of the conse[Vol. 79:155
quences of decreasing safety on interstate highways may be to increase overall safety, if the decrease is a result of a change in policy that shifts drivers away from relatively more perilous rural roads and makes interstate driving more attractive.
5. The Basic Rule has created serious problems for law enforcement. Its vague nature subjects the Basic Rule to many different interpretations by both drivers and law enforcement officials. The results have included increased roadside confrontations between officers and motorists, and also a judicial and administrative backlog in adjudicating possible violations.
6. There is some evidence that motorists are becoming accustomed to the law. For example, traffic citations for Basic Rule violations, initially soaring in the law's first year, declined as drivers apparently adapted to the flexible standards. Similarly, after a sharp spike in fatalities in 1997, Montana's roadways became safer in 1998, the law's third year of operation.
In the end, we do not mean to say that the Basic Rule is a good or a bad idea. The most important and interesting elements of this story lie in the details rather than the "bottom line." 1999]
To understand the Basic Rule, it is necessary to emphasize that Montana is a large and thinly populated area. With 147,047 square miles of territory, it stands as the fourth largest state.' Montana's population, however, totals approximately 870,000, making it the third most sparsely populated state with an average of just six people per square mile. Billings, with its 87,000 residents, is the state's largest city. Yet Billings does not face the suburban sprawl of other metropolitan areas the first traffic light outside of the city is 145 miles away in Miles City, population 8,400.
Traveling Montana's vast expanse via its interstate highways can be relatively hazardous. The state has 88,000 miles of highway. There is no separate state police force and only 212 Highway Patrol officers monitor the
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW roads. As of 1995, Montana's rate of 2.3 fatalities per 100 million vehicle miles was considerably above the national average of 1.8 deaths per 100 million vehicle miles. Moreover, the deadliest stretch of road in the country and two of the nation's three most perilous highway areas are located in Montana, with fatality rates of 6.206 and 4.031 per 100 million miles, respectively. In sum, Montana's wide open spaces afford ample distance and danger for the motoring public. B. The Fall and Rise of the Basic Rule
Before the enactment of federally mandated speed limits, Montana governed its highways under its Basic Rule.' This law, passed in 1955,"1 accorded motorists substantial freedom in conducting themselves on the road, requiring drivers to operate their vehicles in a
careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed no greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions existing at the point of operation, taking into account the amount and character of traffic, condition of brakes, weight of vehicle, grade and width of highway, condition of surface, and freedom of obstruction to the view ahead.12 Citizens of Montana regarded the Basic Rule as practical and a necessary way of life, viewing fast driving in the words of one inhabitant, as a "Godgiven right."'
Congress altered the situation in 1974. In the wake of the 1973 Arab oil embargo, the federal government enacted the Federal Aid Highways Amendments of 1974 and imposed a "National Maximum Speed Limit" of 55 mph. Initially urged as a conservation effort, the law rapidly gained
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW
cause they were accustomed to driving under the Basic Rule and partly because of the weak sanctions for speeding, the state's citizens continued their basic driving patterns in the decades following 1974. As one newspaper described the situation, "Montana drivers are known for flouting the law, and the state for winking at such behavior. Studies reported that a majority of motorists disobeyed Montana's speed limit on both interstates and two-lane highways. Critics derided the national speed limit as "irrelevant," "practically meaningless," and "a joke." Moreover, some disobeyed the speed limit on principle, as a protest against federal intrusion. Thus, the very existence of the law created at least a degree of faster driving. Folklore emerged regarding the laxity of enforcement. The state traffic highway spokesman recognized the dilemma, acknowledging, "'You cannot choose the speed limit for people, . . [t]he truth is that it can't be enforced unless people agree with
The lax compliance took a toll on law enforcement. Despite writing approximately 66,000 $5 tickets per year, the Highway Patrol described the law as "'a nondeterrent to speeding.'" The law also had a corrosive effect
DOING WITHOUT SPEED LIMITS on the public's perception of law enforcement. The head of the Highway Patrol noted that motorists' disregard for speed limits "'caused disrespect for us [the Highway Patrol] in particular because we were burdened with enforcing the law.''33 Furthermore, the law demoralized the officers themselves. One patrolman lamented, "'You wondered how much good you
Montana received its reprieve from federal regulation of its interstate highways with the enactment of the National Highway System Designation Act (the "NHSDA") in 1995. Spurred by the Republicans' desire to limit the role of the national government, Congress enacted the NHSDA by the overwhelming margin of 419 to 7 in the House and on a voice vote in the Senate, thus repealing the federal speed limit. President Clinton "reluctantly" signed the legislation on November 28,
The NHSDA endured a storm of alarmist and often unfounded protests, many based on predictions about adverse effects on safety. President Clinton admonished states to "exercise this authority responsibly," while Transportation Secretary Federico Pefia sent letters to governors, "imploring them, for safety reasons, to consider not raising speed limits. Insurance companies warned of premium increases to pay for the impending roadway 1999]
carnage. I Ralph Nader labeled the repeal "'homicidal legislation."' Montana law enforcement echoed the national fears, predicting a potential 50% increase in fatalities with "phenomenal wrecks ... cars that roll 8, 9, and 10 times." One trooper ominously warned, "'[m]y phone is going to ring more often in the middle of the night.'"44
Proponents of the NHSDA mounted their own public relations effort. They argued that the law would simply legalize existing behavior by drivers, and bring the law more in accordance with informal norms already producing sufficiently safe driving. Supporters downplayed the safety fears, noting improvements in drunk-driving laws, seat belts, air bags, and anti-lock
On December 9, 1995, Montana reverted to its Basic Rule of reasonable and prudent conduct to govern its roadways.
[Vol. 79:155
II. DRIVING HABITS
A. What Montanans Did and Did Not Do
What was the consequence of this change? In the short term, the effects were minimal. Throughout 1996 drivers did not significantly alter their conduct under their new-found roadway freedom. Although the percentage of
motorists traveling above 80 mph increased from 2% to 5 total average speeds increased negligibly, from 72 to 74 mph during the law's first few months. In fact, speed played no part in the first twelve traffic fatalities. Lynn Conn, a Helena resident, seemed to typify Montanans' attitude toward the Basic Rule: "'I'm a 65 mph driver, and I imagine I'll just stay there.' The Director of the state's Highway Traffic Safety Division said, "'[a] lot of press outside the state did not assume Montanans had a modicum of common sense .... I still give the average Montanan a lot of credit for pretty much driving in a reasonable and prudent manner. The. world is not going to hell.' Anecdotal evidence indicates that Montanans' driving behavior remains relatively constant in terms of speed, although speed limit proponents warn that motorists, now more accustomed to the increased roadway speeds, may be driving less carefully.
Three factors may explain the constancy of drivers' behavior. First, it may take a significant period of time for a change in the speed limit to produce changes in driving behavior. Second, as Montanans like to insist, the state's motorists appear to possess good judgment and honed ability in traversing its highways. This accounts for the striking 72 mph speeds before the repeal of the law and the nominal initial increase thereafter. Republican Governor Marc Racicot contended that, "'[w]e tend to respect each other, instead of aiming for one another. I have great faith that Montanans will be concerned with safety and security.' '"56 One state resident maintained that Montanans are "'used to driving long distances, and they know which roads are safe at which speed.'
The third and perhaps the most compelling explanation of drivers' constant speeds may be Montana's often treacherous road conditions. These conditions, more than formal law, may dictate much driving behavior. Interstate drivers in Montana face a litany of perils: brutal weather, icy pavement, 1999]
roads not designed for high-speed travel, animal crossings, and sharp curves.5 Epitomizing both Montanan drivers' judgment and the often challenging road conditions, one resident stated, "'[i]f you don't drive in a reasonable and prudent manner, you end up in the ditch."' A visiting reporter said that in Montana, "'[t]he real limits are set by the land.'" Thus it appears that driving behavior in Montana is largely a function of local knowledge it is partly for this reason that the change in law was far less important to behavior than it was feared to be. Before the abandonment of the national speed limit, citizens of Montana were violating it regularly, and when the abandonment occurred, those citizens continued to do what they were doing. B. Tourists and Speed Magnets
Tourists are the central exception to motorists' constant driving behavior. The repeal of the national speed limit turned Montana into a national speed magnet.
Montana receives an estimated seven million visitors annually. Many of these outsiders came to be known, or more appropriately, derided, as "speed tourists." Such visitors, spurred by their desire to drive fast, descended on the "Montanabahn." Their exploits became legendary. A Porsche driver boasted that he traveled from Missoula to Billings, a distance of 350 miles, in less than three hours a Minnesota car club wanted to race "700 Corvettes ... across the state at 150 miles an hour " a writer for Forbes hit a
DOING WITHOUT SPEED LIMITS
top speed of 116 mph in a Miata fifteen test engineers drove a convoy of Mercedes through the state "at speeds in excess of 95 mph " a French tiremaker "wanted to run tests at 140 mph " and lastly, a reporter for Popular Mechanics drove a high-test minivan, aptly named "The Montana," across the state at 113 mph to review the vehicle.
The resulting behavior outraged state officials: "'I think [the planned Basic Rule violations] show a real lack of respect, not only for the law in Montana, these were professional drivers, not everyone else on the road was." Highway Patrol officials were equally livid. One officer questioned a motorist who was stopped for driving 107 mph over a bridge deck, asking, "'What would happen to you in your home state?"' When the man responded that at home he would have been charged with reckless driving, the officer questioned, "'Well, what makes you think it's all right to do that in this state?"
The influx of tourists altered both average speeds and highway fatalities. But before analyzing these statistics, it is important to note their limitations. Most importantly, the Highway Patrol's statistics lack appropriate detail in determining the full impact of Basic Rule driving patterns. For example, the statistics do not reveal how many of the out-of-staters' accidents occurred at times when the Basic Rule was not the governing law and a numerical speed limit was in effect. Nor do the reports specify what percentage of the outof-state drivers' accidents involved factors other than speed, including alcohol or failure to wear seat belts, both significant contributors to highway fatalities. Lastly, fatality statistics tend to fluctuate considerably each year, even under conditions when the posted speed limit remained constant, again
Within the context of the preceding paragraph's disclaimer, noticeable driving patterns, especially those involving out-of-state motorists, began to emerge. Although the average speed increased only 2 miles per hour during the Basic Rule's first few months, by the close of the law's first year, average speeds climbed to 78 mph on the. interstate, in significant part (it appears) because of tourists. Moreover, a Highway Patrol study indicated that "60 percent of the cars traveling more than 85 mph were from out of state. The figure was 75 percent for those traveling more than 95 mph."79 Another investigation documented that out-of-staters, particularly Canadians, drive at higher speeds than residents on Montana's roads.
The Montana Highway Patrol's roadway safety statistics tend to support the perception of tourists as the more dangerous drivers. From 1996 to 1997, the number of out-of-state vehicles involved in fatal accidents increased by 38%,81 and the number of roadway deaths involving out-of-state vehicles increased by 69% during the same one-year span.82 These numbers should, of course, be put in perspective. For example, non-Montanans were involved in only 23% of fatal accidents in 199683 and only 26% in 199784[Vol. 79:155
DOING WITHOUT SPEED LIMITS
hardly an overwhelming proportion of roadway crashes. Similarly, nonMontanans were involved in only 24% of roadway deaths in 1996 and 30% in 1997.85 These statistics suggest a simple conclusion. Most fatal accidents do not include out-of-staters, but the Basic Rule attracted unsafe drivers from out of state, and this helped produce an increase in fatalities including nonresidents. C. A Note on Coordination
The varying driving habits of Montanans and out-of-staters indicate a general coordination problem under the law each motorist may interpret the Basic Rule differently, thereby causing significant divergences in traffic flow. Such speed disparities can be perilous, potentially increasing the "risk of crashes and other hazardous traffic situations, such as unsafe lane changes and following too closely."86 A Highway Patrol study estimated that the number of people traveling with the general traffic flow decreased to a record low of 41 This is important because accidents may be a function of flow rather than mere speed. Hence a numerical speed limit has an advantage to the extent that it provides a number around which drivers may coordinate their behavior. The significant increase in fatalities in 1997 may have resulted partly from this lack of coordination. D. Early Results
Despite the slightly elevated speeds and potential traffic flow disparities, the statistics tallying the Basic Rule's effects, measured in terms of fatal accidents and total roadway deaths, remain inconclusive. During the first year under the Basic Rule, both fatal accidents and total roadway deaths declined by 4.8% and 7.9%, respectively. Fatal accidents on interstate highways,
the roads where the Basic Rule most commonly applies, did increase from 33 in 1995 to 37 in 1996, although the latter was below the 39 lethal crashes recorded in 1994.89
Statistics from this first year appeared to suggest that proponents of the Basic Rule were correct on some disputed questions. In particular, supporters contended that increased speeds on highways lured motorists away from dangerous country roads and onto better-designed, more expedient highways. Consequently, although interstate deaths increased, the Basic Rule promoted safety by decreasing total deaths on all roads. 9' The first year under the Basic Rule seemed to fulfill the promise of efficient, self-regulating, and most surprisingly, safer, travel on Montana's roads.
In the following year the safety tide turned dramatically. During 1997, fatal accidents increased by 26% and total roadway deaths soared by Speed proved particularly lethal. Measuring those crashes where speed was a factor, fatal accidents increased 39%93 and total deaths rose by 47%.
Yet the pattern reversed, though not as markedly, in 1998. As of August 18, 1998, comparing the year-ago period, fatal accidents increased a meager .77%95 and total roadway deaths actually declined by 6.2%.96 Even the presumably virulent element of speed proved less troublesome in 1998. Again comparing year-ago periods, fatal crashes in which speed was a factor decreased by and total roadway deaths involving speed as a factor decreased by
(Vol. 79:155
This data is even less conclusive than the vacillating numbers indicate. For example, when comparing 1996 to 1997, excepting those accidents where a numerical speed limit was in effect (i.e., non-Basic Rule times or zones), the increases in fatal accidents and total roadway deaths amounted to 15 and 28 %, 100 respectively-higher numbers from the previous year, but not as devastating as the original figures. Deleting those accidents where alcohol was a factor further ameliorates the situation. Calculating fatal accidents and total deaths without those incidents where alcohol was a factor, the numbers rise a modest 13%1o and 19%,102 respectively. Even the specter of unbridled Basic Rule speed, seemingly a leading factor in roadway deaths, may be less important than it seems in light of the complexity in tracing causation. The Highway Patrol suggested, "'[i]t's really difficult to pin down this crash and perhaps this death."10 In short, driving safety under the Basic Rule fluctuates, producing relatively less hazardous motoring in 1996 and year-to-date 1998, while exacerbating roadway fatalities in 1997. Equally important, the Basic Rule stands as only one factor in roadway safety analysis conditions such as alcohol and unsafe driving during times or in zones with numerical speed limits also were significant elements in this multifaceted problem. Of course it is possible that some of these conditions are connected with the Basic Rule. Dangerous driving while drunk may be aggravated in the absence of a numerical speed limit, and reckless driving in zones without such limits may have a "spillover" effect on zones with numerical limits. 1999]
There is also reason to question the meaning of the fatality figures themselves, because such data varies enormously from year to year. For example, from 1987 to 1988 Montana roadway deaths decreased by 15%, while increasing by 17% from 1989 to 1990.104 Consider the following chart:
1980-1998105
Measured in historical context, the 34% increase in roadway fatalities in 1997 appears to be a statistical anomaly within this fluctuating /range, while the aggregate of almost three years under the Basic Rule is not greatly out of line with historic patterns of overall roadway death variations. Some state lawmakers have so urged, with one asserting, "'[a]s far as I can see, the staworth of statistics are not enough to make a determination." The Director of Montana's Highway Traffic Safety Division captured the essence of the fatality-rate debate, noting, "[i]f you're looking for a compelling reason to have a maximum speed limit, you won't find it in the data."
In conclusion, the Basic Rule has done little to alter Montanans' driving behavior. Tourists, however, relish the lack of numerical limits, potentially contributing to divergent traffic flows and increased overall speeds. Overall, the nascent fatality figures, representing a decrease in deaths in 1996, a substantial increase in 1997, and a subsequent decline in 1998 year-to-date com-
parisons, suggest a possible increase in unsafe driving, but offer an inconclusive verdict on Basic Rule safety.
III. TRADEOFFS
The Basic Rule carries with it both advantages and disadvantages. Although we cannot undertake a full cost-benefit analysis here, we can cast light on some of the important variables. Part of the analysis involves a form of "risk-risk tradeoffs,"109 which occur when the regulation of one risk affects another risk. Just as regulation of one source of environmental danger (such as nuclear power plants) may increase the danger from another source (such as coal-fired power plants), so too for speed limits. Increasing or decreasing speed limits may increase some risks while decreasing others. For example, a higher speed limit on an interstate highway may increase deaths on the interstates while reducing the use of, and deaths on, less traveled, more dangerous roads. Hence, an increased speed limit may save aggregate lives. This section seeks to identify and analyze some of the most important tradeoffs. A. Safety
The most heralded detriment of Montana's Basic Rule is the law's impact on roadway safety. As noted in Part II.B above, while the numbers are less than conclusive, it seems fair to characterize Montana's roads as somewhat more dangerous under the Basic Rule. Increased speeds, reckless tourists and traffic flow disparities appear particularly hazardous under the new law. Admittedly, the evidence is ambiguous, for it is possible to claim that many of the accidents and deaths occur at times or in zones not governed under the Basic Rule, that such numbers tend to fluctuate from year to year, and that increased seatbelt usage and decreased use of alcohol could have dramatically increased safety. These claims undercut the most alarmist reading of the data. More evidence is necessary for a final judgment currently, it appears that the Basic Law has decreased safety by a modest but non-trivial amount. On the whole, safety, while the most significant concern, cannot yet be shown to be more than a slight detriment overall. B. Fuel Efficiency
Decreased fuel efficiency represents another adverse consequence of the Basic Rule' As vehicle speed increases, fuel efficiency decreases, thereby causing motorists to spend more on gasoline and consume more than necessary of a non-replenishing natural resource. The Popular Mechanics re1999]
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW
porter who test drove the Montana minivan throughout the state provides a colorful discussion of the decrease in fuel efficiency at high speeds, writing, "[b]ack at 113 mph, the trip computer on the Trans Sport [Montana minivan] says we're averaging 6 miles per gallon. Right there, we discover the first drawback of traveling-even legally-at such high speeds. At this rate, the Trans Sport's 24-gal. tank will be dusty by Tarkio, about 125 miles down the road."1 Conversely, a commercial truck driver noted the economic advantage of lower speeds, stating that on his trip through Montana from Vancouver, British Columbia, to Hartford, Connecticut, "'[i]t's about a thousand bucks in my pocket to drive slower."' I
Reasonable questions, however, can be raised about the fuel efficiency argument. Obviously, fuel efficiency alone is not the criterion upon which to establish speed limits if it were, the law would limit vehicles to their most efficient and unrealistically low speeds of 35 to 40 mph. It is also possible through, for example, higher miles per gallon or using light rather than heavy trucks. Even accounting for such rebuttals, however, decreased fuel efficiency looms as another Basic Rule disadvantage.
DOING WITHOUT SPEED LIMITS
in ozone-forming Nox [oxides of nitrogen] emissions." The EPA survey estimated that Montana faced a 12.74% increase in ozone forming emissions. On the other hand, Montana already meets the national primary and secondary standards for ozone, and hence the increase in air pollution from automobiles does not appear to create serious risks of any kind. An official from the Montana Department of Environmental Quality, Jim Carlin, found a negligible impact on the environment of motorists' higher speeds."16 While Mr. Carlin noted elevated levels of carbon monoxide around Billings and Missoula were probably attributable to increased speeds, he characterized the practical effect of such speed-related increases in air pollution as "hardly even quantifiable they [the higher levels of emissions] wouldn't be a good reason to debate the speed limit law."" This appears to be a plausible view, though the increased pollution certainly counts as an adverse effect. D. Tourism
The fact that Montana operates as a "speed magnet" is not only a negative perhaps the Basic Rule actually helps generate more tourism, thereby creating various positive welfare effects. This is certainly a reasonable judgment. Nevertheless, there is a debate about whether the "reasonable and prudent" standard might decrease tourism, another potential drawback." Initially, as with many other aspects of the new law, Basic Rule opponents made alarmist predictions, forecasting a steep drop in tourism,11 Montana's second largest industry. But these predictions were based on anecdotes, not evidence. For example, the Highway Patrol reported that "one out-ofstate woman had called to say she was canceling her vacation for safety reasons."' 2' A Maine newspaper, after observing only one month under the Basic Rule, exhorted:
A lot of people from other states will avoid driving through Montana
now that they know some of the barriers are down against extravagant
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW
how people will view a state with its speeders unleashed. That gorgeous state suddenly looks like a place to visit some other year." In analyzing a potential decrease in tourism, the Billings Gazette polled travel agents in New York, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia and New Jersey to query whether vacationers intended to cancel planned trips to Montana.1 None reported any cancellations. Christopher Reynolds, a Los Angeles Times travel writer, concurred that the spate of publicity would not deter tourists. The general manager of one of Missoula's newest hotels asserted, "I think the speed limit [the Basic Rule] will bring people into Montana." An official from Travel Montana, the state's tourism agency, confirmed that "there is no indication that the law has either helped or hindered tourism." In the end, speed limits seem to have no significant effect on Montana's robust tourism industry. Any decrease from frightened motorists has probably been matched by those seeking a state without numerical speed limits. E. Reputation
A final concern to Montana under the Basic Rule, the detriment to the state's reputation, is less tangible. Montana has endured national ridicule and derision from the public since instituting the Basic Rule. Comedians poked fun at Montana and its free-wheeling spirit.128 Others have been less charitable. National Public Radio's "Car Talk" program labeled Montanans
"a bunch of morons." Syndicated columnist Tony Kornheiser was equally condescending in his description of Montanans, quipping, "[h]ave you seen the kind of people who live in Montana? Montanans make West Virginians look like it's opening night at Lincoln Center. This is the end of Montana as a state and the beginning of Montana as a test track." A Highway Patrol officer lamented that the Basic Rule "'[m]ade us the joke of the nation.'"'13
Montanans viewed outsiders' criticism as an attack on their state's values and vehemently defended their libertarian ways. Governor Racicot's Communication Director bristled, "'[tihe tone of much of the coverage has been comfortable if they don't have someone else telling them what to do." One resident replying to Kornheiser's arrogant missive did not mince words:
The whole thing shakes down to a simple truth about how we do things
here. Our legislature made a law reflecting reality instead of prescribing it. We're doing just fine with that, thank you, we're used to being
responsible for ourselves. If you can't come to terms with that, don't
drive here. Despite these impassioned rebuttals, Montana's image emerged a bit battered from the national press pounding. On the whole, however, since tourism remains unaffected and Montanans themselves shrug off outsiders' opinions, the eccentric reputation may prove a source of pride for the state's independent residents. 1999]
The benefits under the Basic Rule, although more difficult to quantify than the detriments, appear substantial. Increased efficiency represents the most important advantage under the new law. The state's vast distances, isolated commercial centers and dearth of traffic argue for the value of higher
speeds.1 There may well be significant productivity gains from time saved. Highway Patrol Sergeant Robert Koch highlighted the economic importance of saving time on the roadways, noting, "'[w]e have a lot of people making a living driving, . . and they are appreciative of the fact they can drive 70 or even 80 miles per hour on the interstate."" Residents also favor the increased speeds to facilitate weekly errands or enhance social life. The increased speeds can result in substantial time savings. "A car going 65 mph takes more than 10 hours to cross Montana. Go 80 mph, and you shave off two hours." Overall, a U.S. News & World Report article aptly summarized the productivity argument, stating, "[fluel efficiency has doubled since 1974, and saving a few bucks on a long trip by doing 65 vs. 75 is hardly compelling. But many drivers will find savings of an hour or two in travel time quite appealing." It would be highly desirable to quantify the various savings from these efforts, though we have not been able to do so here.
Interestingly, Basic Rule supporters also claim increased safety as an advantage under the Basic Rule. Proponents contend that prior to the law, the majority of motorists did not obey the posted speed limits.1 Consequently, advocates argue, drivers who adhered to the mandated levels were actually dangerous, disrupting the traffic flow by traveling significantly slower than most other vehicles on the road.141 Furthermore, proponents claim that the
DOING WITHOUT SPEED LIMITS
prior law extended driving times over long, tiring distances, decreasing roadway safety.' One Montanan emphasized the weariness and peril of such protracted travel: "'The big killer out here is falling asleep on a getting fatigued." "143 All in all, proponents' safety arguments, contradicting speed limit advocates' safety claims, require empirical evaluation. We have not found much direct evidence in their favor.
Montanans' deep sense of pride and satisfaction with the Basic Rule represents an intangible, yet not trivial, benefit. The Basic Rule epitomizes Montanans' self-reliant attitudes. One reporter's comments summarized the citizenry's gratification as follows: "[T]he core issue has to do with sustaining'the cult of Western independence. No one-certainly not some pudgyfingered, Hyundai-driving carpooler at the Department of Transportation in the District of Columbia-tells the independent man how fast he can drive." The Basic Rule generates a heartening chorus among Montanans. One individual exclaimed, "'I think no speed limit is the most
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW
fabulous thing that ever hit the United States." A reporter described the state's euphoria, noting that "Montana has discovered the modern equivalent of the 'yee-hi!,' dust-stirring stagecoach gallop, and it is fun." Eliciting a wellspring of public support, the Basic Rule fosters an incalculable, but perhaps important, advantage the law represents an extension of Montana's distinctive culture, embodying and affirming residents' independent values.
A. In General
For law enforcement officials, the Basic Rule is both a blessing and a bur-
drivers and Basic Rule infractions range from $70 the result was a windfall for the state treasury. State revenues increased by an estimated $545,000 during the law's first year.154
Another benefit to law enforcement under the Basic Rule is the wellspring of public support for "reasonable and prudent" driving. For example, the Montana office of the American Legion reinstituted its custom of commemorating fatal crash scenes with miniature steel crosses, a practice which it had not undertaken in 40 years. In addition to the American Legion's efforts, Montana embarked upon a major advertising campaign to inform motorists about the Basic Rule and encourage safe driving. Described as a "public information blitz," the $20,000 campaign intones, "Whoa, Dude, there is a Speed Limit in Montana." The state uses a variety of mass media in targeting its message primarily to non-Montanans.160
Despite the increased revenues and enhanced civic support, law enforcement faces significant burdens in administering the Basic Rule. First, officers have encountered more roadside confrontations with motorists. The law's subjective nature results in a growing number of "official-violator relationships," where drivers argue with officers over appropriate speeds. 1999]
Second, the Basic Rule's mutable standards encourage motorists to challenge citations in court, resulting in more numerous and protracted trials. Consequently, law enforcement and Montana's legal system must endure a deluge of Basic Rule cases. The Highway Patrol described the increasing workload:
More offenders are taking basic rule violations to court. Thus officers
must prepare for the case and appear in court for these challenges. Because of the law's subjectivity, trials involving basic rule violations tend
to take more time. Case preparation and court appearance time have
increased by 614 hours over the previous year [1995].164 Montana's Attorney General, Joseph Mazurek, derided the increase in court time and costs, emphasizing the detriment to public safety by decreasing officers' time patrolling the highways. Third, the increase in accidents under the Basic Rule resulted in a further drain on officials' time. Comparing 1995 to 1996, officers spent an additional 4,000 hours in 1996 investigating crash sites, a 9.6% increase from 1995.166 Fourth, local courts appear doubly affected, as they deal with both the rising case load as well as recording the Basic Rule infractions. Finally, uncertainty about the meaning of the rule means that drivers do not know, in advance, when they will be violating the law, and hence there is a risk of lack of fair notice-a point we take up below. In the end, law enforcement faces a dilemma. On the one hand, the increased revenues, the American Legion's efforts, and the state's advertising campaign facilitate the Highway Patrol's efforts to ensure roadway safety.
DOING WITHOUT SPEED LIMITS In opposition, roadside confrontations, court time, legal costs, crash investigations and an overburdened judicial system make enforcement more difficult. Despite the augmented revenues and moral support, it appears that the demands of apprehending, investigating and prosecuting Basic Rule violations significantly burdens Montana's thinly-staffed Highway B. Administering Standards
The most difficult challenge under the Basic Rule is establishing workable criteria for arrest and prosecution. The essential problem is that there is no quantitative basis for deciding whether a motorist has violated the law. Variously described as "confusing," "nebulous,"170 "squishy," "vaguely defined,"1 "arbitrary and inconsistent," and "an enforcement nightmare," administering the Basic Rule is an onerous task because it is so unclear. Law enforcement officials and motorists find the law too subjective, hindering both drivers' ability to comply with the Basic Rule and the Highway Patrol's ability to deter violators. A reporter analogized the dilemma to asking every law enforcement official "to decide how many drinks each driver may have, based on body weight and type, before becoming too 1999]
Opinions ranged from "'they'll ticket you if you go past to "'[b]reak 90, and you better start looking over your shoulder,"" to a Highway Patrolman's assertion that "'in my opinion, 90 is an unsafe speed for pretty much any conditions.""
Speeds of more than 100 mph are particularly vexing for law enforcement. Many officers state the refrain that "'[a]nything in triple digits is probably a ticket," '" defining 100 mph as "the real Montana speed limit." But others are not as certain that the 100 mph threshold triggers a violation. When queried whether a motorist legally could drive more than 100 mph, Major Steve Barry, Deputy Chief of Montana's Highway Patrol, admitted, "'I can't really answer that."" Another officer acknowledged that he would be disinclined to stop a professional driver on a desolate highway at speeds in excess of 100 mph.
Montana's judiciary also is reluctant to assign a fixed numerical speed limit. Some judges impose a de facto 85 mph limit, asserting, "'[b]ring that speed into my court and that person is guilty." Other judges disagree, contending "there's no speed that would necessarily result in a convicmight be perfectly This disparity in judicial attitudes has caused many officers to complain that "dangerous" drivers are often "let off by
[Vol. 79:155
DOING WITHOUT SPEED LIMITS
Frustrated by the lack of established limits, some Highway Patrol officers and state officials resorted to employing non-numerical guidelines to encourage Basic Rule compliance. One Highway Patrolman exhorted, "'Don't drive so fast you can't enjoy the scenery!" Other officers emphasized conformity with prevailing traffic patterns, warning, "'People who are passing everything-that's the type of person we're going to be focusing on." Finally, some law enforcement officials appealed to drivers' caution, imploring individuals to travel "at a speed that would be comfortable with a carload of your children." 190
The dearth of consistent standards resulted in arbitrary and ineffective enforcement. The discretion of scores of officers, prosecutors and judges combined with the numerous Basic Rule conditions concerning weather, roads, and vehicle maintenance fosters inconsistency.' ' Additionally, the Highway Patrol asserts that the Basic Rule's subjective nature hinders enforcement by creating longer vehicle stops and increased court appearances. Consequently, law officers spend less time on the road, and the roadside stops become more confrontational, detracting from overall safety and enforcement efficiency.
A recent Park County case involving a motorist traveling at 101 mph illustrates the debate over establishing workable standards.'95 A district court jury acquitted the driver of any Basic Rule violations.1 The decision incensed law enforcement officials. Highway Patrol Chief Craig Reap stated "'[i]f someone hits your car at 101 mph, wouldn't you be outraged to hear there's no violation?""' The Attorney General was equally indignant, proclaiming "if being caught driving 101 mph isn't violating the basic rule, ... [I don't] know what [is]."1 The defendant's attorney countered that the driver's background as a mechanic, the car's exemplary maintenance, and
the deserted road's flat surface made travel at 101 mph perfectly reasonable and prudent. The attorney dismissed claims that the law was confusing, emphasizing the jury's sound judgment in considering the totality of the driving environment.
The Basic Rule has had a detrimental effect on the consistency and potentially the overall effectiveness of Montana's law enforcement. Admittedly, the Basic Rule affords ample and possibly excessive discretion. However, the cause of the "standards" problem emanates not only from the law's vagueness, but also from patrolmen' and judges' variable interpretations of the Basic Rule's expressed "reasonable and prudent" standards. Those officers and judges who establish their own, perhaps idiosyncratic, numerical limits and uniformly stop or convict defendants under fixed guidelines might be thought to endanger both the spirit and the letter of the Basic Rule, in turn creating an uncertain patchwork of rule-free and rule-bound law enforcement. A more uniform enforcement process might have reduced this problem. Consequently, the Basic Rule's enforcement problems stem partly from the vagaries of individual assessments and multiple conditions. These points lead naturally to the question of whether the Basic Rule compromises values associated with the rule of law.
Drivers face numerous opportunities to either comply with or disobey the rule of law. As discussed previously, Montanans routinely ignored prior speed limits, causing disrespect for the law and demoralizing the officers charged with enforcing the state's statutes. Furthermore, some officers speculated that violation of speed limit laws lead to infractions of other vehicular offenses and a general deterioration of rule of law values. Speed
limit opponents heralded the return of the Basic Rule, averring that the new law would cease turning "law-abiding citizens into scofflaws." 2°4
Rule of law values also suffer under the Basic Rule. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the Basic Rule also gives rise to additional traffic violations, although the infractions differ from those arising under prior speed limits. For example, officers report that drivers frequently do not decelerate when leaving the interstates and entering commercial centers. Law enforcement officials from neighboring states also report externalities. In Idaho, a state policeman assigned to patrol the Montana-Idaho border regularly stops drivers exceeding 90 mph. The Idaho officer notes that many motorists are unaware of Idaho's laws or are simply inattentive to their vehicle's speed, despite three signs denoting the change in state speed limits.
As with most effects of the Basic Rule, the law's effects on motorists' rule of law values appears inconclusive. While evidence suggests that traffic violations that are not related to speed have decreased, other speed-related violations are on the rise. Likewise, the theory that motorists are no longer being turned into "scofflaws" is countered by the significant increase in citations issued under the Basic Rule and by the externalities reported in border states.
One year after Montana reinstituted the Basic Rule on its highways, the state's Republican Governor, Marc Racicot, Democrat Attorney General, Joseph Mazurek, and the Highway Patrol led a campaign to reestablish numerical speed limits. Citing the rising number of accidents and interstate
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW
fatalities, the speed limits coalition proposed a daytime speed limit of 75 mph with a fine of $25 for driving 10 mph over the posted limit and no points against the individual's insurance record. Motorists driving more than 10 mph over the speed limit would incur additional fines and have the infraction posted to their insurance record.
State Senator Bill Crippen presented the coalition's proposal in a bill introduced in January 1997.215 The legislation faced an uphill battle from the outset. Proposed in a "legislature [that] has a long history of turning down proposals to increase speeding penalties," the bill encountered significant opposition and was defeated on a procedural vote of 35 to Although Senator Crippen managed to revive the legislation on a 26 to 24 committee vote to debate the issue before the full Senate, the bill's prospects seemed bleak.
Opposing lawmakers asserted that the public did not support altering the Basic Rule. Polls showed that 56% of Montanans and 58% of legislators opposed numerical limits. As one conservative legislator explained, manner. I went door to door during the election, and a good percentage didn't think government had any business interfering in how fast people want to drive."' Other speed limit detractors echoed the dearth of public support, noting that "a number of state groups representing county attorneys, lower court judges and sheriff and police officers didn't testify at the hearing because they declined to take a position on SB 64."221 Senator Arnie Mohl summarized the opposition position best, declaring "'[t]he public don't [sic] want a speed limit. Let's leave it lay."' Opponents ultimately prevailed, voting down the bill 41 to
In September of 1997, several state legislators renewed calls for numerical speed limits. Since the Montana legislature meets every other year and had concluded its 1997 session, several legislators petitioned the Secretary of
State's office for a special session to pass speed limit legislation. The tenth legislator's request on September 4, 1997 triggered a mail canvass of lawmakers proponents needed a majority of 76 votes to convene the legislature. Speed limit proponents again cited mounting highway fatalities as
227
Opponents rejected the link between the Basic Rule and fatalities. One lawmaker observed that "many of the deaths have involved alcohol or the failure to use seat belts, and that many have occurred at night, when a speed limit is in effect. Given the legislature's historic dislike of speed limits, S.B. 64's resounding defeat, and the overall lack of public support, it appeared unlikely lawmakers would vote to convene the legislature. These predictions came true as speed limit proponents lost their bid to reconvene the legislature by a lopsided vote of 110 to
The political polarization the speed limit issue engenders is the most interesting aspect of recent legislative actions. Although polls show that Montanans are roughly evenly split on the speed limits question, significant differences of opinion exist by geographic region, gender and age. For example, residents of Montana's more rural eastern and central regions favor the Basic Rule to shorten the time required to travel the long distances between the ar-
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW
Gender and age are even more indicative of individuals' preferences in the speed limits debate. When residents were asked whether they "would favor or oppose having the Legislature enact a specific, daytime speed limit," respondents split almost evenly on the question, with 48% in favor and 45% opposed. However, women favored the limits by a substantial 68% to 28% margin, while men opposed the limits 62% to Questioned on the specific proposal from Governor Racicot and Attorney General Mazurek, women favored the legislation by an even wider 69% to 25% margin. Men still opposed the limits plan, although by the smaller margin of 50% to 43%.236 Age appears to reinforce gender speed limit preferences. In similar surveys, men between the ages of 18 and 30 were the strongest Basic Rule advocates, while women over 63 were the leading supporters of numerical limits. The recent legislative actions exemplify Montana's factionalized opinion on the speed limits issue. Yet despite the clamor over increased highway fatalities and the role of excess speed in such accidents, until Montanans develop a consensus bridging geography, gender, and age, a legislative alteration of the Basic Rule seems unlikely.
In late 1998, a sharply divided Montana Supreme Court invalidated the daytime speed limit as unconstitutionally vague. The case involved a defendant who had been doing a steady 85 miles per hour. In a brief opinion, the Court concluded that the Basic Rule did not give the defendant "reasonable notice of the speed at which his conduct would violate the law." Neither the arresting officer nor the Attorney General was able to specify a speed that would have been reasonable for the defendant. The
Court emphasized that the law enforcement machinery of the state had not attempted to limit the discretion of police officers through guidelines, and that it had relied instead on individual, case-by-case judgments. Thus "the average motorist in Montana would have no idea of the speed at which he or not only permits, but requires the kind of arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement that the due process clause in general, and the void-for-vagueness doctrine in particular, are designed to prevent," largely because it delegates "basic public policy" to police officers, judges, and juries. A dissenting opinion by Justice Regnier emphasized that the defendant had been "[o]perating a vehicle at 85 miles per hour on a two-lane highway with frost heaves, steep hills, and curves, where farm vehicles may unexpectedly appear." Thus Justice Regnier's suggestion appeared to be that the defendant in the case could not reasonably claim to have lacked notice that he was violating the law.
The purpose of this paper is principally empirical, and thus we do not venture a detailed discussion of the Court's ruling under the due process clause. But what we have said here offers some lessons about the need for empirically-informed constitutional law. It is difficult for a court to venture a judgment about vagueness without knowing how a law operates in practice. A law that seems vague may be far less so when taken in the context of public and private practices. Note. for example, that on the day after it invalidated the Basic Rule, the Montana Supreme Court upheld the prohibition on "reckless driving," notwithstanding the apparently unclear definition of "reckless driving" as operating "any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property." The constitutional question is what legal terms are taken to mean, by public and private actors, and a seemingly open-ended term may be proved far less open-ended by practice.
The evidence that we have discussed does provide considerable support for the Court's ruling. As we have seen, diverse law enforcement officials interpret the basic law in diverse ways, and motorists cannot always know, with precision and in advance, how much speed is excessive. The strongest opinion for invalidation might have been empirical, emphasizing the unmistakable record of uncertainty and arbitrariness.
We think, however, that it was probably premature for the Court to invalidate the law. There is some evidence of an increasing degree of clarity about the circumstances in which drivers will be found to violate the law. At the very least, there seems to have been an emerging judgment about what 1999]
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LA W REVIEW
kinds of driving behavior would count as unreasonable and imprudent. Motorists, and grudgingly, law enforcement, were adjusting to the law.
Probably the best outcome would have been for the Court to reserve judgment on the ultimate issue with a holding that the defendant in the case was certainly on notice that he was not driving prudently. If the Court had reserved judgment on the due process issue, by showing that the particular defendant could not claim a lack of notice, it might have encouraged chief law enforcement authorities to provide greater guidance to the driving public, perhaps through illustrative examples of speeds that would be considered reasonable and speeds that would be considered unreasonable in diverse circumstances.
It remains to be seen how Montana will respond to the ruling of its Supreme Court. A revised version of the Basic Rule might attempt to provide greater clarity through some kind of standard ceiling, or it might, in the spirit of the Basic Rule, use guidelines and exemplars. It might even require the adoption of guidelines and exemplars by law enforcement officials the Court was obviously troubled by the failure of law enforcement to provide greater clarity for the driving public. On the basis of the evidence discussed here, we believe that it is legitimate to ask for greater guidance for rule of law purposes. But in a case in which the largest issues might best have been left undecided, the Court may well have invalidated the Basic Rule prematurely, at least in the absence of a more detailed factual report.
Montana's Basic Rule appears to be a simple proposition: During daytime hours on the state's highways and interstates, motorists must drive in a "reasonable and prudent" manner. Yet the Rule's impact on America's fourth largest state, its roadways, its courtrooms, and its residents, has proven to be anything but simple.
Enacted in accordance with Montana's libertarian principles, the Basic Rule drew national attention but caused no substantial difference in Montanans' driving habits in the short term. Although the average speed increased by a non-trivial amount from 72 mph to 78 mph, most Montanans continued driving at approximately the same speed. While remaining within historical fluctuation ranges, the state's total fatalities decreased during 1996, soared in 1997, and declined again in 1998 it remains unclear if this variation is attributable to the change in law or to some other factor or set of factors. The underlying lesson appears to be that driving habits are only partly a function of law. Probably the most discernible effect of the Rule is that Montana has become a "speed magnet," attracting tourists who view Montana's interstates as race tracks. It is also clear that the Basic Rule created several complex tradeoffs. Highway safety, fuel efficiency, air quality, and Montana's reputation suffered under the Basic Rule. Probable economic efficiency, increased social ties, shorter driving times, and personal satisfaction stand as benefits.
Enforcement is perhaps the biggest problem with the Basic Rule. Although ticket revenues have increased, roadside confrontations, accident investigations and court appearances also have increased, depleting the already scant resources of the Highway Patrol and judiciary. Furthermore, the subjective standard has proven an onerous task to administer. Arbitrary and inconsistent enforcement by the police, prosecutors, and judges impedes citizens' compliance and the law's effectiveness. Legislative attempts to reinstate a numerical speed limit have failed amidst geographic, age and gender factionalization. However, in late 1998, a sharply divided Montana Supreme Court invalidated the daytime speed limit as unconstitutionally vague, a move we have criticized in light of the insufficient factual record of the case.
A more consistent application of the law might have reduced some of these problems and may have prevented, or at least forestalled, the recent Montana Supreme Court's action. Recent evidence of declining roadway fatalities and Basic Rule citations may indicate that drivers were adapting to the flexible standard. Furthermore, as Montanans, tourists, the Highway Patrol, prosecutors and judges became more accustomed to "reasonable and prudent" travel, a consensus might have emerged, reducing the difficulty of establishing workable standards for law enforcement and the judiciary.
An overall evaluation of the law and its consequences would require more time and data. Even at this early date the transition from the 55 mph limit to the Basic Rule offers some significant lessons. It highlights the important role that social norms play in generating driving behavior. It reveals how a state may become a speed magnet or a speed repellent. It also illustrates the need to assess a number of effects in order to evaluate a change in transportation policy. Finally, the study demonstrates the palpable adverse effects of a vague, highly subjective standard on law enforcement. These lessons do not permit any simple or straightforward verdict on the Basic Rule. But they do bear on a number of recurrent debates in private and public law, most notably the choice between rules and standards, and the relationship between law and social norms. 1999]
BOSTON UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW
The Boston University Law Review is pleased to announce the election of its Editorial Board for the 1999-2000 academic year:
Editor-in-Chief Managing Editor Administrative Editor
