The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable

Article 3

The Wages of Stardom: Law and the Winner-Take-
All Society: A Debate
Robert H. Frank

Volume 6 | Issue 1

1-1-1999

Kevin M. Murphy

Sherwin Rosen

Cass R. Sunstein

Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable

Recommended Citation
Frank, Robert H.; Murphy, Kevin M.; Rosen, Sherwin; and Sunstein, Cass R. (1999) "The Wages of Stardom: Law and the Winner-
Take-All Society: A Debate," The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable: Vol. 6: Iss. 1, Article 3.
Available at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable/vol6/iss1/3

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in The University of Chicago Law
School Roundtable by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

The Wages  of Stardom:
Law and the Winner-Take-All  Society

A DEBATE

Each year The Roundtable sponsors  symposia  on topics  in which law and some
other academic or social interest intersect. "The Wages  of Stardom: Law and the
Winner-Take-All  Society"  is  our first symposium  of 1999,  and it focused on how
the  "Winner-Take-All"  phenomenon  affects  lawyer  salaries  and  faculty  hiring
and how both relate  to  the overall  legal profession, legal representation,  income
inequality, and other issues.

The "superstar?'  or "winner-take-all"  phenomenon  is  the idea  that, under cer-
tain  market  conditions,  a  small increase  in  talent can  result  in  a  disproportion-
ately  large  economic  benefit to  the  "winner,"  presenting  problems  to both eco-
nomic  efficiency and  social  equality. On Friday, February  26,  1999,  The Round-
table invited  four renowned  scholars to  debate whether, and  to what degree, the
superstar/winner-take-all  phenomenon  exists  and  affects  the  legal  community.
Cass  R_  Sunstein,  the Karl N. Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence  at  the Uni-
versity  of  Chicago  Law  School,  acted  as  our moderator.  Professor  Sunstein  is
widely  regarded  as  one  of  the  nation's  foremost legal  scholars  in  the  fields  of
constitutional  law, administrative  law, environmental law and how laws influence
human behavior  and vice versa. A few of his recent books includeAfter the Rights
Revolution: Reconceiving the Regulatoy State and Free Markets and Social Justice. Robert
H. Frank is  a  professor of economics  at the Johnson  Graduate  School  of Man-
agement  at  Cornell  University  and  is  Goldwin  Smith  Professor  of Economics,
Ethics,  and Public  Policy  at  Cornell's  College  of Arts  and  Sciences.  Professor
Frank, more  than  anyone,  has  brought  the  debate  about  the  "winner-take-all"
phenomenon  to  the public  eye,  particularly  with  the  1995  book he co-authored
with Philip  Cook, The  Winner-Take-All Society. His most recent book is  the widely
acclaimed  Lsuy Fever  Why  Mony  Fails to  Satisi in  an Era of Excess. Sherwin
Rosen is  the Edwin  and Betty Bergman Distinguished  Service Professor  of Eco-
nomics  at the University  of Chicago and Senior Fellow at the Hoover Institution.
He  is  considered  one  of the world's  foremost  experts in  the  fields  of labor  eco-
nomics,  applied  microeconomics  and  income  distribution.  In  1981,  Professor

2 

Roundtable

Rosen  started  the academic  debate  on  our topic with  his  article  "The  Economics
of Superstars"  in  The Ameican Economic Review. Kevin  M. Murphy  is  the  George
Pratt  Shultz  Professor  of Economics  at  the  University  of Chicago's  Graduate
School of Business.  In  1997, The American  Economic Association  awarded  Pro-
fessor  Murphy  the John Bates  Clark  Medal,  a prize  given  every  two  years  to  the
best American  economist  under the  age  of forty.  He is widely recognized  as  one
of the  top economists  in  the world for his work  on the causes  and  consequences
of income  inequality,  unemployment  and  economic  growth,  and his  research  on
labor,  minimum  wages,  human  capital  and  education  are  considered  ground-
breaking.

Both  Robert  Frank  and  Cass  Sunstein  argued  that  the  Superstar/Winner-
Take-All  phenomenon is  real and  poses  serious  problems  for society-problems
that  perhaps  government  intervention  can  solve.  Sherwin  Rosen  and  Kevin
Murphy were more  skeptical  about  this problem  and argued  that  the free market
can take  care  of any such  distortions.

WENDY  MOORE: Good  afternoon,  my  name  is  Wendy  Moore  and  I  am
the interdisciplinary  programs  editor  of The University of Chicago Law School Round-
table. I would  like  to  thank  all  of you for  coming  out and would  like  to welcome
you  to our winter  symposium:  The Wages  of Stardom.

The  other  day,  Robert  [Peterson],  Ariana  [Almajan]  and  I  were  talking  with
Professor  Uoseph]  Isenbergh  and  he  pointed  out  the  obvious  irony  that  all  of
our panelists  were  superstars.  I guess  that  goes  to  show how far  this  phenome-
non has  permeated  our society  and  also  the law school.  Indeed  each  of our pan-
elists  is  a  superstar  in his  field. Sherwin  Rosen  is  a  Professor  of Economics  here
at  the  University  of Chicago  and he  first wrote about  the superstar  phenomenon
in  his  1981  article,  "The  Economics  of Superstars."'  Professor Robert  Frank  of
Cornell  University  followed  up  these  ideas  and  expanded  on  them  in  a  number
of his  works  including  a  1995  book  he  co-authored  with  Philip  Cook called  The
Winner-Take-AllSodety.2 Kevin Murphy is  a professor  here  at the business  school
and  he  is widely  regarded  as  one  of the  best young  American  economists  and is
widely  renowned  for  his  work  in  labor  economics.  Finally,  Professor  Sunstein
here  at the law school is well known  to  all and is widely respected  for his work in
constitutional  law and law and human  behavior.

Each  of  our panelists  will  give  a  brief speech  on  the  topic  and  then  we  will
turn  it over  to  our audience  and your  questions.  Now  I will  turn  it over  to  Cass
Sunstein  our moderator  and participant. Thank you.

CASS  SUNSTEIN:  Welcome  to  all  of  you  and  a  special  thanks  to  the
Roundtable  whose members  have  done a wonderful job with  this and  have made
it  a pleasure  for  all of us. We  have  opening statements  that  are  reasonably short.
That  may  be a  surprise  to  our panelists  because  I haven't told  them  about it. Do

1.  Sherwin  Rosen,  "The  Economics  of Superstars,"  71  American Economic Review  845  (Dec

1981).

2.  Robert  H_  Frank and Philip J.  Cook,  The  Winner-Take-AllSodety  (Free  Press  1995).

1999]

Law &'y The Winner-Take-All Sodety 

3

they  look sad  or  happy?  [Laughtej The  statements  will  be  about ten  to  fifteen
minutes  each. We'll begin with Professor Frank.

ROBERT  FRANK. Thank you Cass,  I am pleased  to be invited to talk with
you  today and special thanks  to Wendy for calling me  a  superstar. That, I  think,
illustrates an important point in the superstar phenomenon  and that is it is highly
local.  The  only  reasonable  sense  in  which  I  could  be considered  a  superstar  is
that I am the  best at what I happen  to  do in economics,  but  since nobody  else
does  that it is a modest claim to fame. [aughtej

As  Wendy pointed  out, Sherwin  wrote a  very important article  in the  Ameri-
can Economic Review in  1981  called 'The  Economics of Superstars."  He picked
up on an idea  that Alfred Marshall  had actually  developed in the late 19t  century
and the idea is  a  very important  and simple idea.  In the  19th  century most  of us
listened to music  in person.  I heard  an interesting  statistic  on  an NPR program
about a year  ago  that in  the State of Iowa  alone in  the year 1900 there were  1300
opera houses.  I had to get  on the  Intemet the next day to make sure that I had
heard  right. After a  little  digging,  I  came  to  find  out that  the  program  director
didn't mean  opera  houses in the traditional  sense, but more like live music  halls.
In the State of Iowa  this is  still a very impressive number  in such a  small, largely
rural  state. That was  the  difference:  if you wanted  to hear  music back  then, you
went to hear it live. Everyone at that time would have been  delighted to hear the
best soprano, no  doubt, but the best soprano  couldn't be everywhere  at once.  So
there was  a very brisk market for hundreds,  literally thousands  of sopranos. The
best  earned  more,  to  be  sure, but  the  ones  down  in  the  ranking  around  2,000
were actually able  to make a living because of the demand.

Not  so  any longer,  when  most  of the  music  that you  now hear  is  recorded.
You  can  take Kathleen  Battle's  master tapes-no  one does  the Mozart arias  any
better, at  least  not that  I've  heard--and  can  stamp  out  copies  of them at  near
zero marginal  cost. Thus, there  is really no purpose  at this  point, if you're listen-
ing to recorded music, to listen  to the second-best  soprano.  You may have some
desire to hear  a few sopranos  but really it is  a short list. The best players,  because
of the  ability  to  expand their reach,  have,  over  time,  captured  a  larger  share  of
the national income.

In  1979,  the  95th  percentile  earner  earned  ten  times  the  5th  percentile  earner.
By  1993,  that ratio had grown  to 25.  It doesn't matter how you slice it. In every
category,  occupation,  or region  that you  look at, movements  in  that ratio  have
been  similar. The  standard human  capital model that we use  as  economists  tries
to  explain  differences  in  wage  earners,  or why  we  earn  more  over  time.  That
model, taken in its narrow form  at least, doesn't seem  to give much purchase on
the  change  in wage  distribution. There  doesn't  seem to have been,  according  to
my human  capital friends,  any huge change  in the distribution  of human capital,
this  loose amalgam  of all those personal characteristics  that determine  how pro-
ductive  you  are.  The smartest people  aren't  any smarter  than  they were  before,
the ambitious  are  not any more ambitious.  The mix of stuff is  pretty  much  the
same  there. The  return  to  certain  kinds  of human  capital  has  changed.  For ex-

4 

Roundtable

ample, if  you  look  at  the return  to  education,  college  graduates  earn  a  larger  re-
turn  on their  degrees  than  they  did  in  the seventies.  But  even if you  look within
the  distribution of college  graduates, you will see  that the college  graduates  at the
top  are  doing very well and  those at the bottom are  struggling  to hold  their  own,
even  losing  ground.  It is  clearly  better to  be in  some  fields rather  than  others.  If
you  are  a  computer scientist,  then you  have  done well  over  the last  fifteen  years.
If  your  master's  degree  was  in  English  literature,  then  it  has  been  a  tougher
struggle  for  you.  There  was  a  New  Yorker cartoon  that  I  clipped  about  two  or
three  years  ago--there  are  two  young  men  standing  in  a  field  on  sticks,  scare-
crows  essentially,  one  calling  out to  the  other,  "English  Lit, how about you?"  as
in,  what is  your  major?  But  slice  it a  different  way, look  at the English  literature
majors.  Those who  are  making  it in  that  field  are making  it in  a way  that  people
didn't in the past.

Cook  and  I  suggested  that  one  explanation  that  seems  common  in  many  of
these  changes  in  income  distribution  is  the  phenomenon  of increased  leverage.
Technology  is  enabling  top  players  to  extend  their  reach  in  a  variety  of  other
fields  as  well.  Top  players  are  more  productive  now  so  that  a  good  executive
decision  at one  time  only  meant  being able  to  do well in your  local  market, then
your  regional  market,  then  national  market  and  now  finally  a  global  market. A
bad  executive  decision, at one time, meant  that there was  not much  of a threat  of
reprisal  because  there  were  not many  competitors  in  your  local  market  and  oth-
ers  didn't  even know who  you were.  Now a bad  decision  at the  top means  many
potential  rival  firms  ready  to pounce  on your  operation,  seize  market  share  from
you  and  so  on.  So as  both  the value  of a good decision  and  the penalty  for a bad
one  has  increased,  I  think  that  we  have  seen  the  penalty  for  mistakes  grow
higher.

That  doesn't explain  why executive  salaries  in  the U.S. have  risen with  respect
to  executive  salaries  in  Europe,  where  the  ratio  is  not as  pronounced.  Another
important  ingredient  to  the  process,  Cook  and  I  argued,  was  the  free  agency
system, which,  as  you  will  recall in  sports,  was  the gateway  event that  led to  the
explosion  in  star  salaries  in  sports.  It  was  not  until  the  courts  awarded  free
agency  rights  to  players  that we  saw the  real  escalation  of player's  salaries.  It  is
similar  in  business  where  it  used  to  be  the  norm-not  any  legal  requirement,  a
fairly  little-violated  norm-that  promotion took  place  from within  the  company.
It wasn't  believed  that  an  executive  from  a  tobacco  company  could run  a  com-
puter  company.  That  has  all  changed  in  a  profound  way,  I  think,  in  the  last
twenty  years.  The  number  of CEOs  promoted  from the  outside  has  risen  about
50  percent  during  that  period.  It  is  not  uncommon  any  longer  to  see  a  Lou
Gerstner  to  go  from RJR to  IBM because  he is  a good manager  and to  have seen
the stock  of IBM go up many  fold.  It is  also  no surprise  to  see  his compensation
package  go up with  the value added. It is  this  combination  of greater  technologi-
cal  leverage,  the  ability  to  expand  your  reach  and have  more  of a  difference  on
the  bottom line,  and  the added  competition  that  attends  the transactions  as  peo-
ple bid for talent in  the market today.

1999]

Law &The  Winner-Take-All Sodey 

5

What we  see in  the  law is  that there are  similar  expansions.  It is  in  the law,  I
think, less  due  to  any technological  breakthroughs  that  allow  people to  expand
their reach  and just more of a  case  of the  stakes  being so  much higher  in many
important legal arenas.  Thus  a lawyer who once  sued on behalf of a  client with  a
stiff neck  for  $10,000, now heads  up  a  class  action where  there  may be two  or
three  billion  dollars  at  stake. The mergers  and acquisitions  lawyers  now arrange
deals  not in  the  tens  of millions  of dollars  but in  the  tens  of billions  of dollars
and the crumbs  from that cake add up to real money.

This  is  a  good development  for the  students  at the  U  of C law school. Many
of you  will  take  jobs  with  the  mergers  and  acquisitions  firms  and  other  high-
profile  firms  and  those  firms  control the  gateways  and  the  entry-level  positions
that lead to seven figure  salaries  in  fairly short order  and with fairly high regular-
ity. It is a very much  sought after  career path, and, not surprisingly, it is harder to
get on  that career path. What Cook and I discovered is  that the  credentials  that
you need  to  present in  order to get into an  elite school are now much more for-
midable  than  they were  twenty years  ago.  You  have  to  occupy  a  much  higher
position  on the percentile  range in terms of your test scores and grades  and your
activities.

You will  apply  for these positions,  there  will be mail-sack  after mail-sack  un-
loaded in the  admissions  personnel  office. They  will not have  time to  interview
everybody;  they won't even have  time to give  each  application  careful  considera-
tion. Whom will they  contact?  The easy  cut is to  talk to the people from U  of C,
from Harvard, Yale  and a handful  of other  schools. They  are  the  ones, after all,
who are more likely to  be the top players  in the next generation  of lawyers. They
have been  screened carefully by those schools. Not only that, they have a creden-
tial that identifies  them to the  client without a moment's  further  discussion that
they are from  the  elite.  The  firms  that recruit  know perfectly well that there are
extremely talented law students  coming out of the University  of Illinois, many of
them smarter than you are. However, that doesn't count if you have a brief time
to  persuade  the  client that if there  is  $25  billion worth of deal  at stake  and you
want the very best law firm that you can  find to manage it, who are you going to
call?  There  is  a  brisk  competition  for  the  reputation  of  premier  law  firms  to
manage  the premier  deals.  As long  as  that competition  goes  on--and there is no
reason  to  think that  it will  get  less  intense--I  think  that you  people  are  in  the
driver's seat.

There  are  some  problems  that have  emerged  in  society  as  a  result  of  these
forces-incomes  have  grown  more  disparate;  people in  the  middle  are  feeling
more  pressed.  They are attempting  to keep up  with consumption  standards  that
are further  and further out of reach. People  feel that they can't vote tax increases
to  pay the  teachers  or to  fix  the  potholes in  the  roads  and  this will  be  an issue
that you will confront. Do you want to  have seven  figure private  salaries  and sit
for an  hour in  a  traffic  jam  on your way to work?  Or  do you want to  consider
the  possibility  of taking  fiscal  steps  to  try  to  clean  up  the  overall  social  invest-
ment picture? That is a  decision that you will  confront and I think that when you
make that decision  try to  bear in mind how lucky you have been  to  have arrived

6 

Roundtable

at the  point were  you  are  now. It  is  very  hard  to  claim  the  moral  high  ground
from where  you sit.  Sure you've  worked  hard,  but why  do you work  hard? That
is  explained  by  genes  and  environment.  We  don't  know what mix  of genes  and
environment  explains  why  you  are  here,  but  it  is  some  mix  of those  two  and
which  of those  two  do  you  think you  are  morally  entitled  to  claim  great  credit
for?  So  rather  than protect  these  seven  figure  salaries  to  the last breath,  consider
what might be done with  them  in the public arena.

SHERWIN  ROSEN: We  have  a saying  around here:  "One is  world  famous

in Hyde Park."  We  are all world-famous  here.  [aughterj

We  had  a  nice Ph.D. dissertation  last year by Mark  Fisher, who  also  has  a  law
degree.  From  either  here  or  Harvard. He  gathered  some  nice  data,  for those  of
you who  are  lawyers,  about  earnings  among lawyers  in  top law firms. He himself
is  working  at Sullivan  &  Cromwell,  which  pays  among  the  highest  salaries.  An
average  associate  there earns  about  $150,000.  This  figure does not just reflect  the
new  hires  but  the  associates  as  a  whole  group.  The  average  partner  income,
profit per partner, is  about $1.5  million.

I basically  agree  with Bob  [Frank].  I had written  down  some remarks  because  I
am sort of verbally  challenged.  I would  rather read than  think of things extempo-
raneously-that  is  why I'm not a lawyer,  I guess.  Bob  said so  many things  that I
agree  with,  except  those  towards  the  end.  [In  a loud voice]  Do  not work  for any
non-profit  organizations!  Make  as much  money as  you  can and  give it to  worthy
causes!  [Laughter] The invisible  hand works  here, too.

Basically,  let  me reiterate  the  point  that  all  income  distributions  and  all  earn-
ings  distributions in  every society  that have ever been studied-and  this  probably
includes  the  Soviet Union,  but  nobody  ever  studied  it I  guess-is  right  skewed.
That  is,  it looks  like  a  log  normal;  at the  right  tail  there  are  some  very  high  in-
come  earners,  and  that  is  universal.  Now  sometimes  the  tail  is  longer  in  some
societies  than  in  others,  but they all  look like that. A lot of the people  who make
a  lot of money  are  lawyers  and  doctors,  where  there  is  great expense  in  learning
the  trade.  But  these  other  things,  when  you  look  at  the  real  huge  earners  like
Marcia  Clark, one  of the great  lawyers,  and  the guy in  the  coonskin  cap  that  she
talks  to-what  characterizes  those  types  of activities  is  that  the  cost  of produc-
tion  has  the  characteristic  that  average  cost  is  much  bigger  than  marginal  cost.
There is  kind of a scale  economy:  once you  get by the  first unit, everything else is
gravy.

It  is  like  that  old  joke  about  why  the guy  who  is  selling  something  to  you  so
cheap,  he is  losing a nickel  on each  item,  but he's  making it up in volume. Paugh-
ted]  That  is  how these  things  work.  How much  would  you  pay  to  watch  Oprah
Winfrey  on  television?  A  couple of bucks  maybe?  But there are  millions  of peo-
ple who  are willing  to do  that, and it is  that volume  effect that allows  her income
to be so large.  Her services  are not congested  because  they go  on television.

If  I write a  book...  [Looking at Frank] How much  money did you make  on that

book, anyway?  [Laughter] I bet it isn't so  much, but it is  still a great book.

1999]

Law & The Winner-Take-All Soaety 

7

FRANK- Wouldn't pay the interest  on their loans.  [More laughtej

ROSEN:  One hour of a lawyer's  time-pretty good!
Once you write the book-all of the cost in writing it is  in the first copy. Then
the  marginal  cost of producing  another  copy  is  basically  zero.  I  was  reading in
The New  York  Times that there  is a movie  in China that Disney is showing.  It is  a
story  taken  after  Chinese  legend,  and it was  thought  that  the  Chinese  govern-
ment wouldn't let it into  China,  but they finally  did.  However, nobody is  paying
to watch it in Shanghai  because it was pirated before they allowed it in. Now you
can  buy  a  copy  of this movie  for two  bucks, which  is  much  less  than the  price
that they are charging to let people at the theater  see it.

That is  the  nature  of these kinds  of activities  and for control  decisions  in  big
businesses  as  well  as  on  Wall Street,  where  if I can  invest  a  dollar  better  than
you,  well  then  I'll invest a  billion  better  than you,  and I'll get all  the  business.  I
won't  make  much  money  per dollar,  but I've  got a  lot  of dollars  on  the  table.
These hedge  funds,  they make very small margins-I  mean they work on practi-
cally  nothing. But  they are  rolling  over an incredible  amount  of money  on  each
transaction. That is how they make it

Now  for lawyers,  I think it is  in  the size  of the  claims. The  top lawyers work
on  big  claims.  The  people  at  Sullivan  & Cromwell,  Kirkland  & Ellis  and  those
firms  that you  are  going  to  enter  if you go  into  that line  of work are  handling
enormous  claims  because  they  are  probably  the  most  talented  people  as  far as
anyone can tell.

You can't run up a bunch of store-front lawyers into a major big-time law firm
partner. When  I was  thinking  of going into  the  law, all  the lawyers  that I knew
were  second-story  lawyers,  above  stores. The  trade  has  changed  a  fair  bit  since
that time. You  can't take  those kind of lawyers  and  make a  good one. You have
to  go hire  one  of the  top  people. Thus, it is  economic to  allocate the  big claims
to  the  big  talent because  that is  where  the  stakes  are  the  biggest  and where  the
input makes  the  most  difference.  These  lawyers  have very  large  marginal  prod-
ucts. They're worth the  money to  the  clients  that hire them.  As the  disputes  get
bigger, as Bob said,  then the income gets  bigger.

What's  been  surprising  to  me  in  the  law  is  that  the  incomes  of lawyers  has
been  rising  for  so  long.  I  had  once  studied  it  Since  the  mid-sixties,  litigation
went crazy, nobody understands  exactly why, and I don't understand why, either.
But lawyers'  incomes  haven't  missed  a  beat  since  then. There  was  a  little  drop-
off in  the  early  nineties,  but when  the  economy took  off, so  did the  income  of
lawyers. As  a result, what seems  to me to  need explanation, and relative to some
of the  remarks  in  Cook and Frank's  book, is  that you've  had a  huge increase in
supply of lawyers,  and yet apparently  the  demand  keeps  racing ahead  of supply.
It is hard  for me  to understand  that; I wish that I had a  better understanding of
what it is that  makes  legal  services  so  valuable.  I  suspect  that it has  to do  a  lot
with  the  growth  of wealth.  The  services  of lawyers  are  only  interesting  when
there  is wealth  on  the  table,  and we are  the richest  society in  the world.  We are
also  the most competitive,  and so we are  going to have a  lot of disputes. That is

8 

Roundtable

what  sustains  the  high  lawyer  population  here,  which  is  higher  than  anywhere
else in  the world.  But other than  that, I do not have  many  thoughts  on  the mat-
ter.

There is  another thing  that I would  like  to bring to  the table, again  emphasized
by Bob.  What I see-and  this  is  completely  speculative-when  I  see the increase
in  inequality  in  the  U.S.  (and  the  U.S.  is  the  economy  that  I  know  the  best) I
think  that  we  have  seen  a  lot more  stratification  in  higher  education  and maybe
lower  education.  I have  a  friend,  a very  distinguished  academic,  whose  kid is  in
sixth,  maybe  seventh  grade,  who  spends  half  of his  time  doing  her  homework
for  her in order  to  build  her  credentials  so  that  she can  get into the  U  of C  Law
School  one  day. The  cram  schools  in Japan  have  this  quality. I think the Koreans
banned  the  use  of cram  schools  at  one  point. I  think  that  this  is  troublesome,
and something  that I would like  to  get you  to  think about  because  I  don't under-
stand it.

There  are  only  about  ten schools,  when  we  are  talking  about  big time  money
in  elite law partnerships-we're  talking  about  this  place  and  Harvard  and  Boalt
Hall  and Yale  and  a  few  other places.  And  then  there  is  a  tremendous  drop-off.
If  you  get  an  M]BA  from  U  of  C  business  school,  the  average  guy  is  making
$125,000,  which  is  almost  what  Columbia  offered  to  pay  Robert  Barro.  How-
ever, if you  go  to  just the University of X  and get an  MBA,  then you're  going to
get  a  job  for  $60,000,  if you  are  lucky.  There  is  a  tremendous  concentration.
Since I went  to kind  of crummy schools,  except the University  of Chicago  where
I got  my  Ph.D.,  I  feel  that  the talent  is  a  lot more  spread  out  than  that. Thus,  I
find it  kind  of curious  about Sullivan  & Cromwell-I  looked it up-that 80  per-
cent  of  their  lawyers  are  from  the  top  fifteen  schools  and  maybe  half are  from
the top five.  There is  this  enormous  heaping.

Now let  me  just close  with  the  statement  that  this  is  true  in  graduate  schools
all  over  the  place-even  in  Economics-where  there  really  is  not  very  much
money in it. We  live  a  quiet life instead. A lot of top economists  come  from only
five or  six or  ten schools,  of which  we are  one  and MIT is  one  and so  on. Law is
a much  bigger  profession  than  economics,  so  in  some  sense  law  is  much  more
concentrated  in  sorting people  than  Economics  is.  Law must  be  fifty  times  the
size  of-more  than  fifty,  hundreds  of times  the  size  of-the Economics  profes-
sion, so this  concentration in law  schools  is a  bit troublesome  to me.

KEVIN  MURPHY  Thank  you. What  I'd like  to  do is  broaden  things  out  a
bit and  try  to  put today's  discussion  into a wider  context. I  do most  of my work
on  income  inequality  and  relative  wages.  It is  kind  of  funny-sometimes  I  get
drawn  into  things  like  this  symposium  today where  we  think  about  the  "super-
stars,"  or sometimes  it is  the "super-rich,"  and we  hear these  stories  that  the  top
two  percent  is  getting  everything  and  everybody  else  is  getting  nothing. Then  I
bounce  around  and go  to  some  poverty  discussion, and we  talk  about the under-
class  and  how  the  bottom  guys  are  falling  away  from  the  rest of us,  while  "we"
are still  doing okay.

1999]

Law &The  Winner-Take-All Sodey 

9

This  is  the reason, I guess,  that the  story I try  to tell people is  that the growth
in inequality is really a  much broader  phenomenon than what everyone  typically
talks  about  It is not a  story of the super-rich;  and it is  not a story  of the  under-
class.  Rising income  inequality is  really a story in which the higher up  the income
ladder you  are  the better you  have done, and the  lower down you are  the worse
you have done. If I were  to make  a graph--and  those of you who have been  in
my  class  have  seen  this  graph--and  I  put  what  income  percentile  you  are  in,
from the first percentile  to the 99th  percentile, on this axis  [drawing an imaginay X-
a~ds], and how much your wages  have gone up  over the past thirty years  on  this
axis  [drawing an  imaginay  Y-axis],  you  would  basically  get  a  straight  line.  You
would see  that wage  growth  has  been  highest at  the  top  and lowest at the bot-
tom, but there  has been expansion  between  the guy at the 25th percentile  and the
75th  percentile;  expansion  between  the guy  at  the  50th  and  the  10th.  While  we
might  think  that  the  superstar  phenomenon  is  relevant  in  certain  places,  it  is
dearly not the whole story. There  is  a much broader  set of phenomena going  on
out there than the superstar phenomenon.

Also, many people talk about growing income inequality along  another dimen-
sion-the  growth in  income  inequality both within  and between  groups. Proba-
bly the most important area  here to  think about is  education. There  certainly has
been  a growth in  the premium paid for education. The premium paid for college
graduates  over  high  school  graduates  roughly  doubled  from  1980  to  the  early
nineties.  The premium  paid  for  a  graduate  degree  has  gone  up  even  more.  In
fact,  in recent  years,  this is  probably  the  education  level  that has  done  the very
best---graduate  degrees relative to the college degrees.

Nonetheless,  we  are  not  talking  about the  very tip-top  as  opposed  to  every-
body else. In terms  of inequality, we are talking  about a widening of the  distribu-
tion  generally.  The  notion  is  that  among  lawyers,  earnings  inequality  has  gone
up-but it is also  true that earnings  inequality has gone up among secretaries  and
among  janitors  as  well.  I don't  know, maybe  there  is  competition  to  have  the
utmost greatest janitor in the world, but somehow that one missed  me.  aughtej
I guess  what I'm  saying is  that I believe  the  superstar  phenomenon  is real. I
think it is important  But I don't think it is as  important even if inequality hadn't
grown.

I think we  have  to know  that it's  there.  But why is  it? People  talk  about the
growth  in  inequality, but I don't think  they  realize the level  of inequality  that is
there to begin with. We talk about one person earning twenty times what another
does.  Or  talk  about basketball  players  where  one  earns  a  hundred  times  or  a
thousand  times  what another  basketball  player  does.  What  these  figures  don't
mention is  that it has  to be that  somehow  these  people can  do  something  in a
different way.  It's not  that Michael Jordan  can play  basketball  against  a  thousand
guys  and beat them. He's  good, but he's  not that good. With a  thousand guys  on
the  court,  he couldn't  move.  [Laughted The  point  is--and it is  like  that  court-
room-you  can't have a thousand  storefront lawyers in  that courtroom compet-
ing against that  one guy. It is really the  existence  of congestion  on  the number-

10  Roundtable

of-people  margin  without  congestion  on the other resources  margin  that really is
the game  being played in  the superstar phenomenon.

Now what might have  caused  this  phenomenon  to  grow over time? Improved
capital  markets-that  is  something  that  people  might  think  about.  Improve-
ments  in  information  and  the  flow  of  information  are  other  possibilities.  The
ability  of mass  media,  clearly.

Why  does  Michael  Jordan  make  so  much?  Well,  you  think  about  the  differ-
ence  between  Michael  Jordan  and  another  player  on  the  team.  Surely Jordan
makes  it more  likely that  you  are going  to win, but he  also  sells a  completely  dif-
ferent product. He is  a hero.  You  could have  a  combination  of players who  con-
tribute  just as  much  to winning, but  they wouldn't be a  hero. Jordan  is  a national
spokesman.  He  sells  products.  In  essence,  he  is  able  to  make  that  record  that is
replicated  for thousands  and  thousands  or millions  of individuals.

So  the  superstar  phenomenon  is  there,  we  know  that  it  is  part  of  the  story.
However,  in  my  opinion,  it  is  not  dear  that it  is  the  major part  of the  story  of
overall  growth in inequality.

One of the things we know,  for example, is  that a lot of the growth  of inequal-
ity  occurs  across  occupations.  That  is  that  certain  occupations,  historically  the
high-skilled  occupations,  have  done  better  than  the  less-skilled  occupations.
Surely  there has  been growth  in inequality  among  the high-skilled  jobs,  but there
also  has  been  growth  among  the  low-skilled  ones.  Again,  one  of  the  amazing
facts  is  how similar  the growth in inequality  is among  the low-skilled  occupations
as  it is among  the high  skilled  occupations.  It is  also interesting  as  to  how similar
the growth in inequality  is  in occupations  where  there is  this economy  of scale-
for example  in  one  area  of academics,  as  opposed  to  something like  the law-as
it is in  other areas.

Secondly,  I'd  like  to  say  that  just  because  these  forces  are  at  work,  doesn't
mean  that we are  immune  to  the laws  of supply and  demand. I  think  that  that is
important.  One  thing  that  we  have  seen  is  that  the  faster  the  college-educated
population  grows,  the  slower  the  premium  for college  graduates  increases.  The
faster  the premium  grows,  the more  people want to  go  on to  college.  The supply
side  does respond.

I  think  that  this  is  important  to  realize  because  we  now  have  a  growing pre-
mium  for  education.  That  means  that we  are  going  to  have  more  people  going
on  to  school,  and  more  people  going  to  school  is  going  to  improve  people's
earnings  and the productivity  of the economy  as  a whole. In  fact, the notion  that
as  you get more  educated you  do different  things  is  really  a big part  of progress,
right? The point is  that when  you go  to  school you  don't learn  how to  dig a  hole
faster  than  the  other guy, you  learn  how  to  build  a  bulldozer  to  dig  the hole  for
you-that is  the idea.  But this  is  important,  right? It  has  to  be important,  other-
wise you would not see such vast earnings  differentials  if it was  just a  question of
how much  better you  could  do a particular  activity. It has  to be that you can  do it
in a  different way-that you  can  bring in other resources  to work with  you. That is
the  essence  of the superstar  phenomenon. That  is  the essence  of progress  gener-
ally.  That is,  we did  not just  learn  how  to  do better what we  used  to  know how

1999]

Law &The  Winner-Take-AllSoiey  11

to  do; we learned  how to do it in a  different way which allowed  us  to substitute
other resources-economists  call it capital-for  our own human  resources.

So where am  I going with this?  I guess  that I would  say two things.  First, we
have  seen  a  broad  across-the-board  growth  in  inequality  in  the  U.S.:  low-end,
high-end, middle, within  groups, between  groups, across  education  levels, within
education levels. Message  one is that we need a broad  story.

Second,  I would also  say that it seems  that some of that growth  is  due to the
fact that we have  had growth  in  the  demand  for  those high-skilled  occupations
and industries.  That is where  the growth  has  been. What sector of the  economy
has grown the  fastest? Professional services.  Why is that surprising, then, that the
inputs  hired by that sector have done very well-namely  educated, professionally
educated,  individuals?  The  laws  of supply  and  demand  still  seem  to  apply,  still
seem to fit with the  data of who  seems to do better.

I think, actually, if you are  going to emphasize  the superstars  point, it is  critical
to  understand why there  are such  big differences  at a given point in  time-even
more so  than understanding growth  over time. I actually  think that in explaining
growth  over  time,  the  supply  and  demand  stories,  to  me, make  a  lot of  sense.
There  may  be particular  areas-for  example,  the  media-where  there has  been
technical  change  far more complementary with the superstars-type  effects. How-
ever,  in general,  I would  say  that the more  traditional  forces  of the relative  de-
mands  and supplies  of highly skilled  and less-skilled individuals  have been  driv-
ing things.

Finally,  there is  always  the  tendency  to  look  at the  down  side  of wealth  and
relative wages.  When the premium for schooling goes up or when inequality rises
we  say, "isn't that terrible."  We  agree that there are  some bad elements,  but you
have  to  remember  there  also  are  some  positive  consequences.  As  we've  seen
growth  in the premium  for schooling, more people have gone on to  school and
we will  continue  to  see that  take place.  Also, if we  don't have improvements  in
the quality  of human  capital  and the  amount people invest in it, it is  hard to  see
how we are going to continue  to improve our standard of living generally. Thank
you.

CASS  SUNSTEIN:  Okay,  the last speaker. This  set  of ideas has  a lot of im-
plications  for law. You might  think that it shows  that competition  can  produce
unjust inequalities  by magnifying  small  differences  in capacity  or willingness  to
work hard.  Also,  maybe  more interestingly,  it produces  inefficiencies  as  well as
unjustified inequalities.  These  inefficiencies may take  the  form  of overcrowding,
as  when  a lot  of people  enter  winner-take-all  markets  inflicting  externalities  on
one  another.  Another  set  of inefficiencies  may  take  the  form  of arms  races  as
when  people use steroids to  be better in football and are in  a difficult position in
reaching a voluntary agreement  not to up the  ante. That probably  captures  more
segments  of economic markets  that are  familiar  to us. I think what the Frank and
Cook book does is  to lay down  a challenge  for those  of us  who are interested  in
the  appropriate  role of law to  think what might  be done  to handle  these prob-
lems.

12  Roundtable 

[6:1

I am going to  talk  about the  broadcasting market. What  I am going to  suggest
in particular is  that there  ought to be not a law but a code. There  oughta  be--"o-
u-g-h-t-a"-be  a  code,  by  which  broadcasters  engage  in  self-regulation;  they
cartelize  themselves.  This  shouldn't be  a violation  of the antitrust laws.  The Jus-
tice Department should  be thrilled.

There  was  a Presidential  Advisory committee  on public interest obligations  of
broadcasters  in  the  last  couple  of years.  Here  are  two  puzzles:  the  broadcasters
on  the  committee  were  extremely  happy with  the  idea  of a  code-in  fact  they
pushed  it, it is what  they liked the  best. Their  self-defense  was  that  this  is  a win-
ner-take-all  market, which  creates  some  social  pathologies.  (I'll get  to  those  in  a
minute.)

But  the  National  Association  of  Broadcasters,  the  trade  organization,  hated
the idea.  They  came  within  half-an-inch  of killing it. As  they  hated  it, they  said,
with  a big smile in their  face,  this  would violate  the antitrust laws.

The  puzzle  is  that  usually members  of an  industry are  not  smiling  when  they
talk about  how an activity, which  they might voluntarily  engage  in,  would violate
the  antitrust  laws.  Why  were  they  smiling  then,  and  why  were  the  broadcasters
on the  committee  so  enthusiastic  about  something  that  the National Association
of Broadcasters  despised?

The  second and  related  puzzle is  that one  way of making legal  controls  on this
market,  with  winner-take-all  features,  less  damaging  to  profits  is  to  tell  ABC  or
CBS  or Fox  you  can  do  something good for the culture  or you  can  pay if you  are
not going  to, thus  providing  an  economic  incentive.  You  can provide  some  edu-
cational  programming  for  kids  or,  if not,  you  give  some  money  to  PBS.  That
would be  a replacement  for current  legal regulation,  which is  rigid.  It is  "play."  It
is  not  "play  or  pay."  The  oddity  was  that  most  of the  broadcasters  on  the  com-
mittee  didn't like  play or pay. They liked play. Now why was  that? I mean  here to
try to  untangle those two puzzles.

Why  might  we  think  that  broadcasting  markets  aren't  something  that  will
serve  our  culture  entirely  well?  Off-hand,  there  are  pervasive  problems  with
broadcasting  markets.  For  example,  there  is  relatively  little  educational  pro-
gramming  for  children,  at  least  on non-cable  stations,  and  about  40  percent  of
Americans  don't  get  cable  at  all.  There  is  very  little  educational  programming,
and  what little  there  is  tends  not  to  be so  good. Television  programming  is  per-
vasively violent.  The  level  of murders  per  hour  is  high,  not  low. Also,  there  are
now  a series  of studies  linking, plausibly, violence  on television  to violence in  the
world.

With  respect  to  democratic  processes,  it is  very  expensive  for  a  candidate  for
political  office  to get on  television,  and this  creates  a  couple  of problems.  One is
an  arms race  to  raise  more  and  more money,  sometimes  illegally,  and  also  a  sys-
tem  in  which  democratic  or  civic  broadcasting  on  television  is  infrequent.  And
when it is  there,  it tends  to  be really  fast and sensationalistic  rather  than substan-
tive. We  might  think that  with  respect  to  children,  the  level  of criminal  activity,
and  the  level  of  democratic  or  civil  programming,  our  media  market  is  doing

1999]

Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodety  13

very poorly.  And by  objective measures,  in America it is  worse,  not better,  than
in European nations.

Is  there  a  market  failure  here,  or  are  we  complaining  about market  success?
There is  a  little of both in  the account  that I would give. We don't have  an ordi-
nary market with  respect to  television  programming.  One problem  is  that indi-
vidual  viewers  infrequently  purchase  programs.  Individual  viewers  are  a  com-
modity. Eyeballs  are a  commodity delivered by networks  to advertisers.

Does  that introduce  distortions? Both no and yes. No, it does  not, in the  sense
that  advertisers,  other  things  being  equal,  want  more  people  to  be watching
rather than fewer. You might  think that it is  a proxy, but it is a  crude proxy. It is
a  crude  proxy, in  the  sense that advertisers  are willing to  sacrifice  something  in
terms  of viewer  volume in order to do  something good for product  sales.  Thus,
if they can  get  somewhat  fewer  viewers  but happier-buying-mood  viewers,  they
are very willing to do that So advertisers  will sometimes  not sponsor a  show that
would  get  a  lot  of viewers  because  the  people  wouldn't  be in  a  very receptive
buying-mood.

One  reason  that  we  don't  have  much  controversial  programming  on  ABC,
CBS,  NBC  or Fox-substantively  controversial  programming-is  that advertis-
ers  are very  nervous  about supporting  it. That is  a  bit of a market  failure  if we
think  that what we  want  to  do is  promote  viewer  sovereignty.  We  don't quite
have that.

There  are  also  externalities-both  positive  and  negative-from  broadcasting,
and those  externalities  won't  be  controlled  by an unregulated  market  A  system
in  which  we  have  civic  or  democratic  programming  can  produce  civic  and
democratic  benefits.  But those  aren't things  that are  fully internalized  by broad-
casters or advertisers. The fact that eyeballs  are a commodity--and  the presence
of externalities-point  to something like a  democratic  failure.

We might think  also  that what is  on  television helps  form preferences.  There
is  a  preference  forming  role  to  popular  media,  everybody  knows  that, and the
public  might  have  aspirations-in  fact it does-that preferences  be  formed  in  a
desirable  rather  than undesirable  way.  That might  point in  the  direction  of edu-
cational  programming,  civic  and  democratic  programming  and  less  in  the  way,
just as an example,  of violence.

Now why might we  think that a  code would be a  good solution  to this? Well,
we might  think that it is a little more flexible  than rigid governmental  commands
in the  sense  that it can  be  both  designed and implemented  by  the  television in-
dustry.

The idea  of a  code is  actually  not new-it was followed by the National Asso-
ciation  of Broadcasters  between  1928  and 1979.  The idea was  that it would re-
spond to all  of these  concerns  with an  unrestricted market  These  concerns  are
heightened,  not  lowered,  in  an  intensely  competitive,  winner-take-all  market
where  one bad program dealing with, say, South Africa, can  kill a  career  and one
good  program  dealing  with  Monica  [Lewinsky]  or  actually  getting  Monica  to
speak can  make or fortify a career.

14  Roundtable

A  code  is  less  intrusive  than  direct regulation,  and  it would  be  a  way  of con-
trolling  the problems  just identified  without getting  bureaucrats  involved  in  dic-
tating content. We  could  think off-hand  of what it would  look like.  It might say,
for example,  there should  be  four hours  of educational  programming  each week.
The  code would  be administered  by  the National Association  of Broadcasters.  It
might  say that in  the  two  months  before  a  Presidential  election,  each  week  there
shall be  two  hours  of free broadcasting  time for  candidates  for public  office. You
could imagine  vaguer  provisions  dealing,  with,  let's  say,  gratuitous  or  sexualized
violence-especially,  but maybe  not only, at times  when  children  are likely  to be
in  the audience.  That actually  borrows  from the old  N.A.B.  code.

My suggestion  is  that this  notion would  counteract  some  of the pathologies  in
our current  television  market.  It would  counteract  some  of the  difficulties  faced
by  those who  don't have  cable,  ensuring programming  for kids.  It would  proba-
bly  have  beneficial  results  in  reducing  violence  at  least  a  little  bit  and  reducing
anxiety maybe  more  than  a little  bit. It would  promote civic  and  democratic  aspi-
rations.  It  could  be  and  should  be  administered  by  the  National  Association  of
Broadcasters.  If  they  are  unwilling  to  do  it,  then  there  should  be  a  watchdog
group  that  gets  a  lot  of attention  that  can  do  the  same  thing. And  in  the  envi-
ronmental  area,  this  kind  of response  to  externalities  has  often  had  tremendous
payoff because  of the  sheer fact  of publicity.

Okay,  now  I  think  we  are  in  a  position  to  say  something  about  the  puzzles
with  which  I began.  Why  is  it  that  the  broadcasters  on the  committee  were  en-
thusiastic  about  the idea  of a  code  but  the National Association  of Broadcasters
hated  the  idea?  You  might  think  that  economic  self-interest  is  not  disconnected
from  this  seemingly  anomalous  pair  of results.  The  broadcasters  on the commit-
tee  were  selected  by  virtue,  in  part,  of  their  commitment  not  to  government
regulation,  which  they  don't much  like,  but  to  civic-minded  broadcasting.  Their
economic  enemy,  in  part,  is  cable  television  and  other  broadcasters  who  have
different  goals  in  mind.  They  are  threatened  by  competition  from  people  who
wouldn't  obey  a  code,  which  they  themselves  in  their  individual  capacity  are
probably  implicitly  acting  in  accordance  with, whether  or  not  it exists.  For  each
of these  broadcasters,  a code is  a  benefit  and probably  not  a harm.  It would  pre-
vent competition  that might harm  them.

The  National Association  of Broadcasters,  by contrast, is  in a position  of pro-
tecting  the  broadcasting  industry  against,  most  importantly,  the  cable  industry.
And  the  broadcasting  industry  is  a  net  loser  from  a  code  even  if individual
broadcasters  are neutral  or net gainers.

But why  on  earth,  now  we  might  ask,  would  the  broadcasters  not want  the
kind  of flexibility  that would  be introduced  by "pay  or play"? The reason appears
to  be-this  is  a speculation-that  these  broadcasters  were going to play  anyhow.
Either  because  that  was  their  commitment  as  a  matter  of principle,  or  because
their  particular  constituency  demanded  it. They were  going to  have  some  educa-
tional  programming,  some  civic-minded  programming,  some  free  air  time  pro-
gramming whether  or not there is  a code.

1999]

Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodey  15

On  the  other hand,  what  they  were  frightened  by is  the  prospect  that  their
competitors  wouldn't  be  bound  by  the  obligation  that  government  currently
imposes.  A pay  or play option  would give  their  competitors,  who  are  not civic-
minded,  an  opportunity  to  "pay,"  maybe  not  them,  but  maybe  PBS.  And  the
good  broadcasters  would  be  stuck  "playing"  with  a  lower  audience  share.  It
makes  perfect sense  for them to  reject pay or play options  on the  grounds  that it
puts  them at a  competitive  disadvantage  compared  to "pay"! Exclamation  point!
Just as  it makes  perfect sense  for them to favor a  code,  or at least not to  be dis-
turbed by a  code, when the industry itself is unhappy with it.

A few general,  very brief thoughts. The first  suggestion  is  that a code-much
more  than governmental  regulation  because  of its  flexibility-would  help  coun-
teract some of the adverse effects  of winner-take-all  pressures  with respect to the
mass  media,  especially  with  respect to  programming  for kids  and programming
that serves  democratic  functions. The second suggestion is that all this contains  a
quite  general  lesson  about  the  uses  of the  antitrust  laws  to  prevent  voluntary
actions  by public  spirited producers  designed  to counteract  some  of the baleful
effects  of races  to the  bottom and winner take  all pressures.  I'm hearing  a lot of
whispering  there  [from the  otherpane-ts] and  I would like  to hear  it aloud,  if it is
whispered, well-is this  a little cartel on  our left? [Laughte]

ROSEN:  This is winner-take-all  [Laughte]

MURPHY:  This  is  the  first  time  that Sherwin  and  I have been  on  the  left.

[More laughter

SUNSTEIN:  The  last suggestion is  that it is unclear  whether American  gov-
ernment will  emerge  with  anything like  a  third way between  unrestricted-let's
call it Reaganism---and  command  and control government  of the  sort that arose
in  the Johnson  era. My suggestion  is  that cooperation  of the kind discussed  can,
in  winner-take-all  contexts,  provide  such  a  third way  between  frequently  disas-
trous  competition  on  the  one hand and excessive  bureaucratic  mandates  on the
other.

Now I think we  should take  questions  and feel free  to talk among ourselves.  If
anyone would like to say anything but maybe we  should just take questions. Yes,
sir?

QUESTION:  Professor  Sunstein,  you mentioned  that one of the bad things
about winner-take-all  is  that there  is  overcrowding in the industry. How  do you
define  overcrowding  and could you  elaborate  on  that,  and then  could the  other
panelists  say  whether  they  think  that  overcrowding  in  fact  exists  and  whether
that is  a good or a bad thing?

SUNSTEIN: I'd be happy to take  that but since it is Professor Frank's  argu-

ment, probably he could best answer...

16  Roundtable

FRANK:  Okay, you  don't automatically  get  overcrowding in  a winner-take-all
market,  and  by winner-take-all  market  I guess  we  understand  that  we mean  that
it  is  a  market  where  your  reward  depends  in  large  measure  on your  relative per-
formance  in  addition  to  perhaps  your  absolute  performance.  If  contestants  in  a
winner-take-all  market  get  paid  the  value  of what  they  produce,  then  there  is  a
general  set of conditions  that does result  in overcrowding  in  the market.

Essentially  it is  this:  if I'm  trying to  decide  whether  to  enter  a market  to  com-
pete,  let's  say,  for a recording  contract,  I think about  the expected  payoff for me
in  doing  that. What  are  the odds  of winning number  one?  How much  I will  win
if  I win?  I  will  weigh  that  against whatever  else  I might  do,  which  might  be  to
pursue  some  career that  entailed  less  risk of failure and, albeit,  a smaller  salary in
return  for  that. So  that  means  that I'll just enter the market if the expected return
beats what I  could do  otherwise. I won't  take into account  the fact  that my pres-
ence  competing  for  the  trophy  makes  other  competitors  less  likely  to  win  it.  In
that  sense  it  is  like  an  over-fishing  example.  The  fishing  boat  doesn't  worry
about  the fact  that some  of the fish  it will  catch would  have  been caught  by oth-
ers  had it  stayed  in  port. You  get  this  excessive  effort  at  fishing  as  the common
result  there.

There  is  another  kind  of behavioral  factor  that  drives  overcrowding,  which  is
that  if you  are  going  to  choose  between  a  safe  career  path  like  teaching  in  a law
school  or  a  risky  career  path  like  trying  to  become  a  mergers  and  acquisitions
lawyer at Sullivan  & Cromwell  (if they even have  them, I don't know),  you've  got
to  estimate  your odds  at succeeding  if you  enter that riskier arena.  There is  a very
powerful  set  of evidence  that  suggests  that when  you  consider  your  chances  in
risky ventures  like  that you're  very  likely to  overestimate  them. That  ninety per-
cent  of drivers  think  that  they  are  above  average  is  the  common  statistic.  That
extends  to  factory workers:  92 percent of them  think  that they  are more  produc-
tive  than  the  median  colleague.  Information  doesn't  seem  to  help  that:  94  per-
cent  of college  professors  report  in  surveys  that  they  are  more  productive  than
their  median  colleagues.  Which  is  why,  by  the  way,  merit  pay  doesn't  seem  to
work. It's  a  recipe  for  more  than  half  the  people  being  very  disappointed  with
their pay.

On  those  scores,  you  tend  to  get  too  many  people  entering  the  competition,
which  has  a  cost in  the lost output  that you  don't get if they had gone  into  some
other line of occupations.  So  that's  the basic overcrowding  argument.

MURPHY:  I  just want to  make  a couple  of points  that tie  into some  of Cass'
comments  and  some  of the  comments  that just came  up.  I  think  when  we  start
talking  about  what  makes... first  of  all,  there  are  things  that  create  a  superstars
market,  and  then  there  are  things  that  create  a  superstars  market  that  are,  to  an
economist's  point  of view,  inefficient.  And  those  two  things  are  not  at all  the
same. I  want to make  sure  that's  clear.

For  example, when  Cass  started  his comments,  he  started talking about  unjus-
tified  gains.  That  is,  small  differences  in  skill  that  generate  big  differences  in  re-
wards.  However,  when  I  can  produce  a  better  television  show  for  a  hundred

1999]

]Law &The  Winner-Take-All Sodey  17

million  people,  that's  not  a  small  difference.  It's  a  small  difference  to  any one
person, but it's  still cumulative. That ten  cents  every day I'm worth to ten million
people is  still a  million dollars  a day in value  that is being created! So don't think
that it is  only  ten  cents  better,  so why  am I getting  a  million  dollars  a  day?  No,
I'm  a million  dollars  better,  and I'm getting  a million  dollars  a  day  to pay  for it!
The  fact that other people are  not going to collect, the fact that we don't have-
what was  it, how  many thousand  people singing  in  Iowa?-is  probably  a  great
thingl  [Laughted  I think that the  fact that we all  are listening to the  CD in the  car
and not having to  trudge down  there and listen to some awful person  singing in
Podunk, Iowa is  a good idea.  [Laught]

Second,  we  often  talk  about arms  races.  Now, arms  races  are  arms  races.  It
doesn't  matter  if we're  competing  to  have  the  best  general,  or if we're  seeing
who can  amass  the biggest  pile  of foot soldiers--either  way it's  a  wasteful  race.
But it's  not a wasteful  race because it's being fought by who has the best general
rather than being fought by who can pile up the most men in a trench, either way
it's wasteful.

Nor is  it a winner-take-all  notion. If we  had  five  billion  dollars  on  the table,
and  the  strength of your argument  determines  whether you  are going to get 50.1
percent  of it  or 49.9  percent  of it, the  debate  would  still  command  enormous
resources.  But it's  not winner-take-alL  It's just that there  is  going  to  be one guy
in  the courtroom  making  the argument  and you  can't have ten  thousand lawyers
competing against him.

When is this a  problem? It is a problem when  people only care about the rela-
tive  position-that it's  the relative position  that generates  the value. That being
the winning team is what's important Yet, don't confuse this with being the best
in the  end. That is, who is  going to be  successful in making computers?  It is  go-
ing  to  be the  guy  who  is  the  best  at  that  point  in  time in  making  computers.
Does the  fact that over time we compete  and produce better and better comput-
ers  mean  that there  is no value  in that, even  though  at any point in  time it is  al-
ways  just being the best that matters?  What  does it take  to compete  in the mar-
ket?  It is  always  a  matter  of being the best  Being better  than  the  competition.
That doesn't  mean  that  there is  no value  to improving  quality  and  no  value  to
being better. Don't confuse  those. It's very much  a  more narrow set-for win-
net-take-all  to be  a  problem, you have  to  establish  that consumers  care  directly
about  the  relatives,  not  that  the  relatives  are  just  a  characteristic  of who  wins
when consumers  ultimately only care about absolutes.

ROSEN:  Let me  answer  that, too,  since  I'm fourth.  The  fact is that  there is
no way of recognizing  excess  competition. There is no  empirical  test that anyone
has  ever been able  to devise for it, that could be routinely used by, say,  a regula-
tory  agency.  In  terms  of media  and  competition,  I  think we're  talking  about  a
race  to  the  bottom-that is  what  it  sounded  like  to me.  However,  the  movie
industry used  to keep  out communists,  and  the  industry  had  a  code-because
they would  corrupt  youth  and so  on. This  seems  to me  to  be  treading  on  very

18  Roundtable

strange grounds  about  free speech  and so  on.  I don't see  that it is related  to win-
ner-take-all.  Maybe  I missed  something..  .maybe we should  regulate rap music.

SUNSTEIN:  There  is  a lot there.  I will  address a  couple of points.  I meant to
separate  the  efficiency  argument  from  the  equality  argument.  And  when  Kevin
says  that  someone  is  a  million  dollars  better-well  that  depends  on whether  so-
cial  and  legal  institutions  allow  that  person  to  be  a  million  dollars  better.  God
didn't  say  that  it's  just to  give  a  million  dollars  to  the person  who  can  produce
two  dollars  more  value  for, say,  500,000  people.  Give me  a theory  of justice  that
says  that  that person deserves  a million dollars  more!

It is  right  that we  should  separate  the  efficiency  argument  from  the inequality
argument,  but we  shouldn't  disparage  the  inequality  argument  because  it isn't an
efficiency  argument. That would  be hasty. The inefficiency  argument...

ROSEN:  Tax  them!

SUNSTEIN: That's  a  possible  solution. The inefficiency  argument has  to  do
with  arms  races  on the  one  hand  and  overcrowding  on  the other. Those  are  the
two  points.  With respect  to  the code  and communists-that  wouldn't be uncon-
stitutional. The  lawyers  in  the room  know, because  the  constitution  only applies
to  the  government  and  I can  report  that no  one  has  suggested  that  any  kind  of
political  control  of that  sort should  be a part of any  code...

ROSEN:  It is political...

SUNSTEIN:  ... and  the N.A.B.  would  resist,  with  many  fans  from all  sides,
any  effort  to  control  through  government  regulation.  For  example,  between
1929  and  1979,  there  was  never  any kind  of government  control.  If  there  were
such  an  effort  to  control,  Sherwin  and  I  could  join  hands  and  urge  that  they
eliminate  that.

The  connection  to  winner-take-all  is  that  broadcasting  markets,  as  the  broad-
casters  are well aware,  have a winner-take-all  feature  where relative  position  mat-
ters  a lot, and it can  be magnified into  huge disparities with  no...

MURPHY:  I just  disagree  in  terms  of what  is  the  definition  of winner-take-
all.  What's  key in  the  over-fishing  case  is  that when  I go  out  and  fish,  you  catch
less  fish but  the overall  number  of fish in  the market remains  the  same. Nobody
benefits  from  that.  When  I  go  out  and  compete  against  you  in  the  computer
market and we  drive down  the price of computers,  that makes  you less profitable
but  the consumer  benefits  from  that. There  is a  technical  externality in  the terms
of economics  in  the case  of fishing that doesn't happen  in the case of computers.
You  have  to  convince  me  why  there  is  a  technical  externality  in  broadcasting.
The  fact  that  people  want to  watch  the  best TV shows  is  no  different  than  that
they  want to  go get the  best haircut  or  to go  eat the  best  dinner or anything  else.

1999]

Law &The  Winner-Take-All Socdie 

19

That doesn't mean that there is an over-fishing problem in the creating of restau-
rants or cutting hair. I ...

FRANK-  What matters, Kevin, is  that some of the payoff you get from  con-

suming the thing depends on the ranking per se.

MURPHY:  That's  key, but  that is  not  so  dear  that it's  true on  TV. I enjoy
'flTe  Simpsons"!  I don't know what else is  on TV, that's  the only  show I watch.
[Laughte]

SUNSTEIN: What's  "The Simpsons?"  [More laughte]

FRANK-  There  is,  I think,  less  disagreement  then  it sounds  like  at least  on
some issues.  I think that  Kevin is  totally  right  that the fact that we all  can  listen
to  the best  soprano now is  a good  thing. If you had a  relative with a  serious  ill-
ness  and you  could turn  to  the  reigning  expert  on  the  planet  for  advice  about
what  to do, you would  count yourself lucky  for that-rather than  have to go to
the expert at the Tompkins  Community Hospital  [in Ithaca, New York],  which is
where we  go when  we get  sick.  If you  can go  on-line and send the  data to Lon-
don and that is  where  the  person who  knows the  most is,  and you  can  get that
advice, then that is exactly what you want and there is  enormous value in  that. So
the  fact  that  technology  allows  the  best  performers  to  extend  their  reach  is  a
terrific thing. There is no  quarrel about that.

However, think about the quest to be Number  One. Think about a lawsuit be-
tween Ford  and  General  Motors. There is  a new fuel injection  system that Ford
came  up  with, GM thinks  that it violates  a  patent. It's  a  close  call-maybe  they
invented  around  the patent, no  one's  really sure. There  is  no terrific  social inter-
est at stake in  how the suit is  resolved,  but it is  for a billion  dollars.  In that case,
each  of the  two companies  has an  enormous  interest in hiring the better lawyer.
If it's  such  a  dose case  that the better lawyer is almost certain  to win it, then the
equilibrium  salary  for  the  better  lawyer  will be  a  billion  dollars,  and  the  other
lawyer gets  nothing. In that case, there is  such a premium to  coming out ahead if
you're competing  for that job  that you will  invest on  every margin  that you  can
to position yourself to be better  than the other lawyer. However, it's not dear, if
the  social  value  of  resolving  the  case  is  a  toss-up,  that  society  gains  anything
from  those investments.

MURPHY:  I've got an alternative  scheme. Let's decide who wins  that case by
how many  janitors  we  can  pile  in a  room.  [Laughter What is  going to  happen?
We are  going to spend a helluva lot building big rooms putting lots  of janitors  in,
right.'  It doesn't have anything to do with the  fact that there's  a big thing on the
table. There's  a  lot of models  that'll  dissipate  that-whether it is  spent  by trying
to  get  the  best lawyers  or spent  trying to  pile  janitors  into  a room.  Now, what
you're saying is  that because  of technology,  there's an implication  for the income
distribution  of  the  nature  of that  competition  in  the  growth  in  the  size  of the

pie-because  of the  technology.  However,  the inefficiency  associated  with  com-
petition  for  that  pie would  be  there independent  of whether  it was  that  technol-
ogy  or the other one.

20  Roundtable

FRANK  Yes.

MURPHY:  So  there's  a decoupling  between  the efficiency/inefficiency  ques-
tion-which  has  to  do  with  splitting  a  pie-and  the  winner-take-all  notion,
which  has  to  do with the  technology  of how you win  the pie.

FRANK:  Technically,  the distinction  is  that, as  in  the  fishing  case  where  you
send  ten  boats  out,  each  boat  comes  back with  a  tenth  of the  total  catch.  The
average  catch is  greater than  what the tenth  boat added to  the total  catch.  If your
average  payment  exceeds  the marginal  contribution  that you make,  then you  will
get this overcrowding  inefficiency. That's  doubly true in the case  of searching for
the  best  contestant  in  a  field  of  ten  contestants.  Doubling  the number  of con-
testants  does  not double  the value  of the  quality  of the  decision  that you  get  in
the  closely  contested  legal  decision. You  get the  decision, which may  be  a better
decision.  You're  going  to  have  more  talent  trying  to  get  the  job  of writing  the
decision,  so  it probably  won't  be  a worse  decision,  but,  still,  the  social value  of
that  decision  doesn't  go  up  in  proportion  to  the  number  of people  who  com-
peted  to write it.

ROSEN:  You  can't  even  show  that. I  mean,  there  has  been  a  lot of work in
economics  about  patent  races  and  whether  people  work  too  fast  to  discover
things. There  are no results  there. You  can't show that they work  too fast. Some-
times  they  do,  sometimes  they  don't. It  depends  on  the  way  that  you  structure
the model.  If you  tweak  the  models  a little  here  or  there,  you  get  a  different  re-
sult. There's  nothing that you  can  say.

Now, in  these  labor  market  phenomena,  I  think  that  what Kevin  is  saying  is
that  there's  no standard  for judging whether  it's  only rank  that matters  or abso-
lutes.  You  can't  think  of an  example  where  it's  only rank. You  know,  if we only
care who  is  the...

FRANK:  Doesn't need be only rank, Sherwin.

ROSEN: But so long as there is  some absolutes  in  there,  then...

FRANK. Then  what?

ROSEN:  Then you're going to get some  efficiency  from allocating these...

FRANK  Oh, you get a gain, but if rank matters, then  there is  this  tendency  to

spend too much.

1999]

Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodety  21

MURPHY:  There  are variables...

ROSEN:  Give me an example.

FRANK- An  example along  the idea that a  cartel is  always  a  bad thing for the
public  interest  New  England  Auto  Racing  Association  at  one  time  had  an
agreement  to  try  to  limit  the  amount  that  competitors-auto  racers-spent  on
tires. Auto racing has  lots  of limits  of this  sort  You have a limit on the  size  that
your  engine  can  be-weight  restrictions,  so  on. These  seem  sensible.  They  are
kind of like anti-steroid  laws  in  athletics.  Why spend  more  and more to put big
engines  in? Why not fix  the size  of the engine  and see who  can  drive  the car  the
best?  That  is  the  goal,  to  try  to  keep  the  cost  of anointing  a  champion  within
bounds, and they found that they had pretty much  controlled all  of the  competi-
tive  dimensions  of auto-racing  save one-namely the  type of tires  that the racers
used.  Naturally,  that  was  the  active  margin.  People  spent  more  and  more  on
tires-2,000  per tire,  $3,000 per tire,  stickier tires, 'wider tires  and so on. So they
proposed, finally, to set out a standard  specification  for tires. They were going to
call on  companies  to bid who would supply tires, all according to the  same sped-
fications,  to  the people  who  competed  in  these  races.  They chose  a  company to
supply the  tires.  However,  one  of the  losing  bidders  filed  an  antitrust  suit  and
won relief in a district court.

Ivy/MiIT. The  Ivy/MIT agreement  was that financial aid should go  on the ba-
sis  of need, not merit. It  was  a  collusive  agreement  because  without that  agree-
ment  there would be very  strong pressure  for the  schools  to bid amongst  them-
selves for the students with highest.SAT  scores.

ROSEN:  You teach at one  of those schools.

FRANK.  Yes,  of course-Ivy/MIT.  If you  think  that  a  social  purpose  is
served by steering financial  aid to  the students whose families are  neediest rather
than  to the  students whose SAT  scores  are highest among a  group, all  of whom
have good credentials,  then that cartel wasn't necessarily a bad thing.

ROSEN: It  was price fixing! You were keeping the prices  up!

FRANK- It was  price  fixing,  absolutely! But by that fact alone  we  can't  con-

dude necessarily  that it was contrary to the public interest, which is  my point.

MURPHY:  But that is  kind of like an argument  that we  should let poor guys
have cartels  or something.  I mean,  that's  basically  the argument! That as  long as
it's  a  bunch  of  poor  guys  getting  together  to  raise  the  price  of hot  dogs,  it's
worth it. [Laughter] Come on, that's  the same argument!

SUNSTEIN: And why is it so dear to you that that is a bad argument?

22  Roundtable

clear what we're  arguing.

them to  cartelize.

need  to say  it! [Laugbte]

MURPHY:  I'm just making  a point. You guys  decide. I'm just trying  to  make

SUNSTEIN:  There  may  be  better  ways  to  help  poor  people  than  allowing

MURPHY:  Yes,  that's  probably  the  best  answer  to  that! See,  I  didn't  even

FRANK:  On  the  justice  thing,  I  think  that  the  framework  that  most  people

argue  about  this  is  in  terms  of  the  standard  Rawlsian  thought  experiment-
where you've  got people  who  don't know how  good  they are  at the outset. They
go  behind  a  "veil  of  ignorance"  that  shields  them  from  the  knowledge  of
whether they'll  come in  first or  second in  the race.  They're  supposed to  cook up
rules  behind  the veil  about  how  the  pie  should  be  split  up  once  they  find  out
who's got what talents.

Typically  people  would not vote for  equal sharing  of the pie when  they  go be-
hind  the veil of ignorance  because,  especially  in a  set  up where  there  were a  mil-
lion  people  and  everybody  got one-millionth  of the  pie,  the  question  would  be-
come:  why  should  you  bother  to  go  to work?  There  would  be  little  incentive  if
you were  going to  get essentially  the  same result  whether you worked hard,  took
risks,  or  not.  Rawls  pointed  out,  I  think  correctly,  that  we  are  willing  to  allow
some  inequality,  because, without  it, we  don't get  any pie  because  nobody  is go-
ing  to  have  any  incentives  to  work. The question  is  how much  inequality?  How
much  inequality  do we  think would  be  justified  in  the  name  of making  the  pie
bigger?  I  think that  the point I heard  Cass  making was  that we're  all  comfortable
if somebody  has  ten percent more  talent  and works  ten  percent harder, then  that
person should get ten  or twenty or maybe  even  thirty percent  more.

However,  is  it intuitively clear  to  our  sense  of justice  that  if you  have one  per-
cent  more  talent  or  work half a  percentage  point harder  that you  ought to  get a
thousand  times  more?  I  think  that's  where  the  intuition  about  what is  a  "just"
distribution of income  comes  into conflict with  the  distribution that results when
we  pay  people-as  Kevin  pointed  out--exactly  what  they  are  worth  in  a  com-
petitive  sense.  What  you  are  worth  to  the  enterprise  isn't  necessarily  the  same
number  that we would  come up with  as what seems  fair given  what people need
to live  on in a society.

ROSEN:  There's  a  concept  called  "economic  rent"  and  there's  a  theorem
that if you  have  pure rent, you  can  tax the hell  out of it and nothing will happen.
Everybody  agrees  that  it's  true.  If  talent is  all  God-given  and  nobody  ever  does
anything  to  acquire  it  and  so  on.  Murphy  has  so  many  brains  I  want  to  tax
them... [Laughte]

MURPHY:  You won't  be collecting much.  [Laughter]

1999]

Law & The  Winner-Take-All Society 

23

FRANK-  I  can't  believe  I  just  heard  it! I'm  going  to  walk  away  and say  no

more! The debate is over.  [More laughtej

ROSEN:  The  question is, what is  the  elasticity  of supply? It's  not zero. If it's

not zero,  then the optimum tax is  not a hundred percent.

FRANK:  It is  not a hundred percent, but we see the argument  made that if an
aspiring CEO for a Fortune  100  company were  taxed not 40 percent but 42 per-
cent,  he  or  she would  decide  to take  Friday  afternoon  to play  golf. I  think  that
vision  of what  drives  the vice-presidents  who are  queuing up trying to be CEOs
misses  something  fundamental.  Their  incentive  to  work  harder isn't  much  af-
fected by that marginal  tax rate at those levels.  We know that when  the marginal
tax rates  in the U.S.  were  60 percent or  70 percent, VPs trying to become  CEOs
didn't take time  off. Japanese  CEO  aspirants  face  even higher tax rates  than that,
and they work harder...

ROSEN: Now they become basketball players.  [aughter

FRANK:  ... if we measure  hours worked-than  American  aspiring CEOs.  So
I think that it is true that you need  to pay the  talent, if you don't want to lose the
talent  to  a rival bidder. So yes,  what you pay is critically important  for getting the
job  done,  but if  the  reward  were  lower  by  two  percent  for  everyone  there's  no
evidence  that people would  put forth  significantly  less  effort in  their attempt  to
become  CEO. There's  just absolutely  no evidence  for that.

ROSEN:  Or the  other way around.

SUNSTEIN: We have a  question in the back.

QUESTION:  It seems  to me  that  there is  a  certain intuitive logic  that in  ne-
gotiating with somebody who has no other alternatives,  you have a lot of control
over  the  negotiations.  My  impression  is  that  a  lot  of superstars  aren't  exactly
autistic savants,  but they really  don't  have another industry to go to  or that they
don't  have  another  comparable  industry  to  turn  to.  What  is  Cindy  Crawford
going to do or...

ROSEN: I think that  she has a lot of opportunities.

QUESTION:  ... or Michael  Jordan-it  turns  out  that he  couldn't even  play
baseball  Since we  sort of have  these  people  over  a  barrel  where  they  have no-
where  else to go, no  comparable alternatives-or, at least, in certain industries-
why that isn't factored in the  equation at least in certain industries?

ROSEN: Like lawyers.

24  Roundtable

MURPHY:  I  think that there is  a big thing that is being missed here. Which is
one  of the things  that in  economics  is  pretty clear-that when you get the  super-
star phenomenon..  .now, we're  talking real superstars  here! Remember,  a big part
of the growth  in inequality  has  not much  to  do with  the guys  making  $8  million.
It  has  to  do with  the guys  making  $65,000  rather  than  $60,000  or the guys  mak-
ing $13,000  rather  than $15,000.

Putting  that aside,  let's  focus  on  the guys  making  over ten million.  One  of the
problems  is  that  the  way  that  you  collect  so  much  is  you  sell  yourself to  a  very
big market.  Unfortunately,  what we  know from  economics  is  that  as  we expand
sales  in the market, prices  tend  to go  down. Therefore,  you are  unable to  capture
a  large  part  of what  you  create.  Even  though  Michael  Jordan  captured-what,
$50  million  or  $100  million  last  year-I would  venture  to  say  that the  true value
of having  him  to  society  was  far  in  excess  of that. Thus, if you  cut back on  Mi-
chael Jordan  ten  percent,  then  maybe  that  tax  revenue  that  you  would  raise-
which  would  be  ten  percent  of what  he  gets-would  be  far  less  than  what  we
would  lose  as  a  society. The  same  is  true with  Oprah  Winfrey  and  with  a  lot of
these  people.  They  only  capture  a  small  part. They  capture  a lot but  they  create
enormous  value--great  value  generated  solely  by  the  fact  that  that  market  is  so
large.  I mean,  how  much  would  each  of us  be willing  to  pay for  Michael Jordan
to  be  here  rather  than  not?  How  much  was  he  worth  to  have  last  year,  rather
than  not?

FRANK- Kevin,  do  you  think  that  if the  top  rate  had  been  42  percent,  he

would have  made a different  career  choice  or expended  any less  effort to win?

MURPHY:  Yeah,  a  little  bit. He would  have put  in a  little  less effort  to  have

been "Michael Jordan."  That's  the point-it doesn't have to  be a big jump.

FRANK-  Why?  Do  you  think  that  he  was  weighing  $30  million  versus  $31
million  in deciding  how  high  to  jump  that time?  I mean,  this  doesn't seem  intui-
tively plausible.

MURPHY:  I  think  people  make  those  decisions  when  they  decide  when

they're going to retire.

FRANK  It could in principle  be true, but it just  doesn't  seem plausible.

MURPHY:  You  know,  this  is  like  the  old  story-whenever  I  teach  my  stu-
dents  the law of demand,  they  say, "Well,  do people really buy less  when you  raise
the price  of a  computer a  nickel?"  And  I  say,  "Yeah,  they buy  less when  it goes
from $1,000  to $1,000  and  five  cents."  They  say, "Come  on,  no it doesn't!"

FRANKI  Sherwin  had it right-he  said,  when  it's a rent, you can  tax  it and it

will  still be offered.

1999]

Law &The  Winner-Take-All Sodety 

25

MURPHY:  No-that is  the  same  argument  that  people  do  not respond  to
raising  it  [the  price  of a  computer]  by  a  nickel. Nobody's  going  to  walk into  a
computer  store and  say,  "Yeah, I'd buy it for  $1,000  but a  $1,000  and a  nickel,
no  way!"  [Laughter But  the  problem is  that this  argument  falls  down  because if
the  nickel  doesn't  matter, let's  go  two  nickels,  ten  nickels,  a  thousand  nickels.
We'll raise it a nickel at a  time-pretty soon we're  at a  million dollars,  and it had
to  matter at some  point The  same is  true of tax rates. The argument  that going
from  40  percent  to 40.01  percent  doesn't  matter, does  not imply  that it is  logi-
cally inconsistent to say that it matters  going from 40 to 50.

FRANK:  If you go to a hundred, you might say to hell with it. There's a point

beyond which you wouldn't push.

ROSEN:  It's  a  difference  between  the  intensive  margin  and  the  extensive
margin.  Michael Jordan  isn't  going  to  do much  if we  take  a  few  nickels  away
from him, but the probability of MichaelJordan being there at all is going to fall.

MURPHY:  Exactly.

ROSEN: And that's  the  supply aspect that we're concerned with.

SUNSTEIN:  But by how much?

ROSEN:  Well,  we  see  it  in  law.  When  wages  in  law  went up,  you've  had
enormous  entry  into  law. For instance,  a lot  of smart women  now come in  and
displaced a lot of dumb  men. You've had an enormous  increase in talent coming
into it. The elasticity of supply into law is very high.

SUNSTEIN:  But there is  an argument  by analogy here-which  may or may
not be true-that Kevin gave.  It is true  that if you raise  the  price  of bread by a
nickel,  the demand  for bread will  fall. However, it doesn't follow from  that anal-
ogy that if the marginal  tax rate on people who make millions is raised a little bit,
that the number  or activity  of those people will  fall in any material way. It would
be  surprising  if it went up,  though  that is  conceivable;  but  that's  an  empirical
question  that can't be argued apriori.

MURPHY:  But neither can bread. The  supply of bread can't be argued either.

There's an argument for both  that's  equally apriori.

SUNSTEIN:  Yes but they're  both empirical  questions. We have a lot of evi-
dence  with  respect  to bread,  but we  don't have  much  evidence  with  respect  to
slightly higher tax rates on millionaires.

ROSEN:  Well, you're  talking about something  like a  capital levy.  As when-
this is  a nice  problem  that has gotten  a  lot of discussion-I say  that I am never

26  Roundtable

going to  tax  capital.  As  a  result, I'm going  to get  a lot of capital  created  and  I'm
going to  tax it once.

SUNSTEIN:  How  much?

ROSEN: A  hundred  percent.

SUNSTEIN:  I'm against that.  [Laughte]

ROSEN:  But it's  inelastic-it's inelastic  at that  point, but  never  again.  That's

kind of the argument we're  having here.  It seems crazy.

MURPHY:  I  guess  my  problem with  this is  that  this is  really  not a discussion
of superstars.  Superstars  may be  the reason why there is  so much  inequality, but,
in  fact, the  more this  is  due to  the  superstar phenomenon,  the  more that  it's due
to  investments,  the  more  it's  due  to  the  combination  with  complementary  re-
sources,  then  the more  elastic  that  response is  likely to  be  and therefore  the big-
ger  the effect things like  taxes would  seem  to be in that  kind of situation.

Thus,  it seems  to  me,  if you're  really  going to  emphasize  the superstar  side,  it
is  not clear  as  to  why  that  argues  for higher  tax  rates.  If  people  were  just born
and  one  guy was  a thousand  times as  good a basketball  player as  another, I  could
tax  the  hell  out  of that  and  I would  never  reduce  the  supply. The  fact  that  it's
due  to  investments  and  the  fact  that  it's  due  to  bringing  complementary  re-
sources  to  bear  with  that  person,  is  going  to  make  the  tax  consequences  in  an
efficiency  sense larger,  not  smaller.

FRANK  You  could  ask this  question-what if every basketball  player  on the
planet  had  a  vertical  leap  half  an  inch  shorter  than  the  current?  By  how  much
would  the  national  wealth  be  smaller?  It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  a  frame  of
reference  that we need in order to  decide whether...

ROSEN:  ... as  when  all those Jewish  guys  were playing basketball...  aughte]

FRANK  If the vertical  leap  becomes  a  foot smaller,  then  yes.  We  take pleas-
ure  in  watching  Michael  Jordan,  in  part,  because  of the  absolute  height  of his
vertical  leap,  but  more prominently  because  he hangs  in  the  air longer  than  any-
one  else.  The  characteristics  that  define  his  being  noteworthy  are  strictly  posi-
tional.

MURPHY:  But we have  to  be a little careful  here.  There  are two  examples-
the  car racing  example that  you gave  and, really,  to  some  extent, Michael Jordan,
are  somewhat  different  because  competition  is  part  of  the  product  there.  The
product that we  are  talking about  is who  is  going to  win, and  by  definition  there
is  going to  be  one winner.  Now in  a  lot of other areas-for  example,  in making
great movies  and  things  like  that-it's not  that I want  to  go  see  the best movie.

1999]

Law &The  Winner-Take-All Sodep  27

If the best movie is  terrible, then I don't want to  see it, right?  I want to see agood
movie.  The  same  analogy  that you  could make  for  a  basketball  player  wouldn't
apply,  for example,  to actors-would  not  apply to TV  performers-because  in
those  cases  it is  not  that  I sit  down  and  say,  "Boy,  this  person's  terrible,  but
they're the best so I love-it!"  [Laughter You get my point?

SUNSTEIN:  Isn't that local news? You just described local news. [Laughter

MURPHY:  I cheer  for  the local  high  school  team  because  they're  going  to
win,  and  that's  because  the  competition  in  the  contest  is  part  of the  product
That's  not the same  as  in  a  lot of other  areas  that are,  quote, "winner-take-all."
That's my point

FRANK. Two quick responses.  It's not just places like  sports where  competi-
tion is  the defining feature. This is not an isolated thing. You want a car, that's  all
you  want-something  to  get  you  from  point  A  to  point B,  or there  are  other
things  that you care about  Most people like a  stylish car and a car  that performs
well.

Think about a  car  that performs well. What does a  car  have  to do in  order to
be  counted  as  one  that performs  well? In  1920, if your car  would get to 60  mph
eventually, you would experience  that subjectively as  an excitingly  fast car. There
would  be people you  could  take  for  a  ride  and impress  them  with  how  fast  it
was-you'd  feel  the  acceleration  when  you  put  your  foot  on  the  accelerator.
Everybody  would experience  a jolt of pleasure at driving  that car. Today driving
such a car would seem  slow. There would be no jolt of satisfaction  at all. Today a
car has  to accelerate  to  60 mph in under  seven  seconds  in order to  feel moder-
ately quick and under five seconds  to be  down there.

ROSEN: Because  they're so safe.

FRANK- The engines  get bigger, then our concept of what it means  to be fast
gets  lower  times. There is a rank  component  to many things  we buy. It's not an
isolated thing.

The  other point  that I wanted  to  make,  just quickly, was  that I  think that  to
call it "winner-take-all"  versus  "superstar,"-  in which  superstar  sort of concen-
trates  attention  on  Michael Jordan.  Phil  Cook  and  I had  a, chapter  in  our book
called  minor league  superstars,  and I think  that a  lot of this phenomenon  plays
out at  a  very  ordinary  level  of  scale.  If you  think of a  salesperson,  what  really
counts  in whether a  salesman  earns a  lot or a  little is not so  much  how he  per-
forms  compared  to his co-workers  but what kind of task is  he assigned  to  do. Is
he assigned  to  a  high-value  task-is  he  selling bonds  for a  pension  fund?  Or is
he  selling  shoes  at  a JC Penney?  If you're  a  good  salesman,  you're  a  lot  more
valuable  the  further  up  that  hierarchy  they  move  you. Right  now  because  of
changes  in  technology  if you're a  little  bit better  than  another salesman,  you've
got a fax, you've got a  cell-phone, you've got a beeper, you've got e-mail,  you can

28  Roundtable

service  a  larger  client  base.  As  a result,  slightly better  salesmen  are  knocking  off
slightly worse  salesmen  all  the way  down  the ladder.  You're  getting this  leverage
effect-it's  not  just at  the very  top  that  it's  pervasive.  It's  all  through  the  labor
market.

QUESTION:  I  have  a  question  for  Professor  Murphy.  I  don't see  how  the
question  above was  really  answered. Because  if a  person  doesn't  have  more  lu-
crative  options,  then  it  doesn't  matter  how  much  you  tax  because  they're  not
going to  get out  of the field  until they  amass  a  certain amount  of wealth.  If  they
don't have  more lucrative  options, it depends  on how you value that wealth.

MURPHY:  Well,  this  is  the  ex ante-expost problem  that  Sherwin  was  talking
about.  Once  people  have  made  the investment,  once  they've  gotten  there,  then
maybe  they  don't have  options.  But what's  going to  be  the extent  to which  peo-
ple  strive to  reach  those  places,  or  strive  to get  to  those goals? That's  what's  go-
ing  to  be affected. You  know, when Michael Jordan  was  in high  school he didn't
know.. .if he had  known he was  going to  earn eighty million, if he had known  he
was  going  to  earn  the  most  in  the  NBA,  then  what  you've  got  in  the  NBA
wouldn't  of mattered.  That is,  even  if NBA  players  had  been  paid  half of what
they  were  going  to  get  paid,  it  wouldn't  have  mattered.  When  he  was  in  high
school, though,  it did  matter. You  have  to  distinguish ex ante versus  expost.

What  happens  with  people  trying  to  go  on  to  become  Cindy  Crawford?  We
don't  know who  the  next  Cindy  Crawford  is  going to  be.  They  don't know,  ei-
ther. What the  next Cindy Crawford  is going to  earn  and what the potential prize
is  does matter. In  fact, it's  kind  of odd  because  I  hear  this  talk  about tax  rates  not
mattering,  but then  one  of the  big inefficiencies  of the  big payoffs  that  you  talk
about in your  book is  that it draws  all  of these people  in.

FRANK  Where  they matter is  for that  person who is  on  the edge. The  untal-
ented  contestant  who  is  just  barely  thinking  about  trying  for  the  NBA  as  op-
posed  to  taking some  math  courses.

MURPHY:  But  who's  untalented?  You  don't  know  up  front-that's  the
problem.  I  mean,  I  barely  got  out  of  high  school...and  I'm  still  untalented.
[Laughte]

QUESTION:  Back  to  a  legal  perspective  here-I'm  not really  seeing  the  di-
rect  tie  to  the  superstars,  that is,  if the  case is  worth  $50  billion,  then  a  percent-
age  of  that  increases  in  absolute  terms  as  the  value  of the  cases  increase  over
time. The  other  question is,  suppose  that we  have  five  top-tier  law  schools  put-
ting  out  a  thousand  students  a year,  does  that  period of entry  have  an  effect  on
overcrowding,  have  an  effect on the superstars  within the  thousand and  then  the
thousand versus  the rest?

1999]

Law &The  Winner-Take-All Sodey  29

ROSEN:  The question is  why are there five? That's  the thing that is  troubling
me. I guess  I'm closer  to Bob  on this than  I'd like to  admit  [aughtej But there's
free  entry  into  high-quality  law  schools.  There  are  no  barriers  there.  It's  not  a
cartel. It's not a  group.  Cass  doesn't meet with Harvard,  Yale professors  like he
wants to  do for the broadcasters,  to keep  people  out.

SUNSTEIN: Isn't it about information?

ROSEN: Right, but why is the information  so  centralized?

FRANK- Many  of these  things  are very path  dependent.  Once you get good,
it is  easier  to get better.  Students  are  choosing  you based  on how good you are,
then,  if  you  get a  little  better,  more people  choose  you. Then  you  can  become
more selective,  which  causes  still more people  to choose  you and better  faculty
to want  to work  for your university  and so  there is  enormous  comparative  ad-
vantage  to  the people  who got there  first and  established  reputations.  It's not to
say  that  they're  impregnable.  There  have  been  movements  in  the  rankings  in
academia,  but  if  you  aspire  to  be  a  top  five  law  school,  which  of  those  five
schools  do you  think  that  you're  going  to  knock  off, if you're  the  number  25
school?  It's real tough prospect to think about knocking them off.

ROSEN:  Why shouldn't  it be the  top  100?  There's  enough  talent  out  there.

Maybe there isn't...

FRANK.  As  you  said,  there  is  a  sharp  peak  in  the  distribution  of payoffs.
There's  only  so  many  $10  billion  mergers  to  arrange,  and  they  don't  need  100
law schools'  worth of students  to hire  do that-so  the battle really is  for certifi-
cation  to get access  to those really good jobs.

ROSEN:  Here  is  an  economic  argument  I've  heard  of for  why  there's  a
greater value  to  sorting, and it relates  to  this increase  in  demand  for  skills  that
Kevin  was  talking  about  earlier.  The  nature  of the  changes  in  technology  that
seem  to  be  driving  a  lot of these  changes  today  have to  do  with  increasing  de-
mand  for intellectual-type  human  capital  rather  than  for  other types.  Then you
want  to  encourage  production  of that kind of capital.  This is  a  supply-side  argu-
ment  and  what  you  need  for  this  argument  is  that there  are  complementarities
between  teacher  and  student  quality. You  don't  want  Cass  teaching  third-rate
students. You want  the best students  to go to  the schools  with  the best teachers
or  to  associate  with  other  students  who  also  are  as  talented  as  them. You  get
some  kind of assortive  mating, in a marriage-market  sense. The analogy is pretty
strong.

Then, if  you have an increase in  demand for these kinds  of skills,  demand for
sorting is  going to  go way up. It's  going to be difficult  to get into  Chicago Law
School,  or  the  University  of Chicago  Economics  Department,  for  that  matter.

30  Roundtable

On  the  other  hand,  I would  expect  there  to  be  more  supply-more  spaces  to
become available-to  reflect  that greater  sorting.

Now,  there's  no  doubt  that  there  is  more  sorting  of  college  students  than
there used  to  be.  I know  that when  I was  in  college,  I could have  gone to Yale  or
Harvard if I  wrote  the  check.  Now it's impossible-it's  basically impossible-to
go  to  those  places.  Even  the  state  schools  like  the University  of Illinois  system
has  many different  units that are very  stratified by student  academic performance
and  so  on.  I  think  that  there is  an  increase  in  sorting,  but  I think it's  due  to  the
increase  in  the value of sorting-social value,  not an  arms  race. The  trouble with
that, I  think, is  why hasn't  the supply of high  quality  law  schools  increased  more
than  it has?

QUESTION:  I'd  be  curious  to  know  how  your  economic  and  legal  models
deal  with  almost what  seems  like  a  psycho-social  phenomenon,  sort  of a  cult  of
personality  that  seems  to  occur  in  a  lot  of these  superstars.  In  the  sense  that
David  Copperfield  does  a  card  trick  that  is  not  ridiculously  different  than  if
someone  else  does a  card trick, except  that Copperfield  makes  $70 million  a year.
It's  not just in  the  entertainment  industry-Jerry  Seinfeld  or  whatever.  I'm just
very  curious  about  that.  It  seems  to  be  almost  more  of  a  psycho-social  phe-
nomenon  that  almost  goes  back  to  ancient  ideas  of kingship  where  people  are
really  excited  about  a  personality,  and  that  there's  a  lot of effort in  creating  that
personality.

ROSEN:  Do you want tips  on how to  become such  a person?  aughter]

SUNSTEIN:  It's  a very  good question.  Part of it  is  that you  can  talk to  oth-
ers  about  the  fact  that  you  saw Michael Jordan  or  David  Copperfield-they  all
know who  he is.  Thus,  part  of it is  it is  not just the  experience  of seeing,  that it
may  be a magic  trick that is  not much better  than others,  but it's someone  every-
one else  has  heard  of and that's  part of the reason you pay for it.

MURPHY:  Right,  the point is  that  that doesn't make  it of no  social value,  or
make  it  not  real.  The  point  is  that  it  is  sort  of arbitrary-that  we  could  have
picked  anyone  to  be  king, but  we  picked  this  guy  and  then  people  really  enjoy
listening  to  this  guy  talk.  This  is  still  a  real  phenomenon,  and  to  not  have  that
would  create  a problem. Now the question is,  do the gains  to  having a "king"  get
dissipated  as people  compete  to be king?

ROSEN:  ... The Closing of the American Mindwas such  a book?  I mean,  nobody

ever  read that book... Impossible  to read... [Laughter]

MURPHY:  This  also  gets  back  to  a  point  that  Bob  Frank  made  a  bit ago,
which  is  this  question  about  when  somebody  else's  car  goes  faster  and  that

3.  Allan Bloom,  The Closing of the American Mind (Simon  & Schuster  1987).

1999]

Law & The Winner-Take-AllSodety 

31

lead
makes  me  want  a  faster  car,  too.  It's  true  that  those  models  can 
to.. .models... and  that's  a  problem  that I've  studied  a  lot. In  fact, Bill  [Landes]
and  Gary  [Becker]  and  some  other  people  have worked  on  problems  like  that
and  it  turns  out  that  relative  position  isn't  the  key  feature.  The  question  of
whether you get too fast a car is  not a question of whether me having a faster  car
makes  you want  to  have  a  faster  car,  but  the  mode  with  which  that  operates.
Does me having a  faster  car make you better  off, or does me having a  faster  car
make you worse  off?  It's not the  complement between  the  speed  of my car  and
the  speed of your car that  leads  to inefficiency,  even  though  that's what leads  to
the ars race  element  of it. I could have a  case in  which you having a  faster  car
makes  me want a  slower  car and that would be inefficient. There  is  no necessary
connection between  those two things.

FRANK: You see, that's  a problematic response in the sense  that if you could
imagine  a  different pattern,  then  you  could  get a  different result,  so  there's  no
result at all.

MURPHY:  I'm just saying that this is what we have to study.

ROSEN: Sounds  like a lawyer.  [Laughter

MURPHY:  We have to study that. [More laughter]

FRANK:  I'm just not aware  that  there is  any  serious  argument  to  the  effect

that when cars  get faster generally, people enjoy having a slow car more.

MURPHY:  No, but do they  enjoy their car less?  If they don't enjoy it less-
even  if it really makes  them want  to have  that faster  car-if they  don't enjoy it
less, then there is  no externality.

FRANK  All  available  evidence  suggests  that  a  car  that goes  to  60  mph in
seven  seconds  seems  slower-and,  hence,  less  attractive  if  you  care  about
speed-in  a world where  all  cars  get there in  six  seconds  than in a  world where
they all get there in  eight seconds. That's totally incontrovertible.

MURPHY:  Do I enjoy it less? Has that been  established?

FRANK  If you care about speed, then, yes, you enjoy it less. Yes,  period.

MURPHY:  Well, I don't know...

FRANK:  Maybe  you  don't  care  about  speed.  But if you  care  about  speed,

then that's just the  answer.

32  Roundtable

[Laughted

ROSEN:  [Gestuwing  towards Mur'p~]  Remember,  he  likes  "The  Simpsons."

MURPHY:  The  point is,  if I  care  about  speed is  saying one  thing. But  saying

that you having a  faster  car makes  me unhappy, is  a different  thing.

FRANK:  It  makes  your  car  slower  as  you  experience  it. That's  known  to  be

true. I  mean there  are a  few things  that we do know.

QUESTION:  This  is  pretty much  Kevin's  argument, perhaps.  When  we had
kings  and  dukes and  so  on,  society  needed  somebody  to  be in charge,  that  had  a
lot of leverage  and  so  on. We  did  have  a lot of counter-effects-namely  that  the
dukes  would  start to  fight with  each  other in wars,  and  that cost  society  a lot. So
we  don't  know which  is  better,  whether  we  had  a good  scheme.  You  could  say
that  we have  something  like  that  now, too.  It's  not really  very different. We  only
have  a  certain  amount  of slots-only  one  Michael Jordan,  and  I  guess  that  we
can't  replace  him  at the moment-but  there  are  other certain  fuzzies:  how many
we  need at  the top  or  how many  we have. There's  something  like  that  that  goes
on  and  there's  a  huge  amount  of competition  to  get into that. Is  that something
like  the wars  of the medieval  times,  and  so  that it can be  even  counterproductive
to  society-is  that what you're saying?

MURPHY:  Well,  it  could  be  if  the  method  on  which  they  competed  didn't
independently  create  value.  That's  the  question.  In  the war case, in  fact, it's  dou-
bly  bad  because  the method  in which  they  competed  created  negative  value,  not
only  not  independent  value.  In  this  case,  it's  not  clear  at  all  that  in  fact-
remember,  they don't collect  the full  amount of that value  and that's...

FRANK  That's  a good point.

MURPHY:  ... and  in  this  case Michael Jordan  is  not competing  by having  us

kill  each  other  off.

FRANK: We're  quite  capable of doing  that on our own.  [Laughte]

QUESTION:  There  seems  to  be  another  way  that  superstars  might  work,
like  Michael Jordan.  Michael Jordan  brought the  whole NBA industry up. There
was  a sort of an initial  phase in which  Michael Jordan  had  to  create interest  again
in  basketball,  like  the  home  run  race  in  baseball.  I  think  that  after  that  there's
sort  of another  thing  happening-that  once  people  are  interested  again  in  bas-
ketball  or baseball,  that  perhaps  the  superstars  are  not as  necessary?  I  mean, we
will  still  be  watching  basketball  or  baseball  after  Michael  Jordan  or  Mark
McGwire.

1999]

Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodety 

33

MURPHY:  I  think that what you are pointing  to is a  sort of diminishing re-
turns  to  having  superstars  and  that  maybe  superstars  are  very  relevant  when
we're  falling to a point where there's  a critical level,  a point at which we're going
to fall from the public  eye. There may be an element  of that, but I think that also
bolsters the view that Michael Jordan  didn't collect  a big part  of the value  that he
created-neither  did Mark  McGwire  or  Sammy  Sosa.  Even though  they're  get-
ting  a  lot in  endorsements  and the  like, it's  unlikely  that they  collect  even  a  sig-
nificant  part  of  the value  that  they  created  in  terms  of the  renewed  interest  in
baseball.

FRANK- There's actually  an estimate  on Jordan.  Ten billion was the estimate

that I saw, value  added.

MURPHY:  Yeah, exactly.

SUNSTEIN: What we want to know is  whether over-optimistic  people, alert
to the example  of Michael Jordan and the $30  million, are entering the basketball
market trying to  become professionals  where  there are other, better things-and
that is  the  problem  the  book points  to.  There's  a  lot to  study  empirically here,
about whether people  who  are entering superstar  markets  a) are  over-optimistic
and b) whether what they're  doing is wasteful. Kevin is  suggesting that often it is
not. Often it isn't, but we want to know how often isn't it.

QUESTION:  The  only  evidence  that  I've  really  heard  from  Bob  is  about
these surveys  where  there  are  90 percent  of the  people  who  think  that they are
above  the  mean  or  something  like  that. I'm  just wondering  how valuable  that
survey is?  If  I were  to go  ask my students  in  class-you know, at the  beginning
of the  quarter-how  many  of them  think  that  they  are  going  to  get above  the
mean  grade,  I'm sure  most  of them will state  that  they will. Partly  because  they
don't want  to  give me  a  signal that  they  think that they  are  not as  smart as  they
might be and that I might hold that against them or something else-but I'm not
really sure what you can  take  from that type  of survey. Simply because  they hon-
estly believe  that everyone  is  going  to be getting  A's in  the  class?  Or  does  it tell
us  something  about what they think about-how other people are going to react
if they reveal that they may not be as smart?

SUNSTEIN: Do you  think if it's  anonymous  that you  might get  a  different
result?  Note that this is very robust. It is not just about  expected performance in
a  class. With  respect  to  the  incidence  of cancer, heart disease,  divorce--any bad
thing that you  can mention  that people  have control  over-they think  that they
are less likely  than most people  to experience  it. In  fact, the only  class  of people
with a realistic  sense  of their  own capacities  and what's  going to happen  to them
and of what other people  think of them-the only people  who are  realistic-are
the  clinically depressed.

34  Roundtable

QUESTION:  But  there  seems  to  be  concerns  about  winner's  purses  and
people  bidding  on  things-there  seems  to  be  evidence  that  we  aren't  making
mistakes.

MURPHY:  The  other point is  that the  dear  empirical  test  of this is  whether,
in  fact, if I raise  the variance  of earnings  in  a profession,  holding the  mean con-
stant, more people  would  enter  that profession.  Economists  would  expect  fewer
people  would  want  to  go  in.  You  would  say more  people  would  want  to  go  in.
As  far  as  I  know,  there  do  appear  to  be  risk premiums  that you  do get--a  pre-
mium  for  risk-which  seem  to  counter  the  argument  that  in  fact  people  over-
enter  markets  in  which  there  is  too  much  risk.  People  tend to  think  that  their
stock  portfolios  are  going  to  do  better  than  they do  as  well.  Yet, we  still, when
we  look  at  the  premium  for  risky  stock  returns,  find  a  consistent  premium  for
risk. I'm  not  sure  that  you  can  take  that  survey  evidence  on  what  they  think-
they  think  that  they're  better  than  the  average  guy  picking  stocks,  but,  on  the
other hand, we  still  end  up with  a  risk  premium.  It doesn't  necessarily  translate
into  behavior.

FRANK:  Those aren't consistent.

MURPHY:  That's  what I'm  saying. But what's important  for the inefficiency

is  that it translate into behavior-not  that it translate into  expectations.

FRANK  No, if you're  risk averse,  then not only will  fewer  people  choose  to

compete in  a high variance market, but fewer should  compete  on a welfare...

MURPHY:  Yes,  but  somehow you're  saying that the observed  risk  premium,

then, is  too small relative  to what it should be.

FRANK  Risk  aversion  steers  you  away,  and  it  should  if it's  risky.  Overesti-

mating your  odds of winning  steers you  towards  competing,  and it shouldn't.

MURPHY:  I guess  what I'm saying is  that, on net, it steers  you away.

ROSEN:  There's  another  factor  here,  and  that is  that risk is  good when you

can  cut it off. There's an option value...

MURPHY:  Realized  risk,  though.

ROSEN:  ... so  if I'm going to  try to  make partner in a  big law firm, guys  who
don't  make  it do very  well in less prestigious  firms. They don't  do as  well  as  they
would  have  had  they made partner. If I'm going to  be a boxer, and I start getting
some  data  feedback  that  I'm not going to  make  it, then I  go  and  do  something
else. Risk  attracts  people  for that reason in  a lot of occupations.

1999]

Law & The Winner-Take-All Sodey 

35

SUNSTEIN:  That's  a  very  helpful  clarification  because  there  the  two  are
quite  different  We may  not have  a problem  of overcrowding,  at  least with  re-
spect to  certain classes  of lawyers,  because those who  end up not making partner
still add value  and do great. But, with respect  to boxers, it's possible that they've
invested  a  lot  of wasted  time  in learning  how  to  box  instead  of  getting  skills
that...

ROSEN: You know how many boxers  can make a  full-time living at it?

SUNSTEIN: Yes, I know the exact number.  [Paughted

ROSEN:  It's forty.

MURPHY:  Let's go back to  where we  started today. We started today  talking
about opera  singers  and I wonder, if we  looked at it, are more people working  to
be opera  singers today?  Probably the  total payments  to opera  singers as  a  group
are higher,  and yet  there  are probably  more  people  working to  be professional
opera  singers  now than  there were  back when  there were  1,300  of them just in
Iowa.  Again,  I  think  because  people  realize  that  their  chances  of making  that
huge record  contract  are pretty  low. That would  be  an  example  that we  could
look at  to  say,  has  this  situation  increased  the  skewness  of  the results?  I  don't
think  the  total pie is  any smaller-but  has  the increased  skewness  of results  led
to more entry or less  entry?

FRANK:  This is  not a  claim  that there is  more or less  entry. The question is,
would it be  better  if  there  was  less  entry?  If  there are  a  lot  of good  magicians
who can do  card tricks  and all you care about is watching the best known  among
them,  then  you  don't  increase  the  size  of the  pie  by  doubling  the number  of
people  in that  competition.  You get  to  see  the  best known  of how  many  there
are  out there, if that's what you care  about And I think to an  extent that is  what
we  care  about, primarily,  in  the  case  of sopranos  when  we're  talking  about the
kinds  of differences  among contestants  in this market  As  Sherwin  has noted, it's
very hard  for  a  trained  listener  to  detect  quality  differences  among  the  top  100
sopranos.

ROSEN:  I've  changed  my mind.  That was  before  I listened  to any of them.

[Laughte]

MURPHY:  There's  an issue, then, in the  question  of why  I wouldn't  buy for
$12  the  CD of that person who is  slightly less  talented when  the better  person's
CD  sells  for $13.  Clearly that  seems to be contradicted  by the facts.  People think
that that CD  sitting in  the  bargain rack  over there  for $4.99  doesn't  sell  like the
one for $13  from the person who is a little bit better.

36  Roundtable

FRANK  Again, we  don't know whether that's  because  what they cared about
was  listening  to  the best known  soprano.  If that's  what they  care  aboutper se-if
they want  to  see  Copperfield  rather  than  another  magician  who  does  it  just as
well, because  they know Copperfield-then  you  get that difference  explained  not
because  the  extra  quality  is  worth  more,  but  by  the  fact  that  it is  by  the  best-
known  performer. You're going to get a best known performer  anyway, however
many people  you  have competing. That's  the distinction  there.

SUNSTEIN:  There's  some  statistic  about  the  percentage  of Division  I  col-

lege  basketball  players  who  think that  they'll  be in the NBA, something  like...

FRANK. Sixty-odd  percent.

SUNSTEIN: And what's the actual percent?

FRANK. A percent and a half, about.

SUNSTEIN:  Right.  Now  that  doesn't  seem  strategic  in John  [Lott]'s  sense,
that  it  doesn't  have  behavioral  consequences.  Does  it  mean  that  they  are  not
adding value that  they could?

ROSEN:  What do you  do about it?  I mean,  suppose  you're  right-then what

do you do? Do you  regulate it?

FRANK  No.

SUNSTEIN:  Information  first.

ROSEN: What  do you  mean?

SUNSTEIN:  You  say one  and a half percent.  It's easy.

ROSEN:  Everybody knows that.

SUNSTEIN:  They do? Then why do sixty percent  say so?

ROSEN:  Everybody  knows  that  hardly  anyone  makes  it  into  the  big-time

sports.

SUNSTEIN:  Well,  if you  think  that  they're  saying it,  but  they  don't  actually

think it-is that what you think?

ROSEN:  Maybe  they  think they're in the one  percent.

SUNSTEIN:  Well,  they  do!

1999]

Law &The  Winner-Take-All Sodey  37

FRANK- They're wrong--at least some of them are wrong.

SUNSTEIN: Most!

ROSEN: But doyou know that they're wrong?

FRANK. Not which ones.

ROSEN:  Right! You can't  do anything  about it! What's  the point  of talking

about it?

SUNSTEIN:  I'll tell you one ingenious advertising  campaign  that we want to
know what its  effects  were. Here  the  government  was  alert. If you look  at their
drug  advertisements  and  their  drunk-driving  advertisements,  you  will  find that
they  are  quite  alert to  this.  Ninety  percent  of  drivers  think  that  they  are  safer
than  the  average  driver  and less  likely  to  be involved  in  an  accident.  The  gov-
ernment's  response  wasn't to  tax anybody  or to  have new  laws.  It said,  "Drive
defensively! Watch out for the other guy!"

ROSEN: Make  cars like tanks.  Everybody bought SUVs.

SUNSTEIN:  No,  that was not  the government's  response.  But it would  be
interesting to know if this  drive-defensively,  watch-out-for-the-other-guy  notion
worked  better  than  others.  The  behavioral  prediction  is  that it would  because
people were excessively optimistic.

ROSEN: There's no  evidence that that reduced the accident  rate.

SUNSTEIN:  Have you studied  the  data?  In fact,  there  is very powerful  evi-
dence... What  I've just said  is  based  on  nothing, but what he said  was based  on
nothing,  too. [Laughter]

ROSEN:  Cars are a lot safer.

SUNSTEIN:  Okay, I think we have time  for one more question.

QUESTION:  I don't know how much MichaelJordan  made at the end of his
career.  I do  think that  he was  the  greatest basketball  player  that ever lived. But
due  to the salary  cap  and free agency, isn't there a way that the salary  of the best
basketball  player  drives  up  the  salary  of the  succeeding  basketball  player  who
might be a  novice and not have any certain value?

38  Roundtable

FRANK.  There  does  seem  to  be  a  going  rate  for  basketball  players,  for
CEOs,  and  as  each  new  frontier  is  breached  the  amount  paid  to  others  in  the
wake  of...

QUESTION:  For a while, Michael Jordan,  although recognized...

FRANK  He didn't get his  due.

QUESTION:  ... he may  have  earned money  for basketball  and  for the  team,
but  he  wasn't getting  a  commensurate  salary  himself. The  new players  might be
getting more  because  of their potential.

FRANK.  Sherwin  posed  a question  of why legal  earnings  haven't gone down
despite  the  flood  of  supply.  Might  that  just  be  the  old  story  of  one  lawyer  in
town, there's  no business, two lawyers  in town...?

SUNSTEIN:  That's  a good note  on which  to end. We  should  thank  the pan-

elists,  especially  Bob.

