 Working Papers University of Chicago Law School Chicago Unbound Second-Order Decisions Cass R. Sunstein Edna Ullmann-Margalit Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/ public_law_and_legal_theory Part of the Law Commons Chicago Unbound includes both works in progress and final versions of articles. Please be aware that a more recent version of this article may be available on Chicago Unbound, SSRN or elsewhere. Second-Order Decisions Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit This paper can be downloaded without charge at: The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=193848 Second-Order Decisions Cass R. Sunstein* and Edna Ullmann-Margalit** I. Introduction According to one picture of practical reasoning, people are decision-making animals, assessing the advantages and disadvantages of proposed courses of action and choosing in accordance with that assessment. This picture plays a familiar role in economics and decision theory; in various forms, it is central to leading descriptions of reasoning in law and politics.1 Even in psychology, where models of bounded rationality are pervasive and where it is common to speak of “satisficing” rather than optimizing, the deviations can be understood only against the background of this picture.2 As many people have noticed, this understanding of practical reasoning is quite inadequate.3 An important problem is that it * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. ** Center for Rationality and Interactive Decision Theory, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. We are grateful to Joshua Cohen, David Friedman, Elizabeth Garrett, Saul Levmore, Avishai Margalit, Martha Nussbaum, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, David Strauss, and two anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on a previous draft; thanks too to participants in a faculty workshop at the University of Nebraska. 1 Thus the most complete treatment of legal reasoning, Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986), deals well with the use of precedent, but not at all with the use of strategies to simplify the burdens of decision; this is a serious gap. Helpful discussions of aspects of that topic can be found in Joseph Raz, Practical Reason and Norms 37-45 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2d ed. 1991) (discussing rules and exclusionary reasons) and Joseph Raz, The Authority of Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986) (discussing analogies). In the political domain, see Yuen Foongh Khong, Analogies At War (1992). 2 A prominent exception of George Ainslie, Picoeconomics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), but Ainslie’s focus is on precommitment, only one of the set of solutions discussed here, and Ainslie does not clearly distinguish between rules and other kinds of precommitment strategies. 3 See, e.g., Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 36-53 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990): John Rawls, “Two Concepts of Rules,” Philosophical Review 64 (1955) 3-32; Edward McClennen, Rationality and Dynamic Choice Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper 2 ignores the existence of simplifying strategies that people adopt well before on-the-spot decisions must be made.4 Debates over rule utilitarianism have of course emphasized the importance of these strategies, and precommitments, plans, and rules have received prominent attention from (among others) Jon Elster,5 Edward McClennen,6 Richard Thaler,7 and Frederick Schauer.8 A central point here their own shortcomings—calculative, moral or otherwise—by making some meta-choice before the moment of ultimate decision. But there are significant gaps in these discussions. They do not take sufficiently seriously the reluctance of ordinary people and social institutions to make on-the-spot decisions,9 and they offer a truncated and to overcome that people seek is Journal of Economics Information Acquisition,” (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). See also the useful survey of a number of treatments in McClennen at 219-238. Within economics, see, e.g., Thomas Schelling, “Enforcing Rules on Oneself,” 1 J L Econ. & Org. 357 (1985); Kaplow, supra note; Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics 77-90 (New York: Rusell Sage, 1993); Eric Rasmussen, “Managerial Conservatism and Rational and Management Strategy, 1: 175-202 (1992); Eric Rasmussen, Games and Information 129 (Oxford: Blackwell 1994). 4 Mill himself emphasized the point; see John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, i n John Stuart Mill, On Liberty and Other Essays 151-53 (John Gray ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991). 5 See Jon Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens pp. 36-47 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979). 6 See Edward McClennen, p. 50-85. 7 See Richard Thaler, supra note, at 77-90. 8 See Frederick Schauer, Playing By The Rules (Cambridge: Cambridge institutional discussion, University Press, 1992), which contains useful particularly of the relationship between courts and legislatures. Conrad Johnson, Moral Legislation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991), is in some ways complementary, discussing the differences between decisions at the legislative level and individual choices. 9 For example, Elster’s principal concern is with the particular problem of weakness of will, see Ulysses and the Sirens, p. 37, which is important but, as we will see, only one of a large number of grounds for second-order decisions. Thaler and Schelling are similarly concerned with self-control problems. McClennen’s principal interest is in dynamic consistency. See p. 219. Mill’s brief but important discussion involves the cognitive demands of constant calculation. See Mill, p. 152. Second-Order Decisions undifferentiated sense of the range of potential strategies for improving, or reducing the burdens, of first-order decisions. They do not, for example, investigate why an agent might adopt a firm rule or instead a soft presumption or a standard; nor do they deal with choices between these options and delegating to others or proceeding via small, reversible steps.10 The result is to give an inadequate understanding of how agents and institutions do or should proceed, and no real sense of the political, moral, and legal issues involved. 10 Johnson, supra note, is typical in not exploring the second-order alternatives to rules (such as presumptions) as ways of promoting consequentialist goals. Elster offers illuminating discussions of some of these strategies, but separately and in various places, without discussing how agents can and do choose between them, and with little treatment of institutional questions. See Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 36-45 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993) (discussing randomization; Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens pp. 36-47 (discussing precommitment, apparently via rules). that greatly reduce burdens at the time of ultimate decision, but require considerable thinking in advance. Decisions of this kind, which we call High-Low, may be difficult to make before the fact; the question is whether the burdens are worth incurring in light of the aggregate burdens, moral, cognitive, and otherwise, of secondorder and first-order decisions taken together. The second we call Low-Low. Some second-order strategies impose little in the way of decisional burdens either before or during the ultimate decision. This is a great advantage, and a major question is whether the strategy in question (consider a decision to flip a coin) produces too much unfairness or too many mistakes. The third we call Low-High. Some second-order strategies involve low ex-ante decisional burdens for the agents themselves, at the cost of imposing possibly high subsequent burdens on someone else to whom the first-order decision is “exported”; a delegation of power to some trusted associate, or to an authority, is the most obvious case. 11 Of course second-order decisions might operate as a rational response, by boundedly rational persons or institutions, to their own bounded rationality; but such decisions might also suffer from bounded rationality and go wrong because of cognitive or motivational problems. See below. Second-Order Decisions method). A sensible agent will choose the alternative second-order strategy of delegating to another person or institution (a form of Low-High) when there is a special problem with assuming responsibility—informational, moral, or otherwise—and when an appropriate delegate, with sufficient time and expertise, turns out to be available; this point helps illuminate debates over delegations within the family and from legislatures to administrative agencies.12 In the process we address a range of ethical, political, and legal issues that are raised by various second-order decisions. A. Strategies The following catalogue captures the major second-order strategies. The taxonomy is intended to be exhaustive of the possibilities, but the various items should not be seen as exclusive of one another; there is some overlap between them. Presumptions. Sometimes ordinary people and public institutions rely not on a rule but instead on a presumption, which can be rebutted. The result, it is hoped, is to make fewer mistakes while at the same time incurring reasonable decisional burdens.13 An 12 Of course self-interested participants in politics will attempt to exploit arguments of this kind in order to produce their preferred outcome. A n industry representation nervous about its chances of success in the legislature might argue strongly on behalf of a delegation, in the hopes that the delegate will be more receptive to its arguments (or more vulnerable to its influence). We deal only in passing with the strategic considerations involved in secondorder strategies; this is a fertile area for further work, both empirical and theoretical. 13 It is important here to distinguish between a presumption and a rule-withexceptions. A rule with exceptions has the following structure: “Do X—except Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper 6 administrative agency might presume, for example, that no one may emit more than X tons of a certain pollutant, but the presumption can be rebutted by showing that further reductions are not feasible. in circumstances A, in which case you are exempt from doing X.” For example, “observe the speed limit—except when you’re driving a police car or an ambulance in an emergency, in which cases you may exceed it.” By contrast, a typical presumption says something like: “Act on the assumption that P—unless and until circumstances A are shown to obtain, in which case, do something else.” The two amount to the same thing when the agent knows whether or not circumstances A obtain. The two are quite different when the agent lacks that information. With a presumption, you can proceed without the information; with a rule-with-exceptions, you cannot proceed, that is, you are justified neither in doing X nor in not doing X. See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, “On Presumption,” J.Phil 80: 143-162 (1983). 14 See, e.g., Louis Kaplow, “Rules and Standards: An Economic Analysis,” Duke L.J. 42 (1992): 189-221; Kathleen Sullivan, “Foreword: The Justices of Rules and Standards,” Harv. L. Rev. 105 (1993): 22-103. 15 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, “Opting: The Case of ‘Big’ Decisions,” in The 1985 Yearbook of the Wissenschaftkeleg Zu Berlin. Second-Order Decisions decide to live with Robert before she decides whether she wants to marry him; Marilyn may go to night school to see if she is really interested in law. A similar “small steps” approach is the hallmark of Anglo-American common law.16 Judges typically make narrow decisions, resolving little beyond the individual case; at least this is their preferred method of operation when they are not quite confident about the larger issues, not only in the common law but in constitutional law too.17 Picking. Sometimes the difficulty of decision, or symmetry among the options, pushes people to decide on a random basis. They might, for example, flip a coin, or make some apparently irrelevant factor decisive (“it’s a sunny day, so I’ll take that job in Florida”). Thus they might “pick” rather than “choose” (taking the latter term to mean basing a decision on preference).18 A legal system might use a lottery to decide who serves on juries or in the military, and indeed lotteries are used in many domains where the burdens of individualized choice are high, and when there is some particular problem with deliberation about the grounds of choice, sometimes because of apparent symmetries among the candidates. and relevant argument influential 16 See Edward Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning 3- 15 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948). In political science, see Charles Lindblom, “The Science of Muddling Through,” 19 Pub. Admin. Rev. 79 (1955), which offers about incrementalism. See also Charles Lindblom, “Still Muddlin, Not Yet Through,” Public Administration Review 39 (1979): 517-26. Lindblom’s discussion is in the same general family as our exploration of small steps, though (oddly) Lindblom does not discuss the judiciary, and he does not explore when other second-order stategies might be preferable. 17 Thus in cases involving the right to die, affirmative action, and sex equality, Justices Sandra Day O’Connor and Ruth Bader Ginsburg much favor small steps as the strategy of choice; this is the ground on which they tend to disagree with Justice Scalia, and in fact it counts as the leading jurisprudential dispute on the current Supreme Court The tension between the rule of law and the common law method is the basic theme of Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation 5-15 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997). For general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time: Judicial Minimalism on the Supreme Court (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999). 18 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Sidney Morgenbesser, “Picking and Choosing,” Social Research 44 (1977): 757-83. Delegation. A familiar way of handling decisional burdens is to delegate the decision to someone else. People might, for example, rely on a spouse or a friend, or choose an institutional arrangement by which certain decisions are made by authorities established at the time or well in advance. Such arrangements can be more or less formal; they involve diverse mechanisms of control, or entirely relinquished control, by the person or people for whose benefit they have been created. Under what circumstances will, or should, an agent or institution make some second-order decision rather than making an all-things-considered judgment on the spot? And under what circumstances will, or should, one or another strategy be chosen? Many people have emphasized the particular value of rules, which can overcome myopia or weakness of will20; but the problem is far more general, and rules are just one of many possible solutions. Our ultimate goal is to suggest the most promising contexts for the principal candidates, especially rules, small steps, and delegation. Second-Order Decisions chosen by attempting to minimize the sum of the costs of making decisions and the costs of error, where the costs of making decisions are the costs of coming to closure on some action or set of actions, and where the costs of error are assessed by examining the number, the magnitude, and the kinds of mistakes.21 We understand “errors” as suboptimal outcomes, whatever the criteria for deciding what is optimal; thus both rules and delegations can produce errors (the rule may be crude; the delegate may be incompetent). If the costs of producing optimal decisions were zero, it would be best to make individual calculations in each case, for this approach would produce correct judgments without compromising accuracy or any other important value. This would be true for individual agents and also for institutions. It is largely because people (including public officials) seek to reduce decisional burdens, and to minimize their own errors, that sometimes they would like not to have options and sometimes not to have information; and they may make second-order decisions to reduce either options or information (or both).22 Three additional points are necessary here. The first involves responsibility: people sometimes want to assume responsibility for certain decisions even if others would make those decisions better, and people sometimes want to relieve themselves of responsibility for certain decisions even if other people would make those decisions worse. These are familiar phenomena in daily life; so too in politics and law, where people with authority encounter formal and informal barriers to their own efforts to delegate. A failure of 21 Kaplow illuminatingly uses a framework of this sort, but in a way that seems to us too reductionistic. Schauer, pp. 196-206, recognizes that the case for rules depends on empirical considerations. The treatments of precommitment i n Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens, and Schelling do not explore the circumstances i n which a rule-bound strategy is preferable to some other (second-order) approach, nor do they explore the grounds for choice among the various second-order strategies discussed here. In general, existing treatments of precommitment tend to ambiguous about whether the relevant strategy is a rule or something else. See, e.g., Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens, at 37-40 (collecting heterogeneous illustrations). 22 See Edna Ullmann-Margalit, “On Not Wanting To Know,” in Reasoning Practically (New York: Oxford University Press, forthcoming 1999); Gerald Dworkin, “Is More Choice Better Than Less?”, in Autonomy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991). responsibility might be understand as a kind of “cost,” but it is qualitatively different from the decision costs and error costs discussed thus far, and raises separate questions. Special issues are created by institutional arrangements that divide authority, such as the separation of powers; such arrangements forbid people from assuming or delegating certain decisions, even if they would very much like to do so. Second-Order Decisions handle an asserted right to physician-assisted suicide. The result may be strategies for delegation or for deferring decision, often via small steps. The inquiry into second-order strategies might be organized by noticing a simple point: Some such strategies require substantial thought in advance but little thought on-the-spot, whereas others require little thought before the situation of choice arises and also little thought on-the-spot. Stlll others involve little ex-ante thought, which leads to imposing the possibly high decisional burdens on others. Thus there is a temporal difference in the imposition of the burdens of decision, which we describe with the terms “High-Low,” “Low-Low,” and “Low-High.” To fill out the possibilities, we add 23 See Stephen Holmes, Passions and Constraint (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996). “High-High” as well. By the term decision costs we refer to the overall costs, which may be borne by different people or agencies: the work done before the fact of choice may not be carried out by the same actors who will have to do the thinking during the ultimate choice. Consider Table 1: Table 1: Burdens Ex Ante and Burdens On the Spot little ex ante thinking Low-Low: picking; small steps; various heuristics; some standards (1) Low-High: delegation (3) little on-the-spot thinking Substantial onthe-spot thinking Substantial ex ante thinking High-Low: rules; presumptions; some standards; routines (2) High-High: some characters in Henry James novels; dysfunctional governments (4) Cell 1 captures strategies that promise to minimize the overall burdens of having to make decisions (whether or not they promote good overall decisions). These are cases in which agents do not invest a great deal of thought either before or at the time of decision. Picking is the most obvious case; consider the analogous possibility of flipping a coin. Small steps are more demanding, since the agent does have to make some decisions, but because the steps are small, there need be comparatively little thought before or during the decision. The most sharply contrasting set of cases is High-High, Cell (4). As this cell captures strategies that maximize overall decision costs, it ought for our purposes to remain empty, or at least nearly so. Fortunately it seems to be represented only by a small minority of people in actual life. Often those who fall in Cell (4) seem hopelessly indecisive, but it is possible to imagine people thinking that HighHigh represents a norm of moral responsibility, or that (as some people seem to think) incurring high burdens of decision is Second-Order Decisions something to relish. It is also possible to urge High-High where the issue is extremely important and where there is no other way of ensuring accuracy; consider, for example, the decision when to terminate a war, a decision that may reasonably call for a great deal of deliberation both before and during the period of choice. When planning is important and when a large number of decisions must be made, cell (2) is often the best approach, as the twentieth-century movement away from the common law, and toward bureaucracy and simple rules, helps to confirm. Individual cases of unfairness may be tolerable if the overall result is to prevent the system from being overwhelmed by decisional demands. Cell (2) is also likely to be the best approach when many people are involved and it is known in advance that the people who will have to carry out on-the-spot decisions constantly change. Consider institutions with many employees and a large turnover (the army, entry levels of large corporations, and so forth). The head of an organization may not want newly recruited, less-than-well-trained people to make decisions for the firm: rules should be in place so as to insure continuity and uniform level of performance. On the other hand, the fact that life will confound the rules often produces arguments for institutional reform in the form of granting power to administrators or employees to exercise “common sense” in the face of rules.25 An intermediate case can be found with most standards; the creation of the standard may itself require substantial thinking, but even when the standard is in place, agents may have to do some deliberating in order to reach closure. Second-Order Decisions We now turn to the contexts in which agents and institutions will, or should, follow one or another of the basic second-order strategies. A. Informal and Formal Delegations As a first approximation, a delegation is a second-order strategy that exports decision-making burdens to someone else, in an effort to reduce the agent’s burdens both before and at the time of making the ultimate decision. A typical case involves an agent who seeks to avoid responsibility (for some strategic or ethical reason, or because of a simple lack of information) and who identifies an available delegate whom he trusts to make a good, right, or expert decision. Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper 16 environmental which must relieve itself of many decisional burdens. A legislature may delegate because it believes that it lacks information about, for example, the problems telecommunications market; the result is an Environmental Protection Agency or a Federal Communications Commission. Or the legislature may have the information but find itself unable to forge a consensus on underlying values about, for example, the right approach to affirmative action or to age discrimination. or in Often a legislature lacks the time and the organization to make the daily decisions that administrative agencies are asked to handle; consider the fact that legislatures that attempt to reconsider agency decisions often find themselves involved in weeks or even months of work, and fail to reach closure. Or the legislature may be aware that its vulnerability to interest-group pressures will lead it in bad directions, and it may hope and believe that the object of the delegation will be relatively immune. Interest-group pressures may themselves produce a delegation, as where powerful groups are unable to achieve a clear victory in a legislature but are able to obtain a grant of authority to an administrative agency over which they will have power. The legislature may even want to avoid responsibility for some hard choice, fearing that decisions will produce electoral reprisal. Self-interested representatives may well find it in their electoral self-interest to enact a vague or vacant standard (“the public interest,” “reasonable accommodation” of the disabled, “reasonable regulation” of pesticides), and to delegate the task of specification to someone else, secure in the knowledge that the delegate will be blamed for problems in implementation. Delegation deserves to be considered whenever an appropriate and trustworthy delegate is available and there is some sense in which it seems undesirable for the agent to be making the decision by himself. But obviously delegation can be a mistake—an abdication of responsibility, an act of unfairness, a recipe for more rather than fewer errors, for even higher (aggregate) costs of decision. And since delegation is only one of a number of second-order strategies, an agent should usually consider other possibilities before delegating. Second-Order Decisions Compared to a High-Low approach, a delegation will be desirable if the legislature, or the delegator, is unable to generate a workable rule or presumption (and if anything it could come up with would be costly to produce) and if a delegate would therefore do better on the merits. This may be the case on a multimember body that is unable to reach agreement, or when an agent or institution faces a cognitive or motivational problem, such as weakness of will or susceptibility to outside influences. A delegation will also be favored over High-Low if the delegator seeks to avoid responsibility for the decision for political, social, or other reasons, though the effort to avoid responsibility may also create problems of legitimacy, as when a legislator relies on “experts” to make value judgments about environmental protection or disability discrimination. 26 This is the basic theme of Marc Roberts et al., The Environmental Protection Agency: Asking the Wrong Questions (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2d ed. 1996). problems with alcohol, because it is an abdication of responsibility, a way of transferring the burdens of decision to someone else who should not be forced to bear them alone. agency) (usually an legitimacy of delegations In institutional settings, there is an analogous problem if the delegate lacks political administrative accountability even if it has relevant expertise. The result is the continuing debate over to administrative agencies.27 Such delegations can be troublesome if they shift the burden of judgment from a democratically elected body to one that is insulated from political control. What we are adding here is that the longstanding debate over delegations offers a far too limited sense of the alternatives. A legislature is not confronted only with the choice whether or not to delegate; if the legislature wants to avoid the degree of specificity entailed by rulebound law, it might instead enact a presumption or take small steps (as, for example, through an experimental pilot program). Related issues are raised by the possibly illegitimate abdication of authority when a judge delegates certain powers to law clerks (as is occasionally alleged about Supreme Court justices) or to special masters who are expert in complex questions of fact and law (as was alleged in connection with a delegation of factfinding power to a prominent law professor in the Microsoft litigation, a delegation that was ultimately ruled invalid). Three important complications deserve comment. First, any delegate may itself resort to making second-order decisions, and it is familiar to find delegates undertaking each of the strategies that we have described. Sometimes delegates prefer High-Low and hence generate rules; almost everyone knows that this is the typical strategy of the Internal Revenue Service. Alternatively, delegates may use standards or proceed by small steps. This is the general approach of the National Labor Relations Board, which (strikingly) avoids rules whenever it can, and much prefers to proceed case-by-case. Or a delegate may undertake a subdelegation. Confronted with a 27 Compare David Schoenbrod, Power Without Responsibility (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995) with Jerry Mashaw, Chaos, Greed, and Governance (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1997). Second-Order Decisions delegation from her husband, a wife may consult a sibling or a parent. Asked by Congress to make hard choices, the President may and frequently does subdelegate to some kind of commission, for some of the same reasons that spurred Congress to delegate in the first instance. Of course a delegate may just pick. D. Intrapersonal Delegations and Delegation to Chance Thus far we have been discussing cases in which the delegator exports the burdens of decision to some other party. What about the intrapersonal case? On the one hand, there is no precise analogy between that problem and the cases under discussion. On the other hand, people confronted with hard choices can often be understood to have chosen to delegate the power of choice to their future selves. Consider, for example, such decisions as whether to buy a house, to have another child, to get married or divorced, to move to a new city; in such cases agents who procrastinate may understand themselves to have delegated the decision to their future selves. Second-Order Decisions IV. High-Low (with Special Reference to Rules and Presumptions) We have seen that people often make second-order decisions that are themselves costly, simply in order to reduce the burdens of later decisions in particular cases. This is the most conventional kind of precommitment strategy.28 The most promising setting for rulebound precommitment involves a large number of similar decisions and a need for advance planning (as opposed to improvisation). In such a setting, the occasional errors inevitably produced by rules are likely to be worth incurring. When this process is working well, there is much to do before the second-order decision has been made, but once the decision is in place, things are greatly simplified.29 A. Diverse Rules, Diverse Presumptions We have suggested that rules and presumptions belong in the High-Low category, and frequently this is true. But the point must be qualified; some rules and presumptions do not involve high burdens of decision before the fact. For example, a rule might be picked rather than chosen—drive on the right-hand side of the road, or spoons to the right, forks to the left. Especially when what it is important is to allow all actors to coordinate on a single course of conduct, there need be little investment in decisions about the content of the relevant rule. A rule might even be framed narrowly, so as to work as a kind of small step. A court might decide, for example, that a law excluding homosexuals from the armed services is unconstitutional, and this decision might be framed as a rule; but the court’s opinion could be issued in such a way as to leave undecided most other issues involving the constitutional status of homosexuals. Rules often embody small steps. Of course the same points can be made about presumptions, which are sometimes picked rather than chosen and which might be quite narrow. For present purposes we focus on situations in which an institution or an agent is willing to deliberate a good deal to generate a rule or a presumption that, once in place, turns out greatly to simplify (without impairing and perhaps even improving) future decisions. This is a familiar aspiration in law and politics. A legislature might, for example, decide in favor of a speed limit law, partly in order to ensure coordination among drivers, and partly as a result of a process of balancing various considerations about risks and benefits. People are especially willing to expend a great deal of effort to generate rules in two circumstances: (1) when planning and fair notice are important and (2) when a large number of decisions will be made.30 In most well-functioning legal systems, for example, it is clear what is and what is not a crime. People need to know when they may be subject to criminal punishment for what they do. In theory if not in practice, the American Constitution is taken to require a degree of clarity in the criminal law, and every would-be tyrant knows that rules may be irritating constraints on his authority. So too, the law of contract and property is mostly defined by clear rules, simply because people could not otherwise plan, and in order for economic development to be possible they need to be in a position to do so. When large numbers of decisions have to be made, there is a similar tendency to spend a great deal of time to clarify outcomes in advance. In the United States, the need to make a large number of decisions has pushed the legal system into the development of rules governing social security disability, workers’ compensation, and criminal sentencing. The fact that these rules produce a significant degree of error is not decisive; the sheer cost of administering the relevant systems, with so massive a number of decisions, makes a certain number of errors tolerable. Second-Order Decisions that the rigid rules will likely produce serious mistakes—high costs, low environmental benefits—in some cases; the waiver provision allows correction in the form of an individualized assessment of whether the statutory presumption should be rebutted. The potential vice of this approach is that it requires a fair degree of complexity in a number of individual cases. Whether the complexity is worthwhile turns on a comparative inquiry with genuine rules. How much error would be produced by the likely candidates? How expensive is it to correct those errors by turning the rules into presumptions? B. Of Institutions, Planning, and Trust Often institutions are faced with the decision whether to adopt a High-Low strategy or instead to delegate. We have seen contexts in which a delegation is better. But in three kinds of circumstances the High-Low approach is to be preferred. First, when planning is important, it is important to set out rules (or presumptions) in advance. The law of property is an example. Second, there is little reason to delegate when the agent or institution has a high degree of confidence that a rule (or presumption) can be generated at reasonable cost, that the rule (or presumption) will be accurate, and that it will actually be followed. Third, and most obviously, HighLow is better when no trustworthy delegate is available, or when it seems unfair to ask another person or institution to make the relevant decision. Liberal democracies take these considerations as special reasons to justify rules in the context of criminal law: The law defining crimes is reasonably rule-like, partly because of the importance of citizen knowledge about what counts as a crime, partly because of a judgment that police officers and courts cannot be trusted to define the content of the law. Generally legislatures tend in the direction of rule-like judgment when they have little confidence in the executive; in America, parts of the Clean Air Act are a prime example of a self-conscious choice of High-Low over delegation. Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper 24 or presumption, it does not make much sense to proceed by random choice or incrementally. Hence legislatures have often displaced the common law approach of case-by-case judgment with clear rules set out in advance. In England and America, this has been a great movement of the twentieth century, largely because of the interest in planning and decreased faith in the courts’ ability to generate good outcomes through small steps. Of course mixed strategies are possible. An institution may produce a rule to cover certain cases but delegate decision in other cases; or a delegate may be disciplined by presumptions and standards; or an area of law, or practical reason, may be covered by some combination of rule-bound judgment and small steps. Thus far we have been stressing public decisions. In their individual capacity, people frequently adopt rules, presumptions, or self-conscious routines in order to guide decisions that they know might, in individual cases, be too costly to make or be made incorrectly because of their own motivational problems. Sarah might decide, for example, that she will turn down all invitations for outof-town travel in the month of September, or John might adopt a presumption against going to any weddings or funerals unless they involve close family members, or Fred might make up his mind that at dinner parties, he will drink whatever the host is drinking. Rules, presumptions, and routines of this kind are an omnipresent feature of practical reason; sometimes they are chosen self-consciously and as an exercise of will, but more often they are, or become, so familiar and simple that they appear to the agent not to be choices at all. Problems arise when a person finds that he cannot stick to his resolution, and thus High-Low may turn into High-High, and things may be as if the second-order decision had not been made at all. Second-Order Decisions problems.”31 Consider, for example, the decision to smoke a cigarette (right now), or to have chocolate cake for desert, or to have an alcoholic drink after dinner, or to gamble on weekends. Small steps, which are rational choices when taken individually and which produce net benefits when taken on their own, can lead to harm or even disaster when they accumulate. There is much room here for second-order decisions. As a self-control strategy, a person might adopt a rule: cigarettes only after dinner; no gambling, ever; chocolate cake only on holidays; alcohol only at parties when everyone else is drinking. But a presumption might work better – for example, a presumption against chocolate cake, with the possibility of rebuttal on special occasions, when celebration is in the air and the cake looks particularly good. A. Equipoise, Responsibility, and Commitment Why might an institution or agent pick rather than choose? When would small steps be best? At the individual level, it can be obvious that when you are in equipoise, you might as well pick; it simply is not worthwhile to go through the process of choosing, with its high cognitive or emotional costs. As we have seen, the result can be picking in both low-stakes (cereal choices) and highstakes (employment opportunities) settings. Picking can even be said to operate as a kind of delegation, where the object of the delegation is “fate,” and the agent loses the sense of responsibility that might accompany an all-things-considered judgment. Thus some people sort out hard questions by resorting to a chance device (like flipping a coin). to 32 On ethical and political issues associated with lotteries in general, see Jon Elster, Solomonic Judgments 36-122 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1993). Second-Order Decisions B. Change, Unintended Consequences, and Reversibility Lotteries involve random processes; small steps do not. We have said that Anglo-American judges often proceed case-by-case, as a way of minimizing the burdens of decision and the consequences of error. In fact many legal cultures embed a kind of norm in favor of incremental movement. They do this partly because of the distinctive structure of adjudication and the limited information available to the judge: in any particular case, a judge will hear from the parties immediately affected, but little from others whose interests might be at stake. Hence there is a second-order decision in favor of small steps. Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper 28 such a way as to make a rule quickly anachronistic even if it is well suited to present conditions. Thus it is possible that any decision involving the application of to new communications technologies, including the Internet, should be narrow, because a broad decision, rendered at this time, would be so likely to go wrong. On this view, a small step is best because of the likelihood that a broad rule would be mistaken when applied to cases not before the court. the In an argument very much in this spirit, Joseph Raz has connected a kind of small step—the form usually produced by analogical reasoning—to the special problems created by one-shot interventions into complex systems.33 In Raz’ view, courts reason by analogy in order to prevent unintended side-effects from large disruptions. Similarly supportive of the small-step strategy, the German psychologist Dietrich Dorner has done some illuminating computer experiments designed to see whether people can engage in successful social engineering.34 Participants are asked to solve problems faced by the inhabitants of some region of the world. Through the magic of the computer, many policy initiatives are available to solve the relevant problems (improved care of cattle, childhood immunization, drilling more wells). But most of the participants produce eventual calamities, because they do not see the complex, system-wide effects of particular interventions. Only the rare participant is able to see a number of steps down the road—to understand the multiple effects of one-shot interventions on the system. The successful participants are alert to this risk and take small, reversible steps, allowing planning to occur over time. Hence Dorner, along with others focussing on the problems created by interventions into systems,35 argues in favor of small steps. Judges face similar problems, and incremental decisions are a good way of responding to the particular problem of bounded rationality created by ignorance of possible adverse effects. Second-Order Decisions information to generate a clear path for the future; often no appropriate delegate has that information. If circumstances are changing rapidly, any rule or presumption might be confounded by subsequent developments. What is especially important is that movement in any particular direction should be reversible if problems arise. On the other hand, a small steps approach embodies a kind of big (if temporary) decision in favor of the status quo; a court that tries to handle a problem of discrimination incrementally may allow unjust practices to continue, and so too with a state that is trying to alleviate the problem of joblessness in poor areas. A small steps approach might also undermine planning and fail to provide advance notice of the content of law or policy. Thus it cannot be said that a small steps approach is, in the abstract, a rational approach to bounded rationality36; whether it is a (fully optimal) response to bounded rationality, or a (suboptimal) reflection of bounded rationality, depends on the context. Strategies Examples Potential Advantages Potential Disadvantages Appropriate Context 1. low-high: delegation spouses, friends; administrative agencies relief from direct responsibility for ultimate decisions; increased chance for good outcomes Anglo-American common law; lotteries; big personal decisions low overall costs; reversibility; coping with change and with unintended consequences problems relating to trust, fairness, and responsibility; possible high costs in deciding whether and to whom to delegate difficulty of planning; high aggregate decision costs; multiple mistakes speed limit laws; legal formalism; criminal law; recovering addicts; rigid people certain Henry James characters; dysfunctional governments low costs of numerous decisions once in place; uniformity; facilitates planning difficulty of generating good rules or presumptions; mistakes once in place none (unless decision costs are actually pleasant to incur and decisions end up being good) paralysis; unpopularity; individual or institutional collapse 2. low-low: picking, small steps, various heuristics 3. high-low: rules, presumptions, routines availability of appropriate and trustworthy delegate; high burdens of, or perceived likelihood of error in, decision by delegator equipoise/ symmetry of preferences or values; reasonable aversion to drastic changes; reasonable fear of unanticipated consequences sheer number of anticipated decisions/ decisionmakers; repetitive nature of future decisions; need for planning, confidence in ability to generate ex ante decisions agency or institution cannot do otherwise Second-Order Decisions VI. Summary and Conclusions A. Second-Order Strategies The discussion is summarized in Table 2. Recall that the terms “low” and “high” refer to the overall costs of the decision, which are not necessarily borne by the same agent: with Low-High the costs are split between delegator and delegate; with High-Low they may be split between an institution (which makes the rules, say) and an agent (who follows the rules). There remains an important underlying issue: do people, or institutions, actually make a self-conscious decision about which second-order strategy to favor, given the menu of possibilities? Sometimes this is indeed the case. A legislature may, for example, deliberate and decide to delegate rather than to generate rules; a court may choose, self-consciously, to proceed incrementally; having rejected the alternatives, a President may recommend a lottery system rather than other alternatives for admitting certain aliens to the country. An institution or a person may well make an all-things-considered decision in favor of one or another secondorder strategy. Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper 32 order strategy; there is no reason to think long and hard about the second-order decision. The same can be said about those who argue that rules can promote consequentialism indirectly38 and also those who favor incrementalism, or small steps, in political or legal reasoning.39 There are many ways of handling decisional burdens, and others may be better. Second-Order Decisions C. Rationality and Bounded Rationality Second-order decisions are often a response to a particular source of bounded rationality: limited information. As we have emphasized, second-order strategies are potentially optimal solutions to the problems posed by unanticipated side-effects and the difficulty of obtaining knowledge about the future. Or they may respond to an institution’s awareness that it is prone to use unreliable heuristic devices when a decision must be made on the spot. In addition, second-order strategies may be a response to motivational rather than cognitive problems; people try, for example, to counteract their own tendencies toward impulsiveness, myopia, and unrealistic optimism.40 In these ways second-order decisions can be seen as rational responses by rational actors making those decisions with full awareness of the costs of obtaining information and of their own propensities for error. capacity to make optimal small steps. Thus people may choose second-order strategies that badly disserve their own goals, as, for example, when people rely on heuristic devices that produce mistakes.42 D. Conclusion Ordinary people and official institutions are often reluctant to make on-the-spot decisions; they respond with one or another second-order strategy. The diverse candidates raise separable ethical and political problems. Some such strategies involve high initial burdens but generate a relatively simple, low-burden mechanism for deciding subsequent cases. These strategies, generally taking the form of rules or presumptions, are best when the anticipated decisions are numerous and repetitive and when advance notice and planning are important. 42 See Khong for suggestive examples. Second-Order Decisions raise serious ethical or political issues and create problems of unfairness, as when delegates are burdened with tasks that they do not voluntarily assume, or would not assume under just conditions, and when the delegation is inconsistent with the social role of the delegator, such as a legislature or a court. Hence delegations can be troubling from the point of view of democracy or the separation of powers. Forthcoming in Ethics. Published in the Chicago Public Law and Legal Theory Working Paper Series with permission. Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence The University of Chicago Law School 1111 E. 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637