Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles Part of the Law Commons
Cass R. Sunstein, "Professors and Politics," 148 University of Pennsylvania Law Review 191 (1999).
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.
PROFESSORS AND POLITICS
CASS R. SUNSTEIN
t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor ofJurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. Professor Sunstein testified on the constitutional issues relating to the impeachment of President Clinton, see Testimony Before the United States House of Representatives, Comm. on the Judiciay, Subcomm. on the Constitution (Nov. 9, 1998) (statement of Cass R. Sunstein, Professor of Law), available in LEXIS, News Library, Transcripts File. I am grateful to Martha Nussbaum and Richard Posner for valuable comments on an earlier draft, and to Brooke May for research assistance.
I See, e.g., Constitutional Scholars' Conference, Joint Statement, Constitutional Scholars' Statement on Affirmative Action After City of Richmond v. JA. Croson Co., 98 YALE L.J. 1711, 1712 (1989) (arguing that municipalities should not scrap affirmative action programs in the wake of City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson) An Open Letter to Congressman Gingrich, 104 YALE L.J. 1539, 1539 (1995) (urging that Congressman Gingrich rescind his proposal to amend the House Rules to require three-fifths vote for enacting laws that increase income taxes) infra notes 6-7 (providing text of a one-sentence letter opposing impeachment and a letter opposing Clinton's possible resignation).
See Neal Devins, Bearing False Witness: The Clinton Impeachment and the Future of Academic Freedom, 148 U. PA. L. REV. 165, 166 (1999) (arguing that "when a significant number of law professors and historians hold themselves out as experts when they are not... allacademics pay a price").
The editors have asked me to provide a few details for background readers who dislike this sort of thing are encouraged to skip the footnotes.
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 191 1999-2000
UNIVERSITY OFPENNSYLVANIA LAWREVIEW
with an eye toward drawing some general lessons about professors and politics, including presidential politics.
With respect to the President, the United States has now had three serious impeachment inquiries in its entire history. As the nation began discussion of the impeachment of President Clinton in 1998, many constitutional law professors concluded that no legitimate grounds for impeachment had been identified. On their view, the House of Representatives had started to embark on a constitutionally impermissible path, one with potentially significant consequences. This seemed unfortunate not merely because of the potential removal of the President, and hardly because of the nature of President Clinton's particular policies, but because of the constitutional illegitimacy and potentially destabilizing effect of resort to the impeachment mechanism.
Some law professors believed that, as a technical matter, the constitutional question was not even They believed that this interpretation was not a "partisan" view, that it had nothing to do with approval of President Clinton in general, and that it was the best reading of the Constitution-a reading that would attract support from a variety of possible approaches to interpretation and that would apply regardless of the political affiliation of the President. Before the hearings, members of the House of Representatives-themselves quite uncertain about the issue-asked, in private meetings with law professors: What do law professors generally think? Where are they? Why
For a discussion of the Impeachment Clause, see Cass R. Sunstein, Impeaching the President, 147 U. PA. L. REv. 279, 280-92 (1998). Devins is wrong to say that "scholars who argued against the appropriateness of originalism at the Bork hearings made use of originalism (and little else) in arguing against the Clinton impeachment." Devins, supra note 2, at note 24. Professor Tribe's argument, for example, was largely textual, see Defining "High Crimes and Misdemeanors": Basic Principles (visited Oct. 24, 1999) http://www.house.gov/judiciary/22398.htn (advocating that defining impeachment properly "means taking seriously exactly what the Constitution says"), and while I did not argue against the appropriateness of originalism at the Bork hearings, my argument was typical in stressing a range of interpretive theories. SeeSunstein, supra.
5 I draw on personal experience here. There was a series of private, informal meetings with several law professors who met, in small groups, with a large number of representatives, many of whom were unsure about how to think about, or vote on, the impeachment question. A vivid recollection: The representatives listened politely to the constitutional arguments, and were clearly interested in them, but some of their eyes really lit up only during discussion, in which law professors were not involved, of the underlying political dynamics.
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 192 1999-2000
PROFESSORS AND POLITICS
It is a considerable overstatement for Devins to say that "members of Congress were actively involved" in any academic anti-impeachment letter. Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 66. Certainly the remarks did not lead to the letters. But I agree with Devins about the general importance of a degree of independence on the part of academics involved in these matters. Those of us who agreed with the White House on the inappropriateness of impeachment made very clear-especially in several informal discussions with lawyers there involving the constitutional standard for impeachment-thatwe were not working "with" or "for" the White House in anyway.
Because this letter was limited to teachers of constitutional law, I think Devins is wrong to say that none of the relevant letters "made expertise a prerequisite"-at least if we assume that teachers of constitutional law generally have some expertise on the topic of impeachment. Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 45.
I wrote and circulated the one-sentence letter after many discussions with other law professors. Some people did not like this approach, on the ground that it was without reasoning others, including me, thought that it would be worthwhile and relevant, if only because it would show a widespread judgment on the general constitutional question without committing people to a particular argument about which they might have reservations. Here is its content:
The undersigned professors and teachers of constitutional law* have diverse
political convictions and disagree on many political and legal issues but we
agree that the possible grounds for impeachment recently identified by Kenneth Starr and David Schippers are not an appropriate basis for impeaching a
President under Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution.
*All of the signatories to this letter have taught the general constitutional law
course or some aspect of constitutional law as part of their curricular responsibilities. There was also a subsequent letter, circulated after impeachment, opposing resignation on the ground that it would do damage to the constitutional structure. See BernardJ. Hibbits, Law Professors Solicit Signatures for Anti-Resignation Letter (visited Oct. 27, 1999) http://juritlaw.pitLedu/resig.htm (containing the full text of the letter, dated Dec. 19, 1998).
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 193 1999-2000
UNIVERSITY OFPENNSYLVANIA LAWREVEW
ing in petition drives. Most of us thought that the process of sending and responding to emails and collecting signatures was a boring, unpleasant, and tedious business'-part of a most unwelcome (even if occasionally diversion from our academic jobs. Nothing here seemed glamorous, a source of or in anyone's selfinterest. But the relevant law professors believed that this was an exceedingly unusual event, that the House of Representatives was on the verge of acting unconstitutionally, and that it was appropriate, and maybe not inconceivably useful, for the public and elected representatives to be aware of a widespread (though not universal) professional opinion.
I am not entirely sure what, in particular, Devins thinks was wrong with all this, or what lesson he wants to draw from it. He does not argue that the impeachment of President Clinton was constitutionally acceptable (though he may believe this). He does not demonstrate nor even claim that the law professors who signed one or another letter were wrong on the merits. Nor does he argue for the (implausible) proposition that on principle, law professors should never speak publicly about important public issues.
Devins suggests that developments of this kind may endanger academic freedom, an empirical claim that seems to me quite doubtful, even absurd. Is it imaginable that the tenure system for law professors would be eliminated if law professors frequently signed petitions on public issues? In any case, Devins does not discuss what academic freedom is for, to wit, the power to speak controversially about the
A confession: The one-sentence letter was the first such letter I have ever written and circulated, and because the process was so tedious, I hope never to have to do such a thing again.
9 See infra note 31 (discussing Burden ofProofand television producers).
10 But see infra note 31 (discussing my dog).
I Devins follows the familiar view in stating that "Republican witnesses at the House impeachment hearings testified that the President's conduct was impeachable whereas Democratic witnesses testified that it was not." Devins, supra note 2, at note 67. In a sense, this statement is accurate but my hunch is that a majority of witnesses, on both sides, did not consider themselves "Republican witnesses" or "Democratic witnesses." What a strange way to conduct a hearing on the impeachment question-as if, before the debate even became serious, all Republicans were for impeachment and all Democrats against it.
Perhaps the greatest peculiarity of the hearings was that a majority of the witnesses said that the allegations in question pointed to legitimate grounds for impeachment, thus giving the impression that teachers of constitutional law were evenly divided on the question-when in fact the overwhelming majority of constitutional law teachers believed that impeachment was constitutionally illegitimate or at least inappropriate. The selection of witnesses gave a grossly distorted picture of academic opinion.
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 194 1999-2000
PROFESSORS AND POLITICS
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 195 1999-2000
Md at text accompanying note 21.
UNIVERSITY OFPENNSYLVANIA LAWREVIEW
whether the Constitution protects the right to use contraceptives. Many law professors believe that with respect to the charges against President Clinton, impeachment falls in the same category. The signatories likely thought, in good faith, that they knew enough about the constitutional provision to conclude that an impeachable offense had not been made out. It is hard to see why there is anything untoward here. I agree with Devins that people should not sign petitions when they are unable to defend the relevant position publicly but I would give the signatories the benefit of the doubt on this point.
Devins's second point has to do with the motivations of those who participated in the relevant events. He says that "[m]any of the law professor and historian signatories were animated by partisanship and
about the historians involved-but it is very hard for Devins or anyone else to have access to the motivations of strangers. Nor is it clear what he means by "self-interest" and "partisanship." Academics "who want to see their names in print" surely have much better ways to achieve that goal it is hard to believe that publication was a significant motivating factor here. And contrary to Devins's suggestion, hardly comes from signing such a letter. A few law professors may care about celebrity, but most law professors care about the law and about ideas.
The allegation of "partisanship"1 raises many questions. Law professors who signed this letter were offering a judgment about the meaning of the Constitution, a judgment that they believed it to be true. In what sense was their motivation "partisan"?' A law professor who testifies that a proposed statute would violate the Constitution
Judge Posner seems to me unfair in criticizing law professors for not publicly deploring President Clinton's conduct, which, plausibly, included perjury and obstruction ofjustice. See RICHARD POSNER, AN AFFAIR OF STATE 240-45 (1999) (lamenting that "leaders of the legal profession might have been expected to emphasize the importance of the rule of law in general and of telling the truth ... These expectations would have been disappointed"). I know that many of those who opposed impeachment on constitutional grounds believed that the relevant conduct was deplorable, and certainly many of us emphasized, publicly and privately, the seriousness of perjury and obstruction ofjustice. In any case, nearly everyone, including President Clinton's closest friends and allies, as well as members of both parties, publicly deplored his conduct, and an outpouring of statements to this effect by law professors would have been largely pointless.
Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 31.
is Id. at text accompanying note 32.
Id. Id. at text accompanying note 31.
is Id. at text accompanying note 32.
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 196 1999-2000
PROFESSORS AND POLrTICS
letters.2 ' For what it is worth, the University of Chicago Law School is
I A possible point in support of Devins: If a group of law professors despised a certain President, they might not go to the effort to circulate and sign a letter against impeachment, even if they believed that the grounds for impeachment were invalid. Perhaps some law professors did not sign the Clinton letters even though they agreed with them, simply because they did not like President Clinton perhaps some law professors would not sign a similar letter on behalf of, for example, President Reagan, even if they agreed with it.
Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 33.
These include Douglas Laycock, Stephen Macedo, and Andrzej Rapaczynski. I am sure that there are many more and am happy to say that I do not know the political views of the vast majority of signatories. Of course Devins is allowed to characterize people as he chooses, but for what it is worth, I would not describe myself as a "leftliberal," see Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying notes 33-39, or indeed as a Democrat, see id. at note 36 and accompanying text.
Devins is misleading to suggest thatJudge Posner described the "law professor antiimpeachment letter as 'a form of herd behavior... by the animal that likes to see its name in print.'" Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 54 (quoting RICHARD A. POSNER, AN AFFAIR STATE 242 (1999)). ActuallyJudge Posner describes this as the possible opinion of an "unkind critic," thus distancing himself from the charge, which is not his own view. RICHARD A. POSNER, AN 242 (1999). (I owe this correction to judge Posner.)
I also doubt that "many legal academics see Ken Starr... as their nemesis." Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying notes 36-37. I do know that many of those (including me) who opposed Clinton's impeachment believe that Starr was a distinguished judge and a distinguished Solicitor General and have not the slightest doubt that he is an entirely honorable person. A number of us who strongly opposed im-
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 197 1999-2000
UNIVERSITY OFPENNSYLVANIA LAWREVIEW
not usually characterized as "left-liberal," and while I cannot speak officially or on behalf of the faculty, it seemed to me that at least a solid majority of the faculty, including many strong critics of President Clinton's policies, were opposed to impeachment on the ground that it would be illegitimate or inappropriate from the constitutional point of view. Indeed, my former colleague Michael McConnell, hardly a left-liberal, went so far as to write a letter to Congressman Hyde, sharply critical of President Clinton and suggesting that impeachment would not be unconstitutional-but pleading with Hyde not to support impeachment of the President in the midst of such partisan divisions. Was McConnell's letter inappropriate? Unacceptably parti-
did not directly address a purely legal question?
The impeachment of President Clinton produced, on all sides, more than I am not sure why Devins does not, with respect to law professors and historians on all sides, indulge a principle of charity-suggesting that in cases of doubt, we should assume that those with whom we disagree are acting in good faith and on the basis of evidence that they hon-
peachment, and who were quite critical of some of the decisions of the Office of Independent Counsel, knowJudge Starr, like and respect him personally, and believe that the 9ersonal attacks on him and his motivations were absurd and baseless.
See Letter from Michael W. McConnell, Presidential Professor, The University of Utah College of Law, to Henry J. Hyde, Jr., Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary Committee of the House of Representatives 1-2 (Dec. 12, 1998) (on file with the University of Pennsylvania Law Review) (indicating that while "the Constitution allows for the possibility that an elected President may so abuse the public trust that he can and should be removed," still "a President should [not] be impeached or removed from office solely on the votes of his political rivals").
This seems to me to infect RIcHARD A. POSNER, AN AFFAIR OF STATE (1999) as well, where analysis of the constitutional issue seems to me remarkably casual and offhand. See id. at 94-109 (discussing the history and scope of impeachment through a "structural and pragmatic... approach to constitutional meaning").
I share many of Devins's concerns about the political campaign against Judge Robert Bork. But I do not think that the law professors who opposed Bork's confirmation did so because they "saw Bork as a threat to their status and influence." Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying notes 51-53. I think that they did so on principle, that is, because they believed thatJudge Bork's view about constitutional interpretation would be a threat to constitutional ideals, properly understood. They may have been wrong on the merits, and I agree with Devins that petitions of the sort circulated againstJudge Bork should be rare. (In the interest of full disclosure, I should say that I testified quite critically about Judge Bork's views on separation of powers questions, but signed no petitions and took no public position on the question of whether he should be confirmed.)
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 198 1999-2000
PROFESSORS AND POLITICS
Id. at text accompanying note 55. Id. at text accompanying note 75 (quoting David M. Rabban, Can Academic Freedom SurvivePostmodernism?, 86 CAL L. REV. 1377, 1378 (1998)).
GERALD GUNTHER, LEARNED HAND: THE MAN AND THEJUDGE (1994).
29 Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 55.
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 199 1999-2000
UNIVERS1TY OFPENNSYLVANIA LAWREVEW
vision shows. Of course some of us may not think so well of colleagues who spend a lot of time on talk shows, especially in light of the (ridiculous, hilarious" ) restrictions of the and above all if this comes at the expense of their scholarship and teaching. But since there are many ways to be a good law professor, and so long as teaching and research are not cheapened or neglected, I do not quite see Devins's objection here.
The second problem with Devins's claims is that they overlook the fact that it is perfectly responsible, maybe even a civic duty, for law professors to participate in public affairs, at least some of the time, by showing how what they know bears on public issues. (I do not believe that Devins disagrees with this point.) If, for example, a teacher of constitutional law thinks that a proposed law is unconstitutional, there should be no taboo on her saying so, even through an op-ed piece. If a teacher of criminal law believes that laws forbidding gang loitering
so For example: In one interview on CNN, I was required to try to stand on a stack of extremely unsteady boxes, not as a scientific experiment or medical test or cruelty of some kind, but so as to ensure a view of the Capitol building on the television screen. Most of the time, it seemed likely that I would fall off. (This interview was live.) And apparently all law professors on television are, by some firmly enforced unwritten rule, required to try to hold a small piece of equipment in one ear, so as to be able to communicate with other people on the show, including the host. (It isn't easy to hold things in your ear.) Most of the time, the small piece of equipment does not fall out but some of the time, it does. (This is especially troublesome when you are trying to balance yourself on a stack of extremely unsteady boxes.) See Burden of Proof (CNN television broadcast, Nov. 9, 1998), available in LEXIS transcript no. 98110900V12 (discussing the meaning of "other High Crimes and Misdemeanors," perjury, and Bills of Attainder). A personal anecdote: I appeared on several shows to discuss impeachment issues, but the format seemed so confining, and so conducive to ludicrous oversimplification, and driving there and back seemed so time consuming, that after a while I decided not to do it anymore. I told a producer of CNN's Burden of Proof that I would no longer discuss impeachment, and would appear on the program if and only if my new dog Perry, a (photogenic) Rhodesian Ridgeback puppy, could appear with me. They called my bluff. The show aired on December 31, 1998, and dealt with legal issues relating to dogs. My dog did become at least somewhat famous in the middle of the show, the producer broke in to tell me that CNN was being "flooded" with calls and compliments about Perry. Interested readers (can there possibly be any?), those who think I'm joking, and Rhodesian Ridgeback enthusiasts can find the transcript at CNN Burden of Proof (CNN television broadcast, Dec. 31, 1998), available in LEXIS, transcript no. 98123100V12. [Ed. Note: Perry's photo is available at http://studentwww.uchicago.edu/orgs/law-phoenix/2bear.html].
A small media notation: The producers who invite people to appear on their shows seem to have the same style and character as that of the on-air hosts of those shows (is this an antecedentjob qualification, or does it develop over time?). Thus the most hilarious invitation came from the producer of the show Hardbal whose invitation appeared in exactly the same staccato voice as that of Chris Matthews, the host of the show: We-want-you-on-Hardball-know-about-it?
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 200 1999-2000
PROFESSORS AND POLITICS
Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 109 (advocating this test as a means of ensuring that academics do the necessary work before registering opinions).
Id. at text accompanying note 75 (internal quotations omitted).
A qualification: Some unpopular opinions are properly subject to taboo con-
HeinOnline -- 148 U. Pa. L. Rev. 201 1999-2000
