Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles Part of the Law Commons
Cass R. Sunstein, "Winner-Take-Less Codes: The Case of Private Broadcasting Interdisciplinary Program Series," 6 University of Chicago Law School Roundtable 39 (1999).
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.
t. Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This essay is a revised version of a presentation given at The Wages of Stardom: Law and the Winner-Take-All Sodety, a panel discussion sponsored by the University of Chicago Roundtable in February 1999. As a revised version of oral remarks, it is more than usually sparing on footnotes. The essay draws on a more formal paper, Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Pubic Interest: Notes Toward a 'Third Way" (forthcoming California Law Review, 1999).
seemingly flexible and highly attractive "pay or play" system, in which broadcasters can be relieved of public interest obligations (to "pay") if they agree instead to pay someone else-another broadcaster-to do so. As we will see, the solution to the two puzzles helps illuminate the nature of television markets, and also the potential virtues and vices in both market and non-market solutions.
Television markets have important "winner-take-all" characteristics.' Intense competition among stations can lead to extraordinary success for some programs and total disaster for others. For many people, the relative quality of the program (Is this the best local news show? The best program on at 7:30?) matters as much as its absolute quality. And for many people, what matters is what other people are watching hence a decision to watch, or not to watch, the evening news on CBS, or Ally McBeal, or Star Trek, or Seinfeld can have external consequences.
Participants in media markets are entirely well-aware of this fact. A bad decision for one week may produce a crisis the next week a good decision for one week may make a year and conceivably a decade. The result can be a kind of homogeneity in programming and also a more than occasional "race to the bottom" in terms of sheer quality, as the effort to grab viewer attention has corrosive effects on programming. Many broadcasters and journalists are quite vocal about this phenomenon, lamenting the adverse effects of competition, which lead them to produce shows different from and inferior to what they would, in a sense, like to offer.
Apart from the concerns of participants, are winner-take-all television markets a basis for legitimate public concern? I believe that they are, above all because of the adverse cultural and democratic consequences of sensationalistic, violent, or prurient programming. It is reasonable to think that competitive forces have an array of harmful effects, ranging from inadequate programming for children, to substance-free and scandal-pervaded treatment of political issues, to news as "infotainment," and most generally to bad consequences for social norms, preferences, and culture as a whole.
Government has often responded to this problem through direct regulation. The most celebrated example is the "fairness doctrine," now largely defunct, which required a certain amount of public interest programming and emphasized the importance of presenting divergent views. Regulation of this kind is often defended as a way of overcoming competitive pressures. The problem with such regulation is that it may be futile or counterproductive. It may also raise serious constitutional problems.
In this essay I discuss another way of promoting public interest goals. The basic idea is a system of voluntary self-regulation, through a "code" of conduct to be issued and enforced by the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB), and if not by the NAB, by some kind of external "watchdog" group. For many dec-
I. THE PROBLEM
4. See Frank and Cook, The Winner-Take-AllSodety at 225-27 (cited in note 1). 5. This is discussed in more detail in Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest (cited in note t).
indispensable to a well-functioning democracy.6 This is so especially in light of the fact that a small relative advantage can lead to huge increases in viewers, a fact that presses television in tabloid-like directions. As Robert Frank and Philip Cook have suggested, "[i]ncreasingly impoverished political debate is yet another cost of our current cultural trajectory. Complex modem societies generate complex economic and social problems, and the task of choosing the best course is difficult under the best of circumstances. And yet, as in-depth analysis and commentary give way to sound bites in which rival journalists and politicians mercilessly ravage one another, we become an increasingly ill-informed and illtempered electorate."7
It would be possible to respond to the sometimes harmful effects of competitive pressures in various ways. Direct legal requirements and prohibitions are of course a possibility. But the most obvious and simplest response would take the form of voluntary self-regulation, through some kind of "code" of good programming. Such an approach would be specifically designed to respond to the problems that can be introduced by market pressures. In other nations, cooperative action has played a constructive role in situations of this kind.8 Such cooperative action often makes people concerned about antitrust violations. But the antitrust law can go quite wrong when it prevents certain cooperative action that overcomes palpably adverse effects of market pressures.9 Indeed, the International Standards Organization is designed specifically to ensure a form of cooperation designed to overcome those adverse effects the question is whether that experience has domestic analogues.
6. See James T. Hamilton, Channeling Violence: The Economic Market for Violent Television Programming (Princeton 1998).
7. See Frank and Cook, The Winner-Take-AllSodety at 203 (cited in note 1).
8. For a discussion of the ethical code in Israel, see Moshe Negbi, The Enemy Within: The Effect of '"Private Censorship" on Press Freedom and How to Confront It- An Israeli Perspective, Discussion Paper D-35, 14 (Harvard University 1998). Note also that many international bodies attempt to certify quality, in a kind of cooperative action designed to reduce adverse effects of market pressures.
9. See Frank and Cook, The Winner-Take-AllSdeo at 225-27 (cited in note 1). 10. See, for example, Michael Prest, Profit Bows to Ethics, The Independent (London), 3 (Oct 26, 1997) (stating "Some of the world's biggest companies are putting their weight behind a new, verifiable code of conduct intended to answer mounting consumer criticism of the exploitative conditions under which the goods they sell are produced in poor countries. ... The code, called SA8000 (Social Accountability 8000), is the brainchild of the Council on Economic Priorities, an American public interest group, which tries to improve corporate responsibility. It has been drawn up by companies, non-governmental organisations, trade unions, and other interested groups, and is due to start operating next year. The code covers the basic issues of child labour, forced labour, health and safety, trade union rights, discrimination, discipline, working hours, and pay.... As the name SA8000 suggests, it is the first to be modeled on existing and widely accepted commercial standards such as IS09000, drawn up by the International Standards Organisation in Geneva, which is used to determine whether companies have the management systems to meet required product quality. But the real strength of the new approach is commercial sanctions. A company which adopts the code also agrees to be independently inspected to see whether it is abiding by the conditions laid down. It will be able to attract customers and gain a competitive advantage by advertising the fact that its factories and suppliers meet the standard.").
of the Radio Act of 1927. The initial NAB code, produced in 1928, included some content guidance, but it was quite vague and also lacked an enforcement mechanism. Just one year later the NAB adopted a new code, involving ethics and standards of commercial practice. For example, the code banned "fraudulent, deceptive or obscene" material, "false, deceptive, or grossly exaggerated advertising claims, and "offensive" material. But the continuing imprecision of this code, together with the continuing lack of an effective enforcement mechanism, made it something of limited usefulness.
The next major step resulted from President Roosevelt's National Recovery Administrative Codes in 1933. The NAB submitted a code of fair practices to the NRA, and on November 27, 1933, President Roosevelt signed it and gave it the force of law. The result included a seven-person Broadcaster Code Authority, designed to supervise compliance. But the National Recovery Act was struck down in 1935 by the Supreme Court,' and the Code Authority was eliminated along with the 'law" that President Roosevelt had signed.
11. I draw here on a variety of sources, including independent research and Mark M. MacCarthy, Broadcast Se/f-Regulation: The NAB Codes, Family Viewing Hour, and Television Violence, 13 Cardozo Arts & EntLJ 667 (1995). 12. See SchehterPouly Cop v United States, 295 US 495 (1935).
B. AFTER THE NEW DEAL: INCREASED CONTENT CONTROL.
Soon thereafter the NAB produced a new voluntary code, which was largely ignored. But in 1938 the NAB came up with another, far more specific code and also an explicit enforcement authority, the NAB Code Committee. Part of the reason for the new development was the increasing willingness of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to regulate both structure and contentand a specific warning, by the Chairman of the FCC (after the broadcast of War of the Worlds) that without industry self-policing, government involvement was likely.
The 1938 Code included a number of important provisions. Among other things, it (a) required broadcasters to allot time fairly for discussion of controversial views (b) banned the sale of time for the airing of controversial views (c) asked broadcasters to cooperate with educational groups for the airing of educational programming (d) required fair and accurate news programs and (e) regulated commercials by limiting the time and length of advertisements. There were also prohibitions on hard liquor advertising. A Code committee would enforce the Code by determining whether a station was in compliance. Notably, the head of the FCC publicly approved the Code, and the American Civil Liberties Union described it as "a great step forward in formulating a policy in the public inter-
All of these steps involved radio, but the 1938 Code was the unmistakable precursor of the eventual television Code. In its first period, television witnessed a pattern that generally characterized the past debates over radio and late twentieth century debates over television: legislative concern, proposed legislation, steps toward self-regulation, and little or no legislation or regulation.
In 1951, members of Congress proposed a National Citizens Advisory Board for Radio and Television, to oversee programming content. At about the same time the NAB began to draft its first television code in 1952, apparently in direct response to a congressional threat of legislation. The new code had a broad reach, emphasizing in particular educational and cultural programming. It also contained content restrictions on display of violent action and sexual material.
Compliance with the Code was voluntary. (Note also that station operators who were not members of the NAB were eligible to subscribe.) Its enforcement provisions were quite modest. The basic mechanism came in the form of a clearinghouse for complaints. In addition, subscribers could display a code seal (the NAB "Seal of Good Practice"), and permission to display the seal would be withdrawn for "continuing, willful, or gross" violations. Thus the only formal sanction was that the non-complying station owner could not display the seal.
But there were informal pressures, too. Stations who sought license renewal were
bought advertising time, because the Code contained limits on the length and
nouncement. Some stations in the United States did not adhere to the Code, but
D. THE DEMISE OF THE CODE.
15. United States v NationalAssodation of Broadcasters, 536 F Supp 149 ( D D C 1982). 16. United States v NationalAssodation of Broadcasters, 536 F Supp at 156-63. The district court held that the time and product interruption standards were not invalid per se. In the court's view, the distinctive characteristics of the broadcasting industry argued against a per se rule of invalidity. Because broadcast frequencies are scarce, because the whole area is subject to regulation, and because of the fact that there are only sixty minutes in an hour (), no simple solution would be sensible. On these two issues, the court also denied summary judgment for the government under the rule of reason, concluding that there were material issues of fact. By contrast, the court held that the multiproduct standard was per se unlawful. In its view, this rule was akin to a standardization agreement by which food manufacturers set a standard for the ingredients that would be used in their products. This form of standardization was per se illegitimate. Thus the court actually invalidated only one provision of the code, on the theory that it was analytically akin to a system for price-fixing. At the same time, the court denied summary judgment for the NAB. An important question was whether the time standards would have the effect of raising or stabilizing the price of commercial time (this was the antitrust problem) it was possible, the court said, that any such effect would be trivial in light of the importance of other factors. If this was true, the code would not violate the Sherman Act. Id. This is because there is no antitrust violation without a significant adverse effect on competition. See, for example, United States vArnold, Schwinn, & Co, 388 US 365, 375 (1967), overruled on other grounds by Continental T t, Inc v GTE Sylvania, Inc, 433 US 36 (1977) Neeld v National Hocky League, 594 F2d 1297, 1298
Code approach, perhaps because of the emerging threat from cable television (see below). In the 1980s, continuing congressional concern about televised violence led to a new law exempting from the antitrust law networks, broadcasters, cable operators and programmers, and trade associations, in order to permit them to generate standards to reduce the amount of violence on television.'7 But there was considerable doubt about whether an explicit exemption was necessary a 1993 opinion from the Department of Justice said that the industry could cooperate to reduce television violence without offense to the law of antitrust.18
E. FAMILY VIEWING.
In 1962, the FCC proposed to make parts of the code into a legal mandate. The industry successfully resisted this step. But there was a continuing pattern of interaction among regulatory proposals, legislative reaction, public concern, and self-regulation. Of these the most important involved 1970s concerns about violence on television. The industry responded through the "family viewing policy," saying that inappropriate entertainment programming would not be shown between 7 pm and 9 pm eastern standard time. This was a distinctive form of self-regulation. But the Writers Guild of America challenged the policy on first amendment grounds, arguing that the policy was not voluntary self-regulation but was in fact a product of government coercion.
In a controversial decision, the trial court accepted the challenge, and barred the NAB from enforcing the policy.19 The court of appeals overturned the decision on the ground that the district court was not the right forum to resolve these issues in the first instance.20 The court of appeals said that the issue should first be resolved by the FCC. Although the decision of the court of appeals was jurisdictional, that court suggested considerable doubt about the district court's judgment: "It simply is not true that the First Amendment bars All limitations of the power of the individual licensee to determine what he will transmit to the listening and viewing public."21
The FCC ruled in 1983 that there had been no government coercion and that the NAB had adopted the family viewing policy voluntarily. In its key passage the FCC wrote, "[v]oluntary industry action is often preferable to governmental solutions, and an industry frequently addresses a problem in order to forestall regulation by the Government conversely, it is not unusual for a regulatory body
CODE: SAMPLE PROVISIONS
22. Federal Communications Commission, Report In the Matter of Primary Jurisdiction Referral of Claims Against Government Defendant Arising from the Inclusion in the NAB Television Code of the 'Family Viewing Policy,' 95 FCC2d 700, 1983 WL 182969 (1983). 23. These provisions are adapted and revised from the more detailed Code suggested by the Model Voluntary Code of Conduct for Digital Television Broadcasters, in Final Report on Public Interest Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters, Charting the DigitalBroadcasting Future, Appendix B (Dec 18, 1998).
avoid programming that encourages criminal or self-destructive behavior they should also be sensitive in presenting sexual material that children might encounter.
3. News coverage shall be substantive and issue-oriented. It should not emphasize the sensational and the prurient. It should concern itself with claims and disagreements on matters of substance. Stations should endeavor not to give excessive or undue attention to sensational accusations or to issues of "who is ahead," at the expense of other issues.
4. Morbid, sensationalistic or alarming details not essential to a factual report, especially in connection with stories of crime or sex, should be avoided. News should be broadcast in such a manner as to avoid panic and unnecessary alarm. News programming should attempt to avoid prurience, sensationalism, and gossip. Stations should make an effort to devote enough time to public issues to permit genuine understanding of problems and disagreements.
5. Violence, psychological but especially physical, should be portrayed responsibly, and not exploitatively. Presentation of violence should avoid the excessive, the gratuitous, the humiliating, and the instructional. The use of violence for its own sake and the detailed dwelling upon brutality or physical agony, by sight or sound, should be avoided. Programs involving violence should venture to present the consequences to its victims and perpetrators. Particular care should be exercised where children may see, or are involved in, the depiction of violent behavior. Programs should not present rape, sexual assault, or sexual violence in an attractive or exploitative light.
6. Broadcasters should ensure that their programming is responsive to the needs of citizens with disabilities. To this end, broadcasters should ensure that programming is accessible, through the provision of closed captioning and other means, to the extent that doing so does not impose an undue burden on the broadcaster. Particular efforts should be made to provide full access to news and public affairs programming. Citizens who are deaf and hard of hearing are sometimes at risk of a form of disenfranchisement, or even physical danger, because steps are not taken to ensure that television broadcasting is available to them. Stations should take special steps to ensure that information about disasters and emergencies are fully accessible to those who are deaf and hard of hearing, including in "real time."
Winner-Take-Less Codes & Ptivate Broadcartes
IV. PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS
24. See Hamilton, Channeling Vioknce at 311 (discussing advances made in public acceptance of recycling through the application of social norms) (cited in note 6). 25. For example, it is not dear that a station devoted to children should be required to provide free air time for political candidates.
V. NOTES ON ANTITRUST LAw
Provisions like those described should not, and in all likelihood would not, be taken to violate the antitrust laws. The Department of Justice has so concluded,2 and in two important cases, aspects of previous codes were upheld against private antitrust attack. A district court refused to issue an injunction against code standards forbidding cigarette advertising, despite a claim that these standards were inconsistent with the antitrust laws. A lower court also upheld the provisions involving standards for advertising directed to children2 In these cases, the court basically concluded that the restrictions were reasonable and in the public interest.
As I have noted, the most recent code met its demise as a result of an antitrust action brought by the Justice Department in 1979, based on an allegation that certain provisions of the Code violated the Sherman Act. After the court's ruling, the NAB suspended enforcement of all code provisions. Doubtless the NAB did this partly for reasons of economic self-interest, and not only because it was fearful of a legal challenge. Nonetheless, the district court's narrow decisionuntested in any court of appeals-has loomed over the debate about codes. But in its most recent analysis of the problem, the Department of Justice suggested that networks could agree to guidelines and principles to reduce unnecessary violence on television.30 Indeed, this is not an ordinary form of collusion. It is
"winner-take-all" effects from their competitors insofar as they were reluctant to engage in certain practices that might attract viewers. In this way, a code would not hurt and might even help them.
tional industry standard-setting efforts that do not necessarily restrict competition and may have significant pro-competitive benefits." Id. In the view of the Department of Justice, "efforts to develop and disseminate voluntary guidelines to reduce the negative impact of television violence should fare well under the appropriate rule-of-reason antitrust analysis." Id at 4. 31. Compare Smith v Pro Footbal4 Inc, 593 F2d 1173, 1183 (D C Cir 1978). 32. It is not entirely dear that any plaintiff would have an antitrust injury. The self-regulation that we are discussing would allow a wide range of choices and options for consumers and producers. Perhaps some producer of some marginal programming could claim that he was unable to sell his product because of (for example) free air time for candidates but this would be an extremely speculative injury. Perhaps viewers could argue that they were deprived of certain programming that they would like but in view of the wide range of options available to viewers, this too is speculative. Perhaps some stations or programmers could contend that a code limited their freedom but it is not dear that this would count as an antitrust injury, espedally in light of the fact that the code is voluntary. 33. This idea is bolstered by the line of cases analyzing restrictions by trade associations and similar entities. See, for example, NCAA v Board of Regents, 468 US 85 (1984) Allied Tube Conduit Corp v Indian Head, 486 US 492 (1988).
