 Penn State University Press Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Forum on Law and the Good Society What ought to be the character of law in good societies, and what role ought it to play? There are several reasons why good society thinkers might want to take these questions seriously. The rule of law in general constitutes a powerful check on tyranny?be it the tyranny of leaders (elected or otherwise) or of democratic majorities. Constitutionalism, more specifically, plays a crucial role in any liberal regime in that it not only empowers government but also limits it and protects the rights of citizens. But it is not only liberals who should take law seriously. Constitutional law, especially, is the cornerstone in the foundation of the polity, creating a common set of political norms and values and thus the beginnings of a common political identity. Finally, democrats might want to consider the role of law from an Aristotelian perspective: Law not only habituates us to certain types of action (virtuous ones, in the good regime) but, rightly conceived and implemented, law can also encourage us to critically engage it and thus refine the circumstances of our own habituation. Law in liberal democratic polities, then, always entails a tension: It makes certain types of liberty possible by constraining others. Cass R. Sunstein If I had known that not a single lunch counter would open as a result of my action I could not have done differently than I did. If I had known violence would result, I could not have done differently than I did. I am thankful for the sit-ins if for no other reason than that they a slogan into reality, by provided me with an opportunity for making life turning a decision is all about. part of the time. Sometimes we just want to are We are all Expressionists scream loudly at injustice, or to stand up and be counted. These noble motives, but any serious revolutionist must often deprive him self of the pleasures of self-expression. He must judge his actions by their ultimate effects on institutions. Actions are expressive; they carry meanings. This is true for nearly everything we do, from the most mundane to the most signif icant. Thus, for example, a lawyer who wears a loud tie to court will be signaling something distinctive about his self-conception and his attitude toward others; so too with a law professor who teaches in blue jeans; so too with a student who comes to class in a business suit. What can be said for nonverbal acts applies to purely verbal statements as well. A bank president who uses the terms "Miss" and will be refers to African-Americans or who as showing a wide range of things about his attitudes on matters of gen der and race. So too with a politician, say in the South, who uses the terms "Ms." and "African-Americans." In these and other cases, what the agent will be communicating, or be taken to mean, may or may not have a great deal to do with his particular intentions. In this sense, the meanings of actions are not fully within the control of agents. Indeed, some agents may not even be aware of the relevant meanings. Consider a foreigner, whose for eign state is often signaled by obliviousness to the social meanings of his actions. What he says is very different from what he means. Volume 9y Number 2 would not be?are not?much moved by evidence that capital pun ishment does not deter. Their primary concern is the symbolic or expressive content of the law, not aggregate murder rates. At the outset it is important to say that we might understand the expressive function of law in two different ways. First, and most straightforwardly, the law's "statement" may be designed to affect social norms and in that way ultimately to affect both judgments and behavior. On this view, an expressive approach to law is not indepen dent of an assessment of social consequences; certain expressions are favored because they will (ultimately) have good consequences. Here there is a prediction about the facts: An appropriately framed law may influence social norms and push them in the right direction. For example, if the law mandates recycling, perhaps it will affect social norms about the envi ronment in a way that is different from the effects on norms of curbside charges. Or if the law wrongly treats something?let us suppose reproductive capacities?as a commodity, social norms may be affected in a troublesome way. regulations paternalistic protections, are weak, thin-skinned, and unable to take care of themselves? Or do they "mean that bigotry is utterly unacceptable in a liberal society? Or consider the subject of risk regulation. In environmental protection, public debate is often focused on the perceived social meaning of law. Thus the Endangered Species Act has a special salience, as a sym bol of a certain conception of the relation ship between human beings and their envi ronment, and emissions trading systems are frequently challenged because they are said to "make a statement" that reflects an inap propriate valuation of the environment. In the same way, mandatory recycling (as opposed to curbside charges, which seem far better from the economic standpoint) may well receive public support on expres sive grounds. Outside of the environmental context, the same may be true of mandatory pro bono work (as opposed to a compulsory donation from lawyers who refuse to do such work). Sometimes this claim is plausible; pre vailing norms, like preferences and beliefs, are not a presocial given, but a product of a complex set of social forces, possibly including law. And law moti vated by norm-change will be my focus here. But sometimes people support a law not because of its effects on norms, but because it is believed intrinsically valu able for the relevant "statement" to be made. (See the opening epigraph from a 1960s protester.) And sometimes law will have little or no effect on social norms. example?that are not seen as mere com function of law?the function of law in "making statements" as opposed to the function of law in directly controlling behavior. I do so by focusing on the particular issue of how legal "statements" might be designed to change social norms. I catalogue a range of possible (and in my view legitimate) efforts to alter norms through legal expressions about appropriate evaluative attitudes. I also urge that the expressive function of law makes most sense in connection with efforts to change norms, and that if legal statements produce bad consequences, they should not be enacted even if they seem rea sonable or indeed noble. Empirical questions loom throughout, and I do offer several empirical claims; but my goal is mostly normative rather than descriptive or positive. The Good Society The point bears on the cultural role of law, adjudication, and even of Supreme Court decisions. The empirical effects of those decisions are highly disputed. If the Supreme Court says that segregation is unlawful, that certain restrictions on hate speech violate the First Amendment, or that students cannot be asked to pray in school, the real-world consequences may be much smaller than is convention ally thought. But the close attention American society pays to the Court's pronouncements is connected with their expressive or sym bolic character. quences. In fact, I believe otherwise and in that way endorse Simon's remark in the epigraph to this essay. But it cannot be doubted that the expressive function is a large part of legal debate. Without under standing the expressive function of law, we will have a hard time in getting an ade quate handle on public views with respect to, for example, civil rights, prostitution, the environment, endangered species, cap ital punishment, and abortion. support of its effects a law not because on norms, but because it is believed intrinsically valuablefor the relevant "statement" to be made. Many social norms solve collective action problems. Some of these problems involve coordination; others involve prisoner's dilemmas. Norms solve such problems by imposing social sanctions on defectors. When defection violates norms, defectors will proba bly feel shame, an important motivational force. The community may enforce its norms through informal punishment, the most extreme of which is ostracism. But the most effective use of norms is ex ante. The expectation of shame?a kind of social "tax," some times a very high one?is usually enough to produce compliance. But there is a subtler and more interesting class of cases, of spe cial importance for understanding the expressive function of law. These cases arise when the relevant law is a signal or statement unaccompanied by much in the way of enforcement activity. There is a large set of instances in which laws that (a) aspire to announce or signal a change in social norms are nonetheless (b) accompanied by little enforcement activity. Consider, for example, laws that forbid littering and laws that require people to clean up after their dogs. In many localities such laws are rarely enforced through the criminal law. But they have an important effect in signal ing appropriate behavior and in inculcating the expectation of social opprobrium and hence shame in those who deviate from the norm. With or without enforcement activ ity, such laws can help reconstruct norms and the social meaning of action. Hence someone who fails to clean up after his dog may be showing disrespect or even contempt for others; many, most, or all people may see things this way; and the result can be large changes in behavior. Eventually there can be norm cascades, as reputational incentives shift behavior in new directions. It should be unsurprising to find that in many places, people clean up after their dogs even though this is not especially pleasant and even though the laws are rarely enforced. Here as elsewhere, private efforts may be unsuccessful. In this light, law might attempt to express a judgment about the underlying activity and do so in such a way as to alter social norms. If we see norms as a tax or a subsidy to choice, the law might attempt to change a subsidy into a tax, or vice-versa. In fact, this is a central, if implicit, goal behind much risk regulation. Educational campaigns often have the goal of changing the social meaning of risk-taking activity. Going beyond provision of information, coercion might be defended as a way of increasing social sanctions on certain behavior. Through time, place, and manner restrictions or flat bans, for exam pie, the law might attempt to make it seem weak to smoke, or to use drugs, or to engage in unsafe sex. Are such efforts illiberal or unaccept ably paternalistic? They should not be so regarded. Choices are a function of norms for which individual agents are not respon sible and which, on reflection, many or most agents may not endorse. This is con spicuously so in the context of risk-taking activity involving cigarettes, drugs, unsafe sex, and firearms. Much discussion of whether law should respect "preferences" or "choices" is confused by virtue of its silence on the matter of social norms. People may follow such norms despite the fact that they deplore them. information is the least intru or are Are such efforts illiberal unacceptably paternalistici They should not be so regarded. Choices afunction of normsfor which individual agents are not responsible and reflection, many or most agents may not endorse. sive regulatory strategy, it should be the preferred option. Whether more aggressive strategies make sense depends on the details. A complex network of social norms governs the acceptable uses of money. This is so in two different respects. First: Some social norms impose sanctions on using money as a reason for action. Here people are not supposed to engage in certain acts if their reason for doing so is financial gain. Second: Some social norms make differ ent kinds of money nonfungible; the prevailing norms require differ ent kinds of money to be used for different purposes. These sets of norms raise many complexities. They are also entangled with the expressive function of law. They suggest, finally, that it is some times inappropriate to infer general valuations from particular choices, since those choices are a function of norms that are limited to the context in which they govern. The Good Society with social norms identifying their appro priate valuation. The claim is not that mar kets value sexuality "too much" or "too lit tle"; it is that markets value these activities in the wrong way. money cannot be used. On one view, any effort at is management illegitimate; this is a project that is off limits to government. But it is hard to see how this argument might be made persuasive. on social norms are Effects not easily avoided; any system of government is effect norms, likely including creation of the basic systems of contract, tort, and private property. Norms of partiality are an important part of social inequality. Social norms may require women to engage in most of domestic labor; in many places, women who refuse to do so incur social sanctions and may even feel ashamed. The social meaning of a woman's refusal may be a rejection of her appropriate role. Hence it may signal a range of undesirable traits. In the areas of both race and gender, prevailing norms help constitute inequality. And here as elsewhere, collective action is necessary to reconstitute existing norms. an to Of course private norm entrepreneurs may be able to accomplish a great deal. With respect to the division of domestic labor between men and women, private efforts at norm management have played an important role. Individual acts that are expressive in character?a refusal to make dinner, for example?are important part of modern feminism. But the expressive function of law is often especially impor tant here, and it can move to the fore in public debates. If a discriminatory act is consistent with prevailing norms, there will be more in the way of discriminatory behavior. If discriminators are ashamed of themselves, there is likely to be less discrimination. The social meaning of an act of sexual harassment will have a great deal to do with the amount of sexual harassment. A large point of law may be to shift social norms and social meaning. Consider in this connection the fact that many restau rant owners and inn-keepers actually supported the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which would have prevented them from discriminating. How could people want the state to act against them? The answer lies in the fact that the law helped shift social norms and the social mean ing of nondiscrimination. Whereas nondiscrimination would for merly signal a willingness to act on a race-neutral basis?and hence would trigger social norms that call for discrimination against blacks?it would henceforth signal a willingness to obey the law, and hence fail to trigger adverse social norms. for example, that John treats a beautiful diamond in the same way that most people treat friends, or that Jane values a plant in the same way that most people value their children, or that Sandy values her car like most people value art or literature. Antidiscrimination law is often designed to change norms so as to ensure that people are treated with a kind of dignity and respect that discriminatory behav ior seems to deny. the further claim that animal life is infi nitely valuable. It is best taken as a recom mendation of a shift in norms governing the treatment of animals, accompanied by a judgment that the new mode will have con sequences for what human beings do. The recommendation may be based on the view that if we see animals (and nature) in this way, we will solve collective action prob lems faced by human beings in preserving animal life important for human lives; it may be based on a noninstrumental effort to extend ideals of basic dignity to all liv ing things. Otherwise What barriers should there be to the expressive function of law? The simplest answer is: The same barriers as there are to any other kind of governmental action. There is nothing distinctive to norm management that requires a special set of constraints. efforts at norm management will be futile or counterproductive. We can imagine, for example, that when government attempts to move social norms in a particular direction, it may fail miserably. Nancy Reagan's "Just Say No" policy with respect to drugs may well be an example. It is necessary to ensure that those who engage in norm management are trusted by the people whose norms are at issue. For this reason it may be best for government to attempt to enlist inter mediate organizations, so as to ensure that people with authority in relevant communities are participating in the process. norm management Moreover, is a conventional and time-honored part of government. Of course we could imagine abuses, even unspeakable ones. But the proper response is to insist on a wide range of rights-based constraints on the manage ment of social norms through law. content of lavo really debates over the statement that law makes, independent of its (direct) consequences. There can be no doubt that law, like action in general, has an expressive function. Some people do what they do mostly because of the statement the act makes; the same is true for those who seek changes in law. Many debates over the appropriate content of law are really debates over the statement that law makes, independent of its (direct) consequences. I have suggested that the expressive func tion of law has a great deal to do with the effects of law on prevail The Good Society ing social norms. Often law's "statement" is designed to move norms in fresh directions. All this leaves open a number of questions. Among the most pressing are empirical ones. To what extent have shifts in norms been a function of law? How can law be made effective in shifting norms? What variables account for effective norm-change? There are also issues about constraints on norm man theoretical important agement. It is particularly important to decide how to handle situa tions in which laws motivated by expressive goals have mixed or bad consequences. I have suggested that legal "statements" producing bad consequences should not be endorsed. But my simplest sugges tion here is that we begin to make sense of law's expressive function if we attend to the role of law in the management of social norms. No system of law can entirely avoid that role; even markets them much a creation of law?are selves?very agement. In these circumstances it is best for government to proceed pragmatically and contextually, seeing which norms are obstacles to exercises in norm man well-being, and using law when law is effective in providing correctives. see Lawrence "The Regulation 61 University of Chicago This essay draws on Cass R. Sunstein, "On the Expressive Function and Social Justice, Chapter 2. I. The Necessity of Failure We are accustomed to thinking of constitutions as devices for cre ating and holding together a political world. That customary mode of thought makes a certain sense. After all, making and maintaining a politics are central objectives of constitutionalism. They are not only part of what a constitution ostensibly does, but also part of what it should do, or must do, if it is to succeed. But this sensible notion has taken on perverse forms, especially after the Civil War of the United States, where constitutional success has sometimes come to be viewed strictly in terms of the perpetuation of a constitution or a regime.1 It is almost as if longevity itself were sufficient evidence of constitutional success.