Frank, Robert H. Murphy, Kevin M. Rosen, Sherwin and Sunstein, Cass R. (1999) "The Wages of Stardom: Law and the WinnerTake-All Society: A Debate," The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable: Vol. 6: Iss. 1, Article 3. Available at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable/vol6/iss1/3
Rosen started the academic debate on our topic with his article "The Economics of Superstars" in The Ameican Economic Review. Kevin M. Murphy is the George Pratt Shultz Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business. In 1997, The American Economic Association awarded Professor Murphy the John Bates Clark Medal, a prize given every two years to the best American economist under the age of forty. He is widely recognized as one of the top economists in the world for his work on the causes and consequences of income inequality, unemployment and economic growth, and his research on labor, minimum wages, human capital and education are considered groundbreaking.
Both Robert Frank and Cass Sunstein argued that the Superstar/WinnerTake-All phenomenon is real and poses serious problems for society-problems that perhaps government intervention can solve. Sherwin Rosen and Kevin Murphy were more skeptical about this problem and argued that the free market can take care of any such distortions.
WENDY MOORE: Good afternoon, my name is Wendy Moore and I am the interdisciplinary programs editor of The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable. I would like to thank all of you for coming out and would like to welcome you to our winter symposium: The Wages of Stardom.
The other day, Robert [Peterson], Ariana [Almajan] and I were talking with Professor Uoseph] Isenbergh and he pointed out the obvious irony that all of our panelists were superstars. I guess that goes to show how far this phenomenon has permeated our society and also the law school. Indeed each of our panelists is a superstar in his field. Sherwin Rosen is a Professor of Economics here at the University of Chicago and he first wrote about the superstar phenomenon in his 1981 article, "The Economics of Superstars."' Professor Robert Frank of Cornell University followed up these ideas and expanded on them in a number of his works including a 1995 book he co-authored with Philip Cook called The Winner-Take-AllSodety.2 Kevin Murphy is a professor here at the business school and he is widely regarded as one of the best young American economists and is widely renowned for his work in labor economics. Finally, Professor Sunstein here at the law school is well known to all and is widely respected for his work in constitutional law and law and human behavior.
Each of our panelists will give a brief speech on the topic and then we will turn it over to our audience and your questions. Now I will turn it over to Cass Sunstein our moderator and participant. Thank you.
CASS SUNSTEIN: Welcome to all of you and a special thanks to the Roundtable whose members have done a wonderful job with this and have made it a pleasure for all of us. We have opening statements that are reasonably short. That may be a surprise to our panelists because I haven't told them about it. Do
ample, if you look at the return to education, college graduates earn a larger return on their degrees than they did in the seventies. But even if you look within the distribution of college graduates, you will see that the college graduates at the top are doing very well and those at the bottom are struggling to hold their own, even losing ground. It is clearly better to be in some fields rather than others. If you are a computer scientist, then you have done well over the last fifteen years. If your master's degree was in English literature, then it has been a tougher struggle for you. There was a New Yorker cartoon that I clipped about two or three years ago--there are two young men standing in a field on sticks, scarecrows essentially, one calling out to the other, "English Lit, how about you?" as in, what is your major? But slice it a different way, look at the English literature majors. Those who are making it in that field are making it in a way that people didn't in the past.
Cook and I suggested that one explanation that seems common in many of these changes in income distribution is the phenomenon of increased leverage. Technology is enabling top players to extend their reach in a variety of other fields as well. Top players are more productive now so that a good executive decision at one time only meant being able to do well in your local market, then your regional market, then national market and now finally a global market. A bad executive decision, at one time, meant that there was not much of a threat of reprisal because there were not many competitors in your local market and others didn't even know who you were. Now a bad decision at the top means many potential rival firms ready to pounce on your operation, seize market share from you and so on. So as both the value of a good decision and the penalty for a bad one has increased, I think that we have seen the penalty for mistakes grow higher.
That doesn't explain why executive salaries in the U.S. have risen with respect to executive salaries in Europe, where the ratio is not as pronounced. Another important ingredient to the process, Cook and I argued, was the free agency system, which, as you will recall in sports, was the gateway event that led to the explosion in star salaries in sports. It was not until the courts awarded free agency rights to players that we saw the real escalation of player's salaries. It is similar in business where it used to be the norm-not any legal requirement, a fairly little-violated norm-that promotion took place from within the company. It wasn't believed that an executive from a tobacco company could run a computer company. That has all changed in a profound way, I think, in the last twenty years. The number of CEOs promoted from the outside has risen about 50 percent during that period. It is not uncommon any longer to see a Lou Gerstner to go from RJR to IBM because he is a good manager and to have seen the stock of IBM go up many fold. It is also no surprise to see his compensation package go up with the value added. It is this combination of greater technological leverage, the ability to expand your reach and have more of a difference on the bottom line, and the added competition that attends the transactions as people bid for talent in the market today.
at the point were you are now. It is very hard to claim the moral high ground from where you sit. Sure you've worked hard, but why do you work hard? That is explained by genes and environment. We don't know what mix of genes and environment explains why you are here, but it is some mix of those two and which of those two do you think you are morally entitled to claim great credit for? So rather than protect these seven figure salaries to the last breath, consider what might be done with them in the public arena.
SHERWIN ROSEN: We have a saying around here: "One is world famous in Hyde Park." We are all world-famous here. [aughterj
We had a nice Ph.D. dissertation last year by Mark Fisher, who also has a law degree. From either here or Harvard. He gathered some nice data, for those of you who are lawyers, about earnings among lawyers in top law firms. He himself is working at Sullivan & Cromwell, which pays among the highest salaries. An average associate there earns about $150,000. This figure does not just reflect the new hires but the associates as a whole group. The average partner income, profit per partner, is about $1.5 million.
I basically agree with Bob [Frank]. I had written down some remarks because I am sort of verbally challenged. I would rather read than think of things extemporaneously-that is why I'm not a lawyer, I guess. Bob said so many things that I agree with, except those towards the end. [In a loud voice] Do not work for any non-profit organizations! Make as much money as you can and give it to worthy causes! [Laughter] The invisible hand works here, too.
Basically, let me reiterate the point that all income distributions and all earnings distributions in every society that have ever been studied-and this probably includes the Soviet Union, but nobody ever studied it I guess-is right skewed. That is, it looks like a log normal at the right tail there are some very high income earners, and that is universal. Now sometimes the tail is longer in some societies than in others, but they all look like that. A lot of the people who make a lot of money are lawyers and doctors, where there is great expense in learning the trade. But these other things, when you look at the real huge earners like Marcia Clark, one of the great lawyers, and the guy in the coonskin cap that she talks to-what characterizes those types of activities is that the cost of production has the characteristic that average cost is much bigger than marginal cost. There is kind of a scale economy: once you get by the first unit, everything else is gravy.
It is like that old joke about why the guy who is selling something to you so cheap, he is losing a nickel on each item, but he's making it up in volume. ted] That is how these things work. How much would you pay to watch Oprah Winfrey on television? A couple of bucks maybe? But there are millions of people who are willing to do that, and it is that volume effect that allows her income to be so large. Her services are not congested because they go on television.
If I write a book... [Looking at Frank] How much money did you make on that book, anyway? [Laughter] I bet it isn't so much, but it is still a great book.
what sustains the high lawyer population here, which is higher than anywhere else in the world. But other than that, I do not have many thoughts on the matter. There is another thing that I would like to bring to the table, again emphasized by Bob. What I see-and this is completely speculative-when I see the increase in inequality in the U.S. (and the U.S. is the economy that I know the best) I think that we have seen a lot more stratification in higher education and maybe lower education. I have a friend, a very distinguished academic, whose kid is in sixth, maybe seventh grade, who spends half of his time doing her homework for her in order to build her credentials so that she can get into the U of C Law School one day. The cram schools in Japan have this quality. I think the Koreans banned the use of cram schools at one point. I think that this is troublesome, and something that I would like to get you to think about because I don't understand it.
There are only about ten schools, when we are talking about big time money in elite law partnerships-we're talking about this place and Harvard and Boalt Hall and Yale and a few other places. And then there is a tremendous drop-off. If you get an M]BA from U of C business school, the average guy is making $125,000, which is almost what Columbia offered to pay Robert Barro. However, if you go to just the University of X and get an MBA, then you're going to get a job for $60,000, if you are lucky. There is a tremendous concentration. Since I went to kind of crummy schools, except the University of Chicago where I got my Ph.D., I feel that the talent is a lot more spread out than that. Thus, I find it kind of curious about Sullivan & Cromwell-I looked it up-that 80 percent of their lawyers are from the top fifteen schools and maybe half are from the top five. There is this enormous heaping.
Now let me just close with the statement that this is true in graduate schools all over the place-even in Economics-where there really is not very much money in it. We live a quiet life instead. A lot of top economists come from only five or six or ten schools, of which we are one and MIT is one and so on. Law is a much bigger profession than economics, so in some sense law is much more concentrated in sorting people than Economics is. Law must be fifty times the size of-more than fifty, hundreds of times the size of-the Economics profession, so this concentration in law schools is a bit troublesome to me.
KEVIN MURPHY Thank you. What I'd like to do is broaden things out a bit and try to put today's discussion into a wider context. I do most of my work on income inequality and relative wages. It is kind of funny-sometimes I get drawn into things like this symposium today where we think about the "superstars," or sometimes it is the "super-rich," and we hear these stories that the top two percent is getting everything and everybody else is getting nothing. Then I bounce around and go to some poverty discussion, and we talk about the underclass and how the bottom guys are falling away from the rest of us, while "we" are still doing okay.
of-people margin without congestion on the other resources margin that really is the game being played in the superstar phenomenon. Now what might have caused this phenomenon to grow over time? Improved capital markets-that is something that people might think about. Improvements in information and the flow of information are other possibilities. The ability of mass media, clearly.
Why does Michael Jordan make so much? Well, you think about the difference between Michael Jordan and another player on the team. Surely Jordan makes it more likely that you are going to win, but he also sells a completely different product. He is a hero. You could have a combination of players who contribute just as much to winning, but they wouldn't be a hero. Jordan is a national spokesman. He sells products. In essence, he is able to make that record that is replicated for thousands and thousands or millions of individuals.
So the superstar phenomenon is there, we know that it is part of the story. However, in my opinion, it is not dear that it is the major part of the story of overall growth in inequality.
One of the things we know, for example, is that a lot of the growth of inequality occurs across occupations. That is that certain occupations, historically the high-skilled occupations, have done better than the less-skilled occupations. Surely there has been growth in inequality among the high-skilled jobs, but there also has been growth among the low-skilled ones. Again, one of the amazing facts is how similar the growth in inequality is among the low-skilled occupations as it is among the high skilled occupations. It is also interesting as to how similar the growth in inequality is in occupations where there is this economy of scalefor example in one area of academics, as opposed to something like the law-as it is in other areas.
Secondly, I'd like to say that just because these forces are at work, doesn't mean that we are immune to the laws of supply and demand. I think that that is important. One thing that we have seen is that the faster the college-educated population grows, the slower the premium for college graduates increases. The faster the premium grows, the more people want to go on to college. The supply side does respond.
I think that this is important to realize because we now have a growing premium for education. That means that we are going to have more people going on to school, and more people going to school is going to improve people's earnings and the productivity of the economy as a whole. In fact, the notion that as you get more educated you do different things is really a big part of progress, right? The point is that when you go to school you don't learn how to dig a hole faster than the other guy, you learn how to build a bulldozer to dig the hole for you-that is the idea. But this is important, right? It has to be important, otherwise you would not see such vast earnings differentials if it was just a question of how much better you could do a particular activity. It has to be that you can do it in a different way-that you can bring in other resources to work with you. That is the essence of the superstar phenomenon. That is the essence of progress generally. That is, we did not just learn how to do better what we used to know how
I am going to talk about the broadcasting market. What I am going to suggest in particular is that there ought to be not a law but a code. There oughta be--"ou-g-h-t-a"-be a code, by which broadcasters engage in self-regulation they cartelize themselves. This shouldn't be a violation of the antitrust laws. The Justice Department should be thrilled.
There was a Presidential Advisory committee on public interest obligations of broadcasters in the last couple of years. Here are two puzzles: the broadcasters on the committee were extremely happy with the idea of a code-in fact they pushed it, it is what they liked the best. Their self-defense was that this is a winner-take-all market, which creates some social pathologies. (I'll get to those in a minute.)
But the National Association of Broadcasters, the trade organization, hated the idea. They came within half-an-inch of killing it. As they hated it, they said, with a big smile in their face, this would violate the antitrust laws.
The puzzle is that usually members of an industry are not smiling when they talk about how an activity, which they might voluntarily engage in, would violate the antitrust laws. Why were they smiling then, and why were the broadcasters on the committee so enthusiastic about something that the National Association of Broadcasters despised?
The second and related puzzle is that one way of making legal controls on this market, with winner-take-all features, less damaging to profits is to tell ABC or CBS or Fox you can do something good for the culture or you can pay if you are not going to, thus providing an economic incentive. You can provide some educational programming for kids or, if not, you give some money to PBS. That would be a replacement for current legal regulation, which is rigid. It is "play." It is not "play or pay." The oddity was that most of the broadcasters on the committee didn't like play or pay. They liked play. Now why was that? I mean here to try to untangle those two puzzles.
Why might we think that broadcasting markets aren't something that will serve our culture entirely well? Off-hand, there are pervasive problems with broadcasting markets. For example, there is relatively little educational programming for children, at least on non-cable stations, and about 40 percent of Americans don't get cable at all. There is very little educational programming, and what little there is tends not to be so good. Television programming is pervasively violent. The level of murders per hour is high, not low. Also, there are now a series of studies linking, plausibly, violence on television to violence in the world.
With respect to democratic processes, it is very expensive for a candidate for political office to get on television, and this creates a couple of problems. One is an arms race to raise more and more money, sometimes illegally, and also a system in which democratic or civic broadcasting on television is infrequent. And when it is there, it tends to be really fast and sensationalistic rather than substantive. We might think that with respect to children, the level of criminal activity, and the level of democratic or civil programming, our media market is doing
A code is less intrusive than direct regulation, and it would be a way of controlling the problems just identified without getting bureaucrats involved in dictating content. We could think off-hand of what it would look like. It might say, for example, there should be four hours of educational programming each week. The code would be administered by the National Association of Broadcasters. It might say that in the two months before a Presidential election, each week there shall be two hours of free broadcasting time for candidates for public office. You could imagine vaguer provisions dealing, with, let's say, gratuitous or sexualized violence-especially, but maybe not only, at times when children are likely to be in the audience. That actually borrows from the old N.A.B. code.
My suggestion is that this notion would counteract some of the pathologies in our current television market. It would counteract some of the difficulties faced by those who don't have cable, ensuring programming for kids. It would probably have beneficial results in reducing violence at least a little bit and reducing anxiety maybe more than a little bit. It would promote civic and democratic aspirations. It could be and should be administered by the National Association of Broadcasters. If they are unwilling to do it, then there should be a watchdog group that gets a lot of attention that can do the same thing. And in the environmental area, this kind of response to externalities has often had tremendous payoff because of the sheer fact of publicity.
Okay, now I think we are in a position to say something about the puzzles with which I began. Why is it that the broadcasters on the committee were enthusiastic about the idea of a code but the National Association of Broadcasters hated the idea? You might think that economic self-interest is not disconnected from this seemingly anomalous pair of results. The broadcasters on the committee were selected by virtue, in part, of their commitment not to government regulation, which they don't much like, but to civic-minded broadcasting. Their economic enemy, in part, is cable television and other broadcasters who have different goals in mind. They are threatened by competition from people who wouldn't obey a code, which they themselves in their individual capacity are probably implicitly acting in accordance with, whether or not it exists. For each of these broadcasters, a code is a benefit and probably not a harm. It would prevent competition that might harm them.
The National Association of Broadcasters, by contrast, is in a position of protecting the broadcasting industry against, most importantly, the cable industry. And the broadcasting industry is a net loser from a code even if individual broadcasters are neutral or net gainers.
But why on earth, now we might ask, would the broadcasters not want the kind of flexibility that would be introduced by "pay or play"? The reason appears to be-this is a speculation-that these broadcasters were going to play anyhow. Either because that was their commitment as a matter of principle, or because their particular constituency demanded it. They were going to have some educational programming, some civic-minded programming, some free air time programming whether or not there is a code.
FRANK: Okay, you don't automatically get overcrowding in a winner-take-all market, and by winner-take-all market I guess we understand that we mean that it is a market where your reward depends in large measure on your relative performance in addition to perhaps your absolute performance. If contestants in a winner-take-all market get paid the value of what they produce, then there is a general set of conditions that does result in overcrowding in the market.
Essentially it is this: if I'm trying to decide whether to enter a market to compete, let's say, for a recording contract, I think about the expected payoff for me in doing that. What are the odds of winning number one? How much I will win if I win? I will weigh that against whatever else I might do, which might be to pursue some career that entailed less risk of failure and, albeit, a smaller salary in return for that. So that means that I'll just enter the market if the expected return beats what I could do otherwise. I won't take into account the fact that my presence competing for the trophy makes other competitors less likely to win it. In that sense it is like an over-fishing example. The fishing boat doesn't worry about the fact that some of the fish it will catch would have been caught by others had it stayed in port. You get this excessive effort at fishing as the common result there.
There is another kind of behavioral factor that drives overcrowding, which is that if you are going to choose between a safe career path like teaching in a law school or a risky career path like trying to become a mergers and acquisitions lawyer at Sullivan & Cromwell (if they even have them, I don't know), you've got to estimate your odds at succeeding if you enter that riskier arena. There is a very powerful set of evidence that suggests that when you consider your chances in risky ventures like that you're very likely to overestimate them. That ninety percent of drivers think that they are above average is the common statistic. That extends to factory workers: 92 percent of them think that they are more productive than the median colleague. Information doesn't seem to help that: 94 percent of college professors report in surveys that they are more productive than their median colleagues. Which is why, by the way, merit pay doesn't seem to work. It's a recipe for more than half the people being very disappointed with their pay.
On those scores, you tend to get too many people entering the competition, which has a cost in the lost output that you don't get if they had gone into some other line of occupations. So that's the basic overcrowding argument.
MURPHY: I just want to make a couple of points that tie into some of Cass' comments and some of the comments that just came up. I think when we start talking about what makes... first of all, there are things that create a superstars market, and then there are things that create a superstars market that are, to an economist's point of view, inefficient. And those two things are not at all the same. I want to make sure that's clear.
For example, when Cass started his comments, he started talking about unjustified gains. That is, small differences in skill that generate big differences in rewards. However, when I can produce a better television show for a hundred
strange grounds about free speech and so on. I don't see that it is related to winner-take-all. Maybe I missed something.. .maybe we should regulate rap music.
SUNSTEIN: There is a lot there. I will address a couple of points. I meant to separate the efficiency argument from the equality argument. And when Kevin says that someone is a million dollars better-well that depends on whether social and legal institutions allow that person to be a million dollars better. God didn't say that it's just to give a million dollars to the person who can produce two dollars more value for, say, 500,000 people. Give me a theory of justice that says that that person deserves a million dollars more!
It is right that we should separate the efficiency argument from the inequality argument, but we shouldn't disparage the inequality argument because it isn't an efficiency argument. That would be hasty. The inefficiency argument...
SUNSTEIN: That's a possible solution. The inefficiency argument has to do with arms races on the one hand and overcrowding on the other. Those are the two points. With respect to the code and communists-that wouldn't be unconstitutional. The lawyers in the room know, because the constitution only applies to the government and I can report that no one has suggested that any kind of political control of that sort should be a part of any code...
SUNSTEIN: ... and the N.A.B. would resist, with many fans from all sides, any effort to control through government regulation. For example, between 1929 and 1979, there was never any kind of government control. If there were such an effort to control, Sherwin and I could join hands and urge that they eliminate that.
The connection to winner-take-all is that broadcasting markets, as the broadcasters are well aware, have a winner-take-all feature where relative position matters a lot, and it can be magnified into huge disparities with no...
MURPHY: I just disagree in terms of what is the definition of winner-takeall. What's key in the over-fishing case is that when I go out and fish, you catch less fish but the overall number of fish in the market remains the same. Nobody benefits from that. When I go out and compete against you in the computer market and we drive down the price of computers, that makes you less profitable but the consumer benefits from that. There is a technical externality in the terms of economics in the case of fishing that doesn't happen in the case of computers. You have to convince me why there is a technical externality in broadcasting. The fact that people want to watch the best TV shows is no different than that they want to go get the best haircut or to go eat the best dinner or anything else.
ROSEN: Tax them!
ROSEN: It is political...
pie-because of the technology. However, the inefficiency associated with competition for that pie would be there independent of whether it was that technology or the other one.
MURPHY: So there's a decoupling between the efficiency/inefficiency question-which has to do with splitting a pie-and the winner-take-all notion, which has to do with the technology of how you win the pie.
FRANK: Technically, the distinction is that, as in the fishing case where you send ten boats out, each boat comes back with a tenth of the total catch. The average catch is greater than what the tenth boat added to the total catch. If your average payment exceeds the marginal contribution that you make, then you will get this overcrowding inefficiency. That's doubly true in the case of searching for the best contestant in a field of ten contestants. Doubling the number of contestants does not double the value of the quality of the decision that you get in the closely contested legal decision. You get the decision, which may be a better decision. You're going to have more talent trying to get the job of writing the decision, so it probably won't be a worse decision, but, still, the social value of that decision doesn't go up in proportion to the number of people who competed to write it.
ROSEN: You can't even show that. I mean, there has been a lot of work in economics about patent races and whether people work too fast to discover things. There are no results there. You can't show that they work too fast. Sometimes they do, sometimes they don't. It depends on the way that you structure the model. If you tweak the models a little here or there, you get a different result. There's nothing that you can say. Now, in these labor market phenomena, I think that what Kevin is saying is that there's no standard for judging whether it's only rank that matters or absolutes. You can't think of an example where it's only rank. You know, if we only care who is the...
FRANK: Doesn't need be only rank, Sherwin.
ROSEN: But so long as there is some absolutes in there, then...
ROSEN: Then you're going to get some efficiency from allocating these...
FRANK Oh, you get a gain, but if rank matters, then there is this tendency to spend too much.
FRANK. Then what?
public interest New England Auto Racing Association at one time had an agreement to try to limit the amount that competitors-auto racers-spent on tires. Auto racing has lots of limits of this sort You have a limit on the size that your engine can be-weight restrictions, so on. These seem sensible. They are kind of like anti-steroid laws in athletics. Why spend more and more to put big engines in? Why not fix the size of the engine and see who can drive the car the best? That is the goal, to try to keep the cost of anointing a champion within bounds, and they found that they had pretty much controlled all of the competitive dimensions of auto-racing save one-namely the type of tires that the racers used. Naturally, that was the active margin. People spent more and more on tires-2,000 per tire, $3,000 per tire, stickier tires, 'wider tires and so on. So they proposed, finally, to set out a standard specification for tires. They were going to call on companies to bid who would supply tires, all according to the same spedfications, to the people who competed in these races. They chose a company to supply the tires. However, one of the losing bidders filed an antitrust suit and won relief in a district court.
Ivy/MiIT. The Ivy/MIT agreement was that financial aid should go on the basis of need, not merit. It was a collusive agreement because without that agreement there would be very strong pressure for the schools to bid amongst themselves for the students with highest.SAT scores.
ROSEN: You teach at one of those schools.
served by steering financial aid to the students whose families are neediest rather than to the students whose SAT scores are highest among a group, all of whom have good credentials, then that cartel wasn't necessarily a bad thing.
ROSEN: It was price fixing! You were keeping the prices up!
dude necessarily that it was contrary to the public interest, which is my point.
have cartels or something. I mean, that's basically the argument! That as long as it's a bunch of poor guys getting together to raise the price of hot dogs, it's
SUNSTEIN: And why is it so dear to you that that is a bad argument?
ROSEN: Give me an example.
MURPHY: I'm just making a point. You guys decide. I'm just trying to make clear what we're arguing.
SUNSTEIN: There may be better ways to help poor people than allowing them to cartelize.
MURPHY: Yes, that's probably the best answer to that! See, I didn't even need to say it! [Laugbte]
FRANK: On the justice thing, I think that the framework that most people argue about this is in terms of the standard Rawlsian thought experimentwhere you've got people who don't know how good they are at the outset. They go behind a "veil of ignorance" that shields them from the knowledge of whether they'll come in first or second in the race. They're supposed to cook up rules behind the veil about how the pie should be split up once they find out who's got what talents. Typically people would not vote for equal sharing of the pie when they go behind the veil of ignorance because, especially in a set up where there were a million people and everybody got one-millionth of the pie, the question would become: why should you bother to go to work? There would be little incentive if you were going to get essentially the same result whether you worked hard, took risks, or not. Rawls pointed out, I think correctly, that we are willing to allow some inequality, because, without it, we don't get any pie because nobody is going to have any incentives to work. The question is how much inequality? How much inequality do we think would be justified in the name of making the pie bigger? I think that the point I heard Cass making was that we're all comfortable if somebody has ten percent more talent and works ten percent harder, then that person should get ten or twenty or maybe even thirty percent more.
However, is it intuitively clear to our sense of justice that if you have one percent more talent or work half a percentage point harder that you ought to get a thousand times more? I think that's where the intuition about what is a "just" distribution of income comes into conflict with the distribution that results when we pay people-as Kevin pointed out--exactly what they are worth in a competitive sense. What you are worth to the enterprise isn't necessarily the same number that we would come up with as what seems fair given what people need to live on in a society.
ROSEN: There's a concept called "economic rent" and there's a theorem that if you have pure rent, you can tax the hell out of it and nothing will happen. Everybody agrees that it's true. If talent is all God-given and nobody ever does anything to acquire it and so on. Murphy has so many brains I want to tax them... [Laughte]
MURPHY: You won't be collecting much. [Laughter]
FRANK- I can't believe I just heard it! I'm going to walk away and say no more! The debate is over. [More laughtej
ROSEN: The question is, what is the elasticity of supply? It's not zero. If it's not zero, then the optimum tax is not a hundred percent.
FRANK: It is not a hundred percent, but we see the argument made that if an aspiring CEO for a Fortune 100 company were taxed not 40 percent but 42 percent, he or she would decide to take Friday afternoon to play golf. I think that vision of what drives the vice-presidents who are queuing up trying to be CEOs misses something fundamental. Their incentive to work harder isn't much affected by that marginal tax rate at those levels. We know that when the marginal tax rates in the U.S. were 60 percent or 70 percent, VPs trying to become CEOs didn't take time off. Japanese CEO aspirants face even higher tax rates than that, and they work harder...
ROSEN: Now they become basketball players. [aughter
FRANK: ... if we measure hours worked-than American aspiring CEOs. So I think that it is true that you need to pay the talent, if you don't want to lose the talent to a rival bidder. So yes, what you pay is critically important for getting the job done, but if the reward were lower by two percent for everyone there's no evidence that people would put forth significantly less effort in their attempt to become CEO. There's just absolutely no evidence for that.
SUNSTEIN: We have a question in the back.
QUESTION: It seems to me that there is a certain intuitive logic that in negotiating with somebody who has no other alternatives, you have a lot of control over the negotiations. My impression is that a lot of superstars aren't exactly autistic savants, but they really don't have another industry to go to or that they don't have another comparable industry to turn to. What is Cindy Crawford going to do or...
ROSEN: I think that she has a lot of opportunities.
QUESTION: ... or Michael Jordan-it turns out that he couldn't even play baseball Since we sort of have these people over a barrel where they have nowhere else to go, no comparable alternatives-or, at least, in certain industrieswhy that isn't factored in the equation at least in certain industries?
ROSEN: Or the other way around.
ROSEN: Like lawyers.
MURPHY: I think that there is a big thing that is being missed here. Which is one of the things that in economics is pretty clear-that when you get the superstar phenomenon.. .now, we're talking real superstars here! Remember, a big part of the growth in inequality has not much to do with the guys making $8 million. It has to do with the guys making $65,000 rather than $60,000 or the guys making $13,000 rather than $15,000.
Putting that aside, let's focus on the guys making over ten million. One of the problems is that the way that you collect so much is you sell yourself to a very big market. Unfortunately, what we know from economics is that as we expand sales in the market, prices tend to go down. Therefore, you are unable to capture a large part of what you create. Even though Michael Jordan captured-what, $50 million or $100 million last year-I would venture to say that the true value of having him to society was far in excess of that. Thus, if you cut back on Michael Jordan ten percent, then maybe that tax revenue that you would raisewhich would be ten percent of what he gets-would be far less than what we would lose as a society. The same is true with Oprah Winfrey and with a lot of these people. They only capture a small part. They capture a lot but they create enormous value--great value generated solely by the fact that that market is so large. I mean, how much would each of us be willing to pay for Michael Jordan to be here rather than not? How much was he worth to have last year, rather than not?
FRANK- Kevin, do you think that if the top rate had been 42 percent, he would have made a different career choice or expended any less effort to win?
MURPHY: Yeah, a little bit. He would have put in a little less effort to have been "Michael Jordan." That's the point-it doesn't have to be a big jump.
FRANK- Why? Do you think that he was weighing $30 million versus $31 million in deciding how high to jump that time? I mean, this doesn't seem intuitively plausible.
MURPHY: I think people make those decisions when they decide when they're going to retire.
FRANK It could in principle be true, but it just doesn't seem plausible.
MURPHY: You know, this is like the old story-whenever I teach my students the law of demand, they say, "Well, do people really buy less when you raise the price of a computer a nickel?" And I say, "Yeah, they buy less when it goes from $1,000 to $1,000 and five cents." They say, "Come on, no it doesn't!"
FRANKI Sherwin had it right-he said, when it's a rent, you can tax it and it will still be offered.
going to tax capital. As a result, I'm going to get a lot of capital created and I'm going to tax it once.
SUNSTEIN: I'm against that. [Laughte]
ROSEN: But it's inelastic-it's inelastic at that point, but never again. That's kind of the argument we're having here. It seems crazy.
MURPHY: I guess my problem with this is that this is really not a discussion of superstars. Superstars may be the reason why there is so much inequality, but, in fact, the more this is due to the superstar phenomenon, the more that it's due to investments, the more it's due to the combination with complementary resources, then the more elastic that response is likely to be and therefore the bigger the effect things like taxes would seem to be in that kind of situation.
Thus, it seems to me, if you're really going to emphasize the superstar side, it is not clear as to why that argues for higher tax rates. If people were just born and one guy was a thousand times as good a basketball player as another, I could tax the hell out of that and I would never reduce the supply. The fact that it's due to investments and the fact that it's due to bringing complementary resources to bear with that person, is going to make the tax consequences in an efficiency sense larger, not smaller.
FRANK You could ask this question-what if every basketball player on the planet had a vertical leap half an inch shorter than the current? By how much would the national wealth be smaller? It seems to me that there is a frame of reference that we need in order to decide whether...
ROSEN: ... as when all those Jewish guys were playing basketball...
FRANK If the vertical leap becomes a foot smaller, then yes. We take pleasure in watching Michael Jordan, in part, because of the absolute height of his vertical leap, but more prominently because he hangs in the air longer than anyone else. The characteristics that define his being noteworthy are strictly positional.
MURPHY: But we have to be a little careful here. There are two examplesthe car racing example that you gave and, really, to some extent, Michael Jordan, are somewhat different because competition is part of the product there. The product that we are talking about is who is going to win, and by definition there is going to be one winner. Now in a lot of other areas-for example, in making great movies and things like that-it's not that I want to go see the best movie.
SUNSTEIN: How much?
ROSEN: A hundred percent.
service a larger client base. As a result, slightly better salesmen are knocking off slightly worse salesmen all the way down the ladder. You're getting this leverage effect-it's not just at the very top that it's pervasive. It's all through the labor market.
QUESTION: I have a question for Professor Murphy. I don't see how the question above was really answered. Because if a person doesn't have more lucrative options, then it doesn't matter how much you tax because they're not going to get out of the field until they amass a certain amount of wealth. If they don't have more lucrative options, it depends on how you value that wealth.
MURPHY: Well, this is the ex ante-expost problem that Sherwin was talking about. Once people have made the investment, once they've gotten there, then maybe they don't have options. But what's going to be the extent to which people strive to reach those places, or strive to get to those goals? That's what's going to be affected. You know, when Michael Jordan was in high school he didn't know.. .if he had known he was going to earn eighty million, if he had known he was going to earn the most in the NBA, then what you've got in the NBA wouldn't of mattered. That is, even if NBA players had been paid half of what they were going to get paid, it wouldn't have mattered. When he was in high school, though, it did matter. You have to distinguish ex ante versus expost.
What happens with people trying to go on to become Cindy Crawford? We don't know who the next Cindy Crawford is going to be. They don't know, either. What the next Cindy Crawford is going to earn and what the potential prize is does matter. In fact, it's kind of odd because I hear this talk about tax rates not mattering, but then one of the big inefficiencies of the big payoffs that you talk about in your book is that it draws all of these people in.
FRANK Where they matter is for that person who is on the edge. The untalented contestant who is just barely thinking about trying for the NBA as opposed to taking some math courses.
MURPHY: But who's untalented? You don't know up front-that's the problem. I mean, I barely got out of high school...and I'm still untalented. [Laughte]
QUESTION: Back to a legal perspective here-I'm not really seeing the direct tie to the superstars, that is, if the case is worth $50 billion, then a percentage of that increases in absolute terms as the value of the cases increase over time. The other question is, suppose that we have five top-tier law schools putting out a thousand students a year, does that period of entry have an effect on overcrowding, have an effect on the superstars within the thousand and then the thousand versus the rest?
ROSEN: The question is why are there five? That's the thing that is troubling me. I guess I'm closer to Bob on this than I'd like to admit But there's free entry into high-quality law schools. There are no barriers there. It's not a cartel. It's not a group. Cass doesn't meet with Harvard, Yale professors like he wants to do for the broadcasters, to keep people out.
SUNSTEIN: Isn't it about information?
ROSEN: Right, but why is the information so centralized?
FRANK- Many of these things are very path dependent. Once you get good, it is easier to get better. Students are choosing you based on how good you are, then, if you get a little better, more people choose you. Then you can become more selective, which causes still more people to choose you and better faculty to want to work for your university and so there is enormous comparative advantage to the people who got there first and established reputations. It's not to say that they're impregnable. There have been movements in the rankings in academia, but if you aspire to be a top five law school, which of those five schools do you think that you're going to knock off, if you're the number 25 school? It's real tough prospect to think about knocking them off.
ROSEN: Why shouldn't it be the top 100? There's enough talent out there. Maybe there isn't...
FRANK. As you said, there is a sharp peak in the distribution of payoffs. There's only so many $10 billion mergers to arrange, and they don't need 100 law schools' worth of students to hire do that-so the battle really is for certification to get access to those really good jobs.
ROSEN: Here is an economic argument I've heard of for why there's a greater value to sorting, and it relates to this increase in demand for skills that Kevin was talking about earlier. The nature of the changes in technology that seem to be driving a lot of these changes today have to do with increasing demand for intellectual-type human capital rather than for other types. Then you want to encourage production of that kind of capital. This is a supply-side argument and what you need for this argument is that there are complementarities between teacher and student quality. You don't want Cass teaching third-rate students. You want the best students to go to the schools with the best teachers or to associate with other students who also are as talented as them. You get some kind of assortive mating, in a marriage-market sense. The analogy is pretty strong.
Then, if you have an increase in demand for these kinds of skills, demand for sorting is going to go way up. It's going to be difficult to get into Chicago Law School, or the University of Chicago Economics Department, for that matter.
On the other hand, I would expect there to be more supply-more spaces to become available-to reflect that greater sorting.
Now, there's no doubt that there is more sorting of college students than there used to be. I know that when I was in college, I could have gone to Yale or Harvard if I wrote the check. Now it's impossible-it's basically impossible-to go to those places. Even the state schools like the University of Illinois system has many different units that are very stratified by student academic performance and so on. I think that there is an increase in sorting, but I think it's due to the increase in the value of sorting-social value, not an arms race. The trouble with that, I think, is why hasn't the supply of high quality law schools increased more than it has?
QUESTION: I'd be curious to know how your economic and legal models deal with almost what seems like a psycho-social phenomenon, sort of a cult of personality that seems to occur in a lot of these superstars. In the sense that David Copperfield does a card trick that is not ridiculously different than if someone else does a card trick, except that Copperfield makes $70 million a year. It's not just in the entertainment industry-Jerry Seinfeld or whatever. I'm just very curious about that. It seems to be almost more of a psycho-social phenomenon that almost goes back to ancient ideas of kingship where people are really excited about a personality, and that there's a lot of effort in creating that personality.
ROSEN: Do you want tips on how to become such a person?
SUNSTEIN: It's a very good question. Part of it is that you can talk to others about the fact that you saw Michael Jordan or David Copperfield-they all know who he is. Thus, part of it is it is not just the experience of seeing, that it may be a magic trick that is not much better than others, but it's someone everyone else has heard of and that's part of the reason you pay for it.
MURPHY: Right, the point is that that doesn't make it of no social value, or make it not real. The point is that it is sort of arbitrary-that we could have picked anyone to be king, but we picked this guy and then people really enjoy listening to this guy talk. This is still a real phenomenon, and to not have that would create a problem. Now the question is, do the gains to having a "king" get dissipated as people compete to be king?
ROSEN: ... The Closing of American Mindwas such a book? I mean, nobody ever read that book... Impossible to read... [Laughter]
MURPHY: This also gets back to a point that Bob Frank made a bit ago, which is this question about when somebody else's car goes faster and that
ROSEN: [Gestuwing towards Mur'p~] Remember, he likes "The Simpsons." [Laughted
MURPHY: The point is, if I care about speed is saying one thing. But saying that you having a faster car makes me unhappy, is a different thing.
FRANK: It makes your car slower as you experience it. That's known to be true. I mean there are a few things that we do know.
QUESTION: This is pretty much Kevin's argument, perhaps. When we had kings and dukes and so on, society needed somebody to be in charge, that had a lot of leverage and so on. We did have a lot of counter-effects-namely that the dukes would start to fight with each other in wars, and that cost society a lot. So we don't know which is better, whether we had a good scheme. You could say that we have something like that now, too. It's not really very different. We only have a certain amount of slots-only one Michael Jordan, and I guess that we can't replace him at the moment-but there are other certain fuzzies: how many we need at the top or how many we have. There's something like that that goes on and there's a huge amount of competition to get into that. Is that something like the wars of the medieval times, and so that it can be even counterproductive to society-is that what you're saying?
MURPHY: Well, it could be if the method on which they competed didn't independently create value. That's the question. In the war case, in fact, it's doubly bad because the method in which they competed created negative value, not only not independent value. In this case, it's not clear at all that in factremember, they don't collect the full amount of that value and that's...
MURPHY: ... and in this case Michael Jordan is not competing by having us kill each other off.
FRANK: We're quite capable of doing that on our own. [Laughte]
QUESTION: There seems to be another way that superstars might work, like Michael Jordan. Michael Jordan brought the whole NBA industry up. There was a sort of an initial phase in which Michael Jordan had to create interest again in basketball, like the home run race in baseball. I think that after that there's sort of another thing happening-that once people are interested again in basketball or baseball, that perhaps the superstars are not as necessary? I mean, we will still be watching basketball or baseball after Michael Jordan or Mark McGwire.
MURPHY: I think that what you are pointing to is a sort of diminishing returns to having superstars and that maybe superstars are very relevant when we're falling to a point where there's a critical level, a point at which we're going to fall from the public eye. There may be an element of that, but I think that also bolsters the view that Michael Jordan didn't collect a big part of the value that he created-neither did Mark McGwire or Sammy Sosa. Even though they're getting a lot in endorsements and the like, it's unlikely that they collect even a significant part of the value that they created in terms of the renewed interest in baseball.
FRANK- There's actually an estimate on Jordan. Ten billion was the estimate that I saw, value added.
SUNSTEIN: What we want to know is whether over-optimistic people, alert to the example of Michael Jordan and the $30 million, are entering the basketball market trying to become professionals where there are other, better things-and that is the problem the book points to. There's a lot to study empirically here, about whether people who are entering superstar markets a) are over-optimistic and b) whether what they're doing is wasteful. Kevin is suggesting that often it is not. Often it isn't, but we want to know how often isn't it.
QUESTION: The only evidence that I've really heard from Bob is about these surveys where there are 90 percent of the people who think that they are above the mean or something like that. just wondering how valuable that survey is? If I were to go ask my students in class-you know, at the beginning of the quarter-how many of them think that they are going to get above the mean grade, I'm sure most of them will state that they will. Partly because they don't want to give me a signal that they think that they are not as smart as they might be and that I might hold that against them or something else-but I'm not really sure what you can take from that type of survey. Simply because they honestly believe that everyone is going to be getting A's in the class? Or does it tell us something about what they think about-how other people are going to react if they reveal that they may not be as smart?
SUNSTEIN: Do you think if it's anonymous that you might get a different result? Note that this is very robust. It is not just about expected performance in a class. With respect to the incidence of cancer, heart disease, divorce--any bad thing that you can mention that people have control over-they think that they are less likely than most people to experience it. In fact, the only class of people with a realistic sense of their own capacities and what's going to happen to them and of what other people think of them-the only people who are realistic-are the clinically depressed.
MURPHY: Yeah, exactly.
SUNSTEIN: That's a very helpful clarification because there the two are quite different We may not have a problem of overcrowding, at least with respect to certain classes of lawyers, because those who end up not making partner still add value and do great. But, with respect to boxers, it's possible that they've invested a lot of wasted time in learning how to box instead of getting skills that...
ROSEN: You know how many boxers can make a full-time living at it?
SUNSTEIN: Yes, I know the exact number.
MURPHY: Let's go back to where we started today. We started today talking about opera singers and I wonder, if we looked at it, are more people working to be opera singers today? Probably the total payments to opera singers as a group are higher, and yet there are probably more people working to be professional opera singers now than there were back when there were 1,300 of them just in Iowa. Again, I think because people realize that their chances of making that huge record contract are pretty low. That would be an example that we could look at to say, has this situation increased the skewness of the results? I don't think the total pie is any smaller-but has the increased skewness of results led to more entry or less entry?
FRANK: This is not a claim that there is more or less entry. The question is, would it be better if there was less entry? If there are a lot of good magicians who can do card tricks and all you care about is watching the best known among them, then you don't increase the size of the pie by doubling the number of people in that competition. You get to see the best known of how many there are out there, if that's what you care about And I think to an extent that is what we care about, primarily, in the case of sopranos when we're talking about the kinds of differences among contestants in this market As Sherwin has noted, it's very hard for a trained listener to detect quality differences among the top 100 sopranos.
ROSEN: I've changed my mind. That was before I listened to any of them. [Laughte]
MURPHY: There's an issue, then, in the question of why I wouldn't buy for $12 the CD of that person who is slightly less talented when the better person's CD sells for $13. Clearly that seems to be contradicted by the facts. People think that that CD sitting in the bargain rack over there for $4.99 doesn't sell like the one for $13 from the person who is a little bit better.
ROSEN: It's forty.
FRANK Again, we don't know whether that's because what they cared about was listening to the best known soprano. If that's what they care aboutper se-if they want to see Copperfield rather than another magician who does it just as well, because they know Copperfield-then you get that difference explained not because the extra quality is worth more, but by the fact that it is by the bestknown performer. You're going to get a best known performer anyway, however many people you have competing. That's the distinction there.
SUNSTEIN: There's some statistic about the percentage of Division I college basketball players who think that they'll be in the NBA, something like...
SUNSTEIN: And what's the actual percent?
FRANK. A percent and a half, about.
SUNSTEIN: Right. Now that doesn't seem strategic in John [Lott]'s sense, that it doesn't have behavioral consequences. Does it mean that they are not adding value that they could?
ROSEN: What do you do about it? I mean, suppose you're right-then what do you do? Do you regulate it?
SUNSTEIN: You say one and a half percent. It's easy.
SUNSTEIN: They do? Then why do sixty percent say so?
ROSEN: Everybody knows that hardly anyone makes it into the big-time sports.
SUNSTEIN: Well, if you think that they're saying it, but they don't actually think it-is that what you think?
ROSEN: Maybe they think they're in the one percent.
FRANK. Sixty-odd percent.
SUNSTEIN: Information first.
ROSEN: What do you mean?
ROSEN: Everybody knows that.
SUNSTEIN: Well, they do!
