 From 1997 to 1998, the President's Advisory Committee on the Public Interest Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters debated various possible reform proposals. Aware of the "winner-take-all" characteristics of the media market, several of the broadcasters on the Committee were quite skeptical about governmental mandates, but highly receptive to the idea of reviving some kind of broadcasting "code," akin to the kind approved and administered by the National Association of Broadcasters ("NAB") between 1928 and 1979. The idea of a code received considerable attention, mid-deliberation, in the trade press. In its annual meeting, however, the National Association of Broadcasters signalled its skepticism about the idea and came very close to saying, "no" and "never." Very oddly, a large part of the broadcasters' objection was that any "code" would violate the antitrust laws. This is very odd, because in private discussions, members of the NAB treated the possibility of an antitrust violation as extremely good news. It is not often that high-level corporate officials are smiling when they discuss the possibility that certain action would be found unlawful. t. Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. This essay is a revised version of a presentation given at The Wages of Stardom: Law and the Winner-Take-All Sodety, a panel discussion sponsored by the University of Chicago Roundtable in February 1999. As a revised version of oral remarks, it is more than usually sparing on footnotes. The essay draws on a more formal paper, Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Pubic Interest: Notes Toward a 'Third Way" (forthcoming California Law Review, 1999). seemingly flexible and highly attractive "pay or play" system, in which broadcasters can be relieved of public interest obligations (to "pay") if they agree instead to pay someone else-another broadcaster-to do so. As we will see, the solution to the two puzzles helps illuminate the nature of television markets, and also the potential virtues and vices in both market and non-market solutions. Government has often responded to this problem through direct regulation. The most celebrated example is the "fairness doctrine," now largely defunct, which required a certain amount of public interest programming and emphasized the importance of presenting divergent views. Regulation of this kind is often defended as a way of overcoming competitive pressures. The problem with such regulation is that it may be futile or counterproductive. It may also raise serious constitutional problems. 2. 1 attempt to defend this proposition in Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest ades, in fact; the NAB did indeed issue and enforce such a code, partly to promote its own economic interests (by raising the price of advertising), partly to fend off regulation (by showing that the industry was engaged in self-regulation), and partly to carry out the moral commitments of broadcasters themselves. A new code, building on the old, could contain various public interest obligations designed to protect children and to encourage substantive attention to public issues, and such a code could also attempt to protect against (for example) sexually and gratuitously violent material, subliminal advertising, sensationalistic treatment of politics, and a wide range of other problems with television. Such a code might promote some of the desirable effects of government regulation without creating the familiar accompanying problems of rigidity and coercion. Competitive pressures often do a great deal in providing programming that people would like to see. In an era of cable, satellite, digital television, and an astonishingly large range of options, competitive pressures will be instrumental in producing "niche" programming for people who have a particular interest in certain programming, even serious programming. The communications market increasingly resembles the market for magazines; there may even be a possibility, in a digital market, of over one thousand stations5 But as I have noted, those competitive pressures also have a downside. They can lead to a failure to provide sufficient attention to educational values, or the kind of programming that is 4. See Frank and Cook, The Winner-Take-AllSodety at 225-27 (cited in note 1). 5. This is discussed in more detail in Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest (cited indispensable to a well-functioning democracy.6 This is so especially in light of the fact that a small relative advantage can lead to huge increases in viewers, a fact that presses television in tabloid-like directions. As Robert Frank and Philip Cook have suggested, "[i]ncreasingly impoverished political debate is yet another cost of our current cultural trajectory. Complex modem societies generate complex economic and social problems, and the task of choosing the best course is difficult under the best of circumstances. And yet, as in-depth analysis and commentary give way to sound bites in which rival journalists and politicians mercilessly ravage one another, we become an increasingly ill-informed and illtempered electorate."7 It would be possible to respond to the sometimes harmful effects of competitive pressures in various ways. Direct legal requirements and prohibitions are of course a possibility. But the most obvious and simplest response would take the form of voluntary self-regulation, through some kind of "code" of good programming. Such an approach would be specifically designed to respond to the problems that can be introduced by market pressures. In other nations, cooperative action has played a constructive role in situations of this kind.8 Such cooperative action often makes people concerned about antitrust violations. But the antitrust law can go quite wrong when it prevents certain cooperative action that overcomes palpably adverse effects of market pressures.9 Indeed, the International Standards Organization is designed specifically to ensure a form of cooperation designed to overcome those adverse effects 0 ; the question is whether that experience has domestic analogues. sion Programming (Princeton 1998). My emphasis here is on allowing programmers and journalists to do what, in an important sense, they would actually prefer to do. It is worth underlining this point Many journalists in the world of broadcasting would very much like to do better; competitive pressures are the problem, not the solution, and a voluntary code could help them and the public as well The idea of a broadcasting code has a long and illuminating history." A central goal was to increase revenues by jacking up the price of advertising. Another goal was to fend off federal regulation. Yet another goal was to embody the public-regarding aspirations of many members of the industry (and to prevent competitive responses by those who had only profits on their mind). Intriguingly, the invalidation of part of the code, on antitrust grounds, was received with enthusiasm by the NAB, a phenomenon that casts light on the puzzle with which I began. But there were informal pressures, too. Stations who sought license renewal were likely to have prompt FCC processing if they adhered to the Code. Moreover, some people believe that subscription to the Code was appealing to those who bought advertising time, because the Code contained limits on the length and frequency of commercials, which would enhance the prominence of the announcement. Some stations in the United States did not adhere to the Code, but the vast majority chose to do so. 15. United States v NationalAssodation of Broadcasters, 536 F Supp 149 ( D D C 1982). 16. United States v NationalAssodation of Broadcasters, 536 F Supp at 156-63. The district court held that the time and product interruption standards were not invalid per se. In the court's view, the distinctive characteristics of the broadcasting industry argued against a per se rule of invalidity. Because broadcast frequencies are scarce, because the whole area is subject to regulation, and because of the fact that there are only sixty minutes in an hour (), no simple solution would be sensible. On these two issues, the court also denied summary judgment for the government under the rule of reason, concluding that there were material issues of fact. By contrast, the court held that the multiproduct standard was per se unlawful. In its view, this rule was akin to a standardization agreement by which food manufacturers set a standard for the ingredients that would be used in their products. This form of standardization was per se illegitimate. Thus the court actually invalidated only one provision of the code, on the theory that it was analytically akin to a system for price-fixing. At the same time, the court denied summary judgment for the NAB. An important question was whether the time standards would have the effect of raising or stabilizing the price of commercial time (this was the antitrust problem); it was possible, the court said, that any such effect would be trivial in light of the importance of other factors. If this was true, the code would not violate the Sherman Act. Id. This is because there is no antitrust violation without a significant adverse effect on competition. See, for example, United States vArnold, Schwinn, & Co, 388 US 365, 375 (1967), overruled on other grounds by Continental T t, Inc v GTE Sylvania, Inc, 433 US 36 (1977); Neeld v National Hocky League, 594 F2d 1297, 1298 (9th Cir 1979). Code approach, perhaps because of the emerging threat from cable television (see below). The FCC ruled in 1983 that there had been no government coercion and that the NAB had adopted the family viewing policy voluntarily. In its key passage the FCC wrote, "[v]oluntary industry action is often preferable to governmental solutions, and an industry frequently addresses a problem in order to forestall regulation by the Government; conversely, it is not unusual for a regulatory body 17. See 47 USC ยง 303c(c). 18. See Letter from Sheila Anthony, Assistant Attorney General for Legislative Affairs, U.S. Department of Justice, to Sen. Paul Simon (D-Ill.) (Nov 29, 1993) in Final Report of the Advisory Committee on Public Interest Obligations of Digital Television Broadcasters, Charting the DigitalBroadcasting Future, Appendix B (Dec 18, 1998). to forego enacting rules when the regulated industry voluntarily adopts standards which deal with a perceived problem.' m In June 1990 the NAB responded to public pressure by issuing new, exceptionally tepid "voluntary programming principles" to cover violence, indecency and obscenity, drugs and substance abuse, and violence. The new standards were reaffirmed in June 1991, and in 1992, ABC, NBC, and CBS issued and agreed to adhere to a set of new standards, although without an enforcement mechanism. Thus in the 1990s self-regulation can be found in various places: the advance parental advisory system, joint advisory guidelines issued by the four networks, NAB principles, and an annual public assessment, by the four networks, of television violence. From what I have said thus far, the case for a new code is quite straightforward. Such a code might well counteract some of the harmful effects of "race to the bottom" competition, and they might ensure that winner-take-all markets look more like winner-take-most markets, in such a way as to promote (for example) more and better programming for children and greater attention to public issues. The question then becomes whether it might be possible to adopt a new code for broadcasting, specifically designed for the new communications market. Such a code might update the old NAB code, and reduce current problems, without having the degree of tepidness of the existing "standards." Obviously a new code could create certain problems, especially in an era in which broadcasters must compete with other television sources. But for the moment, let us put that point to one side. code provisions 3 simply for the sake of illustration: 1. Each broadcaster shall provide three hours of free air time for candidates during the two month period preceding the election. It is preferable to ensure that candidates provide substantive arguments and that they avoid sloganeering and short "soundbites." 2. Broadcasters shall provide one hour of educational programming for children each day. They shall also attempt to ensure that children are not exposed to excessively violent programming or programming that is otherwise harmful to or inappropriate for children. Broadcasters should 22. Federal Communications Commission, Report In the Matter of Primary Jurisdiction Referral of Claims Against Government Defendant Arising from the Inclusion in the NAB Television Code of the 'Family Viewing Policy,' 95 FCC2d 700, 1983 WL 182969 (1983). avoid programming that encourages criminal or self-destructive behavior; they should also be sensitive in presenting sexual material that children might encounter. Winner-Take-Less Codes & Ptivate Broadcartes Such a code would of course raise many questions. The first would involve the problem of enforcement Without an enforcement mechanism, a code might have no effect at all. of recycling through the application of social norms) (cited in note 6). vide free air time for political candidates. Provisions like those described should not, and in all likelihood would not, be taken to violate the antitrust laws. The Department of Justice has so concluded,2 and in two important cases, aspects of previous codes were upheld against private antitrust attack. A district court refused to issue an injunction against code standards forbidding cigarette advertising, despite a claim that these standards were inconsistent with the antitrust laws. 27 A lower court also upheld the provisions involving standards for advertising directed to children2 In these cases, the court basically concluded that the restrictions were reasonable and in the public interest. 26. See Letter from Sheila Anthony (cited in note 18). 27. See American Brands, Inc v National Assodation, of Broadcasters, 308 F Supp 1166 (D D C 1969). The court concluded that the plaintiff was not likely to prevail on the merits. The court referred in particular to the dangers posed by cigarette smoking and claimed that the standards and guidelines in the code serve the "public interest." Id at 1169. Winner-Take-L-ess Codes & Pivate Bmadcasters 51 not as if broadcasters are saying that advertisers must pay a minimum of $X per advertisement. It is possible that the restrictions under discussion would have little or no adverse effect on competition; they may even have good effects on competition.31 Even with a code, programmers would compete over a great many things, including the kinds of programming regulated by a code. The code might in a sense be pro-competitive, because it would ensure television coverage of materials in which there is a substantial public interest and which might otherwise not be provided. This is so especially in light of the fact that stations would compete for viewers with respect to the kinds of programming covered by the code.32 In light of the distinctive nature of the television market, a code of the sort under discussion would likely survive a "rule of reason" inquiry. Any restrictions, such as they are, could be defended as a means of promoting competition and also various public interest goals, such as education of children, access for the handicapped, and democratic and civic functions. 3 We are now in a position to understand the two puzzles with which I began. The broadcasters on the Committee favored a code partly because they thought it a good idea in principle and partly because they had little to lose from it. Though frequently "winners," they were selected for the Committee because of their commitment, through both words and deeds, to moderating some of the adverse effects of market competition in television. They were also vulnerable to "winner-take-all" effects from their competitors insofar as they were reluctant to engage in certain practices that might attract viewers. In this way, a code would not hurt and might even help them. tional industry standard-setting efforts that do not necessarily restrict competition and may have significant pro-competitive benefits." Id. In the view of the Department of Justice, "efforts to develop and disseminate voluntary guidelines to reduce the negative impact of television violence should fare well under the appropriate rule-of-reason antitrust analysis." Id at 4. more of the existing audience than it now does? In short, a code limited to the broadcasting industry would not be good for the broadcasting industry, simply because in a market with winner-take-all features, the existence of the code might mean that cable would take all, or most, or at least more. Of course the likely result is that cable would take more rather than most. And this is why a code limited to broadcasting would probably be, on balance, good for the public, and good for good broadcasters, even though bad for broadcasters as a whole.