Law's Expressive Function 
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein 
Source: 
Published by: 
Stable URL: 
Accessed: 21-12-2015 06:23 UTC

The Good Society, Vol. 9, No. 2 (1999), pp. 55-61

 

 

Penn State University Press

 

http://www.jstor.org/stable/20710952

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Penn State University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Good Society.

 

 

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 131.172.36.29 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 06:23:01 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

LAW  AND  THE  GOOD 

SOCIETY 

Forum  on Law  and  the Good  Society 

What  ought to be  the character of law in good  societies, and what role ought it to play? There are several reasons why good  society thinkers 
might want  to take these questions seriously. The  rule of law in general constitutes a powerful check on tyranny?be  it the tyranny of leaders 
(elected or otherwise) or of democratic majorities. Constitutionalism, more specifically, plays a  crucial role in any liberal regime in that it not 
only empowers government but also  limits it and protects  the rights of citizens. But  it is not only liberals who  should  take law seriously. 
Constitutional  law, especially, is the cornerstone in the foundation of the polity, creating a  common set of political  norms and values and  thus 
the beginnings of a common political  identity. Finally, democrats might want  to consider the role of law from an Aristotelian perspective: Law 
not only habituates us  to certain types of action  (virtuous ones,  in the good  regime) but, rightly conceived and  implemented, law can also 
encourage us to critically engage  it and  thus refine the circumstances of our own habituation. Law  in liberal democratic polities,  then, always 
entails a  tension: It makes  certain types of liberty possible  by constraining others. 

?A.K. 

Law's Expressive Function1 

Cass  R.  Sunstein 

If I had  known  that not  a  single  lunch  counter  would  open  as  a  result 
of my action I could not have done differently than I did. If I had 
known  violence  would  result,  I could  not  have  done  differently  than I 
did.  I am  thankful  for  the  sit-ins  if for no  other  reason  than  that they 
a  slogan  into reality, by 
provided  me  with  an  opportunity  for making 
life 
turning a decision 
is all  about. 

into an  action.  It seems  to me  that this  is what 

to 
?James  Miller.  Democracy 
the Siege of Chicago. (New York, Simon and Schuster, 1987) p. 52. 

is  in the Streets:  From  Port  Huron 

part  of  the time. Sometimes  we  just want  to 
are 

We  are  all Expressionists 
scream  loudly  at  injustice,  or  to  stand  up  and  be  counted.  These 
noble  motives,  but  any  serious  revolutionist  must  often  deprive  him 
self of  the pleasures  of  self-expression.  He  must  judge  his  actions  by 
their ultimate  effects  on  institutions. 

?Herbert  Simon. Models  of My Life. (New York: 
1991),  p.  281. 

Basic  Books, 

Actions  are expressive;  they carry meanings.  This  is true for 
nearly everything we  do, from the most mundane  to the most  signif 
icant. Thus, for example, a  lawyer who wears  a  loud tie to court will 
be  signaling something distinctive about his self-conception and his 
attitude toward others; so too with a  law professor who  teaches in 
blue jeans;  so  too with a  student who  comes  to class  in a business 
suit. What  can be  said for nonverbal acts applies  to purely verbal 
statements as well. A  bank president who  uses  the terms "Miss"  and 
will  be 

refers  to African-Americans 

or who 

as 

"Mrs.," 

"Negroes," 

showing a wide  range of things about his attitudes on matters of gen 
der and race. So  too with a politician, say in the South, who  uses  the 
terms  "Ms." 

and  "African-Americans." 

In these and other cases, what  the agent will  be  communicating, 
or be  taken to mean, may or may not have a great deal  to do with his 
particular intentions. In this sense, the meanings  of actions are not 
fully within the control of agents. Indeed, some agents may not even 
be aware of the relevant meanings. Consider  a foreigner, whose  for 
eign state is often signaled by obliviousness  to the social meanings 
of his actions. What  he says is very different from what he means. 

What  can be  said for actions can also be  said for law. Many  peo 
ple support law because  of the statement made  by law, and disagree 
ments about law are frequently debates over the expressive content 
of law. For  example, much  of the debate over  school  segregation 
was  also a debate about the meaning  of laws calling for segregation. 
Plessy  v. Ferguson1  asserted that such laws did not "mean"  black 
inferiority; Brown  v. Board  of Education1  tried to respond  to this 
assertion with some empirical work  suggesting the contrary. Or  con 
sider debates  over capital punishment. Many  people  who  oppose 
capital punishment would  be unlikely to shift position even  if evi 
dence  showed that capital punishment does  have  a deterrent effect; 
their complaint is mostly about the expressive content of acts of cap 
ital punishment, not about the ineffectiveness of deterrence. So  too 
for many  people  who  endorse  capital  punishment.  Such  people 

Volume 9y Number 2 

55 

This content downloaded from 131.172.36.29 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 06:23:01 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

^^F^ FORUM 

^^^^^^J 

would  not be?are  not?much  moved  by evidence  that capital pun 
ishment does  not deter. Their  primary concern  is the symbolic or 
expressive content of the law, not aggregate murder rates. 

Much  of the contemporary debate over hate speech regulation is 
similar. It is above  all about the social meaning  of such regulations. 
Do  such regulations "mean"  that objects of hate speech require spe 
cial paternalistic protections, are weak,  thin-skinned, and unable  to 
take care of themselves? Or  do  they "mean"  that bigotry is utterly 
unacceptable  in a  liberal society? Debates  of this kind could  not 
plausibly  be  focused on consequences,  for 
the stakes are relatively low, not justifying 
the amount of time and energy devoted  to 
them. In this way  debates over flagburning 
and debates  over hate  speech have  a great 
deal  in common;  they are  expressive  in 
character. 

I. Definitional Note 

At  the outset it is important to say that we might understand the 
expressive  function of  law  in two different ways.  First, and most 
straightforwardly, the law's "statement" may  be designed  to affect 
social norms and in that way  ultimately to affect both judgments and 
behavior. On  this view, an expressive approach to law is not indepen 
dent of an assessment of social consequences;  certain expressions are 
favored because  they will  (ultimately) have good consequences. Here 
there is a prediction about  the facts: An  appropriately framed law 
may  influence  social  norms  and  push 
them in the right direction. For  example, 
if the law mandates  recycling, perhaps  it 
will  affect social  norms about  the envi 
ronment in a way  that is different from the 
effects on norms of curbside charges. Or 
if the law wrongly treats something?let 
us  suppose reproductive capacities?as 
a 
commodity, social norms may be affected 
in a  troublesome  way. 

Much  of the contemporary 
debate  over hate speech 
...  is above  all 
regulation 
about  the social meaning 
of such regulations. Do 
"mean' 
such 
that objects of hate speech 
require special 

regulations 

paternalistic protections, 
are weak, 
thin-skinned, 
and  unable  to take care 
of 
themselves? Or do  they 
"mean  that bigotry is 
utterly unacceptable  in a 
liberal society? 

Or  consider the subject of risk regulation. 
In environmental protection, public debate 
is often focused  on  the perceived  social 
meaning  of  law.  Thus  the Endangered 
Species Act has a special salience, as a sym 
bol  of a certain conception of the relation 
ship between human beings and  their envi 
ronment, and emissions  trading systems are 
frequently challenged because  they are said 
to "make a  statement" that reflects an  inap 
propriate valuation  of the environment. In 
the  same  way,  mandatory  recycling  (as 
opposed  to curbside  charges, which  seem 
far better from the economic  standpoint) 
may well  receive public  support on expres 
sive grounds. Outside  of the environmental 
context, the same may  be  true of mandatory 
pro bono work  (as opposed  to a compulsory 
donation  from lawyers who  refuse to do 
such work). 

In  this essay  I explore  the expressive 

Sometimes  this claim  is plausible; pre 
vailing  norms,  like  preferences  and 
beliefs,  are not a presocial  given, but a 
product of a complex  set of social forces, 
possibly  including  law. And  law moti 
vated by norm-change will  be my  focus 
here. But  sometimes people  support a  law 
not because  of  its effects on norms, but 
because  it is believed  intrinsically valu 
able  for the relevant "statement"  to be 
made.  (See  the opening epigraph from a 
1960s protester.) And  sometimes law will 
have  little or no effect on  social norms. 

Society  is filled with  legal  provisions 
allowing market exchanges of goods  and 
services?like  pets and babysitting, for 

example?that 

are  not  seen  as mere 

com 

function of  law?the  function of  law  in "making  statements" as 
opposed  to the function of law in directly controlling behavior. I do 
so by focusing on  the particular  issue of how  legal "statements" 
might be designed  to change  social  norms. I catalogue  a  range of 
possible  (and  in my  view  legitimate) efforts to alter norms through 
legal expressions about appropriate evaluative  attitudes. I also  urge 
that the expressive function of law makes most  sense  in connection 
with efforts to change norms, and  that if legal statements produce 
bad consequences,  they should not be enacted even if they seem rea 
sonable or indeed noble. Empirical questions  loom throughout, and I 
do offer several empirical claims; but my  goal  is mostly normative 
rather than descriptive or positive. 

modities  and that are valued for reasons other than use. The question 
therefore remains whether the claimed effect on  social norms will 
occur.  It is fully plausible,  for example,  to say that, although a  law 
that permits prostitution reflects an  inappropriate valuation of sexu 
ality, any adverse effect of the law on  social norms is so small as  to 
be an  implausible basis  for objection. 

A  society might  identify the norms to which  it is committed and 
insist on  those norms via  law, even  if the consequences  of the insis 
tence are obscure or unknown. A  society might, for example,  insist 
on an anti-discrimination law for expressive reasons even  if it does 
not know whether  the law actually  helps members  of minority 
groups. A  society might  endorse  or  reject  capital  punishment 
because  it wants  to express a certain understanding of the appropri 
ate course of action after one person has  taken the life of another. 

56 

The Good Society 

This content downloaded from 131.172.36.29 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 06:23:01 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

^^H^ 

LAW AND  THE  GOOD  SOCIETY 

^^^^^^B 

The  point bears on the cultural role of law, adjudication, and even of 
Supreme Court decisions. The  empirical effects of those decisions 
are highly disputed.  If the Supreme Court  says that segregation is 
unlawful,  that certain restrictions on hate  speech violate  the First 
Amendment, or that students cannot be asked  to pray in school, the 
real-world consequences may  be much  smaller than is convention 
ally  thought. But  the close  attention American  society pays  to the 
Court's pronouncements is connected with  their expressive or sym 
bolic 

character. 

I do not claim that the expressive effects 
of  law, thus understood,  are decisive  or 
that they cannot be countered by a demon 
stration of more  conventional bad  conse 

quences.  In fact, I believe otherwise and in 
that way  endorse  Simon's  remark in the 
epigraph  to this essay. But  it cannot be 
doubted  that the expressive  function is a 
large part of legal debate. Without  under 
standing the expressive  function of  law, 
we will have a hard time in getting an ade 
quate handle on public views with respect 
to, for example,  civil  rights, prostitution, 
the environment, endangered species, cap 
ital punishment, and abortion. 

...  sometimes 

support 
of its effects 

a  law  not because 
on norms, but 

because  it is believed 

intrinsically valuablefor 
the  relevant 
"statement" 

to be made. 

IL The  Expressive Function  and Collective Action 
Problems 

Many  social  norms  solve  collective  action problems.  Some  of 
these problems  involve  coordination;  others  involve prisoner's 
dilemmas. Norms  solve such problems by imposing social sanctions 
on defectors. When  defection violates norms, defectors will  proba 
bly feel shame, an  important motivational  force. The  community 
may  enforce  its norms  through informal punishment,  the most 
extreme of which  is ostracism. But  the most  effective use of norms 
is ex ante. The  expectation of shame?a  kind of social "tax," some 
times a very high one?is  usually enough to produce compliance. 

But sometimes private efforts fail. When  this is so, the law might be 
enlisted as  a corrective.  In fact, the least controversial use  of the 
expressive function of law operates  in this way. Here  the goal  is to 
reconstruct existing norms and to change the social meaning of action 
through a  legal expression, or statement, about appropriate behavior. 
Insofar as  regulatory law is concerned with collective  action prob 
lems, this is a  standard idea, especially  in the environmental context, 
but also  in the setting of automobile safety, occupational  safety and 
health, and many other problems as well. What  is perhaps less stan 
dard is to see the law's role as correcting for inadequate social norms. 
Law might either do  the work of such norms or instead be designed to 
work directly against existing norms and to push them in new direc 
tions. The  latter idea is grounded on the view that law will have moral 
weight and thus convince people  that existing norms are bad. 

The most  conventional example  involves legal mandates  that take 
the place  of good  norms, by requiring certain forms of behavior 
through statutory requirements accompanied  by significant enforce 
ment activity. In the area of control of industrial pollution, this is the 
usual  strategy, as  environmental law accompanies  legal mandates 
with a  large commitment of enforcement resources. 

people 

But  there is a  subtler and more  interesting class of cases, of spe 
cial  importance for understanding the expressive  function of  law. 
These  cases  arise when  the relevant  law  is a  signal or statement 
unaccompanied  by much  in the way  of 
enforcement activity. There  is a  large set of 
instances in which  laws  that (a)  aspire  to 
announce  or  signal  a  change  in social 
norms are nonetheless (b) accompanied  by 
little enforcement activity. Consider,  for 
example,  laws that forbid littering and laws 
that require people  to clean  up after their 
dogs.  In many  localities  such  laws  are 
rarely enforced through the criminal law. 
But  they have an important effect in signal 
ing appropriate behavior and in inculcating 
the expectation of social  opprobrium and 
hence shame in those who deviate from the 

norm. With  or without enforcement activ 
ity, such laws can help reconstruct norms and the social meaning  of 
action. Hence  someone who  fails to clean up after his dog may  be 
showing disrespect or even contempt for others; many, most, or all 
people may  see things this way;  and the result can be  large changes 
in behavior. Eventually  there can be norm cascades,  as  reputational 
incentives shift behavior in new directions. It should be unsurprising 
to find that in many  places,  people  clean up after their dogs  even 
though this is not especially pleasant and even  though the laws are 
rarely  enforced. 

When  legally-induced shifts in norms help solve collective action 
problems,  there should be no objection  in principle. Here,  then, is 
the least controversial case  for the expressive function of law. 

III. Norms  Involving Dangerous  Behavior 
Often the expressive function of law is brought to bear on danger 
ous  behavior,  including behavior  that is dangerous  only or princi 
pally  to self. Of  course  all behavior  creates  risks?driving  a car, 
walking on city streets, volunteering for military service. When  gov 
ernment  is trying to change  norms  that "subsidize"  risk-taking 
behavior,  it must do  so because  of a judgment that well-being will 
thereby be promoted. This  judgment might be  rooted in an under 
standing that the intrinsic value or utility of the act is relatively low 
and  that reputational incentives are  the real source of  the behavior. 
We  are dealing,  then, with  classes  of cases  in which  the danger 
accompanying choice means  that intrinsic value  is not high but risk 
taking behavior persists because  of social norms. 

Volume 9, Number 2 

57 

This content downloaded from 131.172.36.29 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 06:23:01 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

Here  as elsewhere, private efforts may  be  unsuccessful.  In this 
light, law might attempt to express a judgment about the underlying 
activity and do  so  in such a way  as  to alter social norms. If we  see 
norms as  a  tax or a  subsidy  to choice,  the law might  attempt to 
change a subsidy into a  tax, or vice-versa.  In fact, this is a central, if 
implicit, goal behind much  risk regulation. Educational  campaigns 
often have  the goal  of changing  the social meaning  of risk-taking 
activity. Going  beyond provision of information, coercion might be 
defended as a way of increasing social sanctions on certain behavior. 
Through  time, place, and manner restrictions or flat bans, for exam 
pie,  the law might attempt to make  it seem 
weak  to  smoke,  or  to use  drugs,  or  to 
engage  in unsafe sex. 

norm or goal. The  prohibition on vote-trading is an example. So  too 
with certain complex social bans on the use of wealth  to buy services 
or goods  from other people.  Some part of the intricate web  of norms 
covering the exchange of money among both friends and strangers are 
connected with  the principle of civic equality. Monetary  exchange 
would  reflect forms of inequality that are not  legitimate in certain 
spheres. Familiar objections to "commodification" are part and parcel 
of social norms banning the use of money. The  claim  is that people 
ought not to trade (for example)  sexuality or reproductive capacities 
on markets because market exchange of these "things" is inconsistent 

Are  such efforts illiberal or unaccept 
ably paternalistic? They  should not be  so 
regarded. Choices  are a  function of norms 
for which  individual agents are not respon 
sible  and which,  on  reflection, many  or 
most  agents may  not endorse. This  is con 
spicuously so  in the context of risk-taking 
activity involving cigarettes, drugs, unsafe 
sex,  and  firearms. Much  discussion  of 
whether  law should respect "preferences" 
or "choices"  is confused  by virtue of  its 
silence  on  the matter  of  social  norms. 
People may  follow such norms despite  the 
fact that they deplore  them. 

Because 

information is the least intru 

or 

are 

Are such efforts illiberal 
unacceptably 
paternalistici They should 
not be so 

regarded. Choices 
afunction  of normsfor 
which  individual  agents 
are not 
responsible and 
reflection, many 
or most agents may  not 
endorse. 

which,  on 

sive  regulatory strategy, it should be  the 
preferred option. Whether more  aggressive  strategies make  sense 
depends on the details. 

IV. Norms  Involving the Use  of Money 

A  complex network of social norms governs the acceptable  uses 
of money. This  is so  in two different respects. First: Some  social 
norms impose sanctions on using money  as a reason for action. Here 
people  are not supposed  to engage  in certain acts  if their reason for 
doing  so  is financial gain. Second:  Some  social norms make  differ 
ent kinds of money nonfungible; the prevailing norms require differ 
ent kinds of money  to be used  for different purposes. These  sets of 
norms raise many  complexities. They  are also  entangled with  the 
expressive  function of  law. They  suggest, finally, that it is some 
times  inappropriate  to  infer general  valuations  from particular 
choices,  since those choices are a function of norms that are limited 
to the context in which  they govern. 

There  is often a connection between norms that block exchanges 
and  ideas about equal  citizenship. The  exchange  can be barred by 
social norms because of a perception that while  there may be dispari 
ties in social wealth,  the spheres in which people  are very unequal 
ought not to invade realms of social  life in which equality is a  social 

58 

The Good Society 

with social norms identifying their appro 
priate valuation. The  claim  is not that mar 
kets value  sexuality "too much"  or "too  lit 
tle"; it is that markets value  these activities 
in the wrong way. 

The  point very much  bears  on  law. In 
many ways,  law tries to fortify norms reg 
ulating  the use of money  and  to prevent 
new  social  practices  from eroding  those 
norms. This  is an  important domain  for 
the expressive use of  law. It is connected 
with  the effort to create  separate  social 
in which money  is appro 
spheres?some 
priately a basis  for action, some  in which 

money 

cannot  be  used. 

The  law bans  a wide  range of uses  of 
money. Votes  cannot be  traded for cash; 
the same is true of body parts. Prostitution 
is outlawed.  There  is of course  a  sharp 
social debate about surrogate motherhood, and those who  seek legal 
proscriptions are  thinking in expressive  terms. One  of their goals 
may  be  to fortify existing social  norms that insulate reproduction 
from the sphere of exchange. Or  their argument may  be  less instru 
mental: They may  seek  to make  a "statement" about reproduction 
without also  seeking to affect social norms. 

Often decisions  about money  can be made  through private mech 
anisms  that do  not require special  legal help. These  mechanisms 
may  be as  simple as a mental notation. They may be more  complex, 
taking the form of different bank accounts understood to be used for 
different purposes. Social  norms in families and small communities 
often fortify these efforts, with certain forms of money being seen as 
"for a rainy day" or as basically untouchable. 

Law  can also  play a  role. Some measures  that might be  seen as 
puzzling, or as objectionable  paternalism, make more  sense  if they 
are  understood  as  precommitment  strategies  reflecting diverse 
"kinds" of money  or as efforts to facilitate people's  efforts to place 
their money  in different categories. As  a facilitative strategy, con 
sider the Individual Retirement Account  (IRA).  IRAs, created by a 
complex  set of  legal provisions, allow  people more  easily  to sepa 
rate their money  into different "kinds." The  Social  Security system 

This content downloaded from 131.172.36.29 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 06:23:01 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

On  one view,  any effort 
at 
is 
management 

illegitimate; this is a 
project that is off limits to 
government. But  it is hard 
to see how  this argument 
might be made persuasive. 
on social norms are 
Effects 
not 
easily avoided;  any 
system of government  is 
effect norms, 
likely 
including creation of the 
basic systems of contract, 
tort, and private property. 

is mandatory, not optional, but  it becomes more  intelligible if we 
understand that people often like to have help  in putting their money 
into different accounts with different uses. 

V. Equality, Social Norms,  and Social Change 

Norms  of partiality are an  important part of social  inequality. 
Social  norms may  require women  to engage  in most  of domestic 
labor; in many places, women who  refuse 
to do  so  incur social  sanctions  and may 
even feel ashamed. The  social meaning  of 
a woman's  refusal may  be  a  rejection of 
her appropriate role. Hence  it may  signal a 
range of undesirable  traits. In the areas of 
both  race and gender, prevailing  norms 
help  constitute  inequality. And  here  as 
elsewhere,  collective  action  is necessary 
to reconstitute existing norms. 

norm 

an 

to 

Of  course private norm entrepreneurs 
may  be  able  to accomplish  a great deal. 
With  respect to the division  of domestic 
labor between men  and women,  private 
efforts at norm management  have played 
an  important role. Individual acts that are 
expressive in character?a  refusal to make 
dinner,  for example?are 
important  part 
of modern  feminism. But  the expressive 
function of  law is often especially  impor 
tant here, and  it can move  to the fore in 
public  debates.  If a discriminatory act  is 
consistent with  prevailing  norms,  there 
will  be more  in the way  of discriminatory 
behavior. If discriminators are ashamed of themselves, there is likely 
to be  less discrimination. The  social meaning  of an act of sexual 
harassment will  have  a great deal  to do with  the amount of sexual 
harassment. A  large point of law may  be  to shift social norms and 
social meaning. Consider  in this connection the fact that many restau 
rant owners and  inn-keepers actually supported the Civil Rights Act 
of  1964, which would  have prevented  them from discriminating. 
How  could people want the state to act against them? The  answer lies 
in the fact that the law helped shift social norms and the social mean 
ing of nondiscrimination. Whereas  nondiscrimination would  for 
merly signal a willingness  to act on a race-neutral basis?and  hence 
would  trigger social  norms  that call  for discrimination  against 
blacks?it  would henceforth signal a willingness  to obey the law, and 
hence fail to trigger adverse social norms. 

In Part IV, I dealt with cases  in which  social norms discourage 
cash  payments. But  social  norms help  constitute a wide  range of 
qualitatively different kinds of valuation,  and  these diverse kinds 
much  affect behavior  and  the social meaning  of behavior. These 
norms are omnipresent and are usually  taken for granted. Imagine, 

for example,  that John treats a beautiful diamond  in the same way 
that most people  treat friends, or that Jane values a plant in the same 
way  that most people  value  their children, or that Sandy values her 
car like most people value art or literature. Antidiscrimination law is 
often designed  to change  norms  so as  to ensure  that people  are 
treated with a kind of dignity and respect that discriminatory behav 
ior seems to deny. 

The  point  is not limited to race and  sex 
equality. Consider,  as  an especially  inter 
esting example,  the movement  for animal 
rights. Some  people  think that animals 
should be  treated with dignity and respect, 
and not as  if they existed solely for human 
consumption  and  use. This  view  is very 
much  about social norms; it need not entail 

the further claim  that animal  life is infi 
nitely valuable.  It is best taken as a recom 
mendation  of a  shift in norms governing 
the treatment of animals, accompanied by a 
judgment that the new mode will have con 
sequences  for what human beings do. The 
recommendation may be based on the view 
that if we  see animals  (and nature)  in this 
way, we will  solve collective  action prob 
lems faced by human beings  in preserving 
animal  life important for human  lives;  it 
may  be based  on a noninstrumental effort 
to extend  ideals of basic  dignity to all  liv 
ing things. 

VI.  Constraints, Liberal  and 

Otherwise 

What  barriers should there be  to the expressive function of law? 
The  simplest answer is: The  same barriers as  there are to any other 
kind of governmental action. There  is nothing distinctive to norm 
management  that requires a special set of constraints. 

Thus,  for example, government should not be permitted to invade 
rights, whatever may  be our understanding of rights. The  rights con 
straints that apply  to government action generally  are applicable 
here as well.  If government tried to change  social  norms so as  to 
ensure that everyone is a Christian, it would  violate  the right to reli 
gious  liberty; if government tried to change  social  norms so as  to 
ensure that women occupy domestic roles, and men do not, it would 
violate the equal protection clause. 

Quite  apart from the question of rights, there is always a risk that 

efforts at norm management will  be futile or counterproductive. We 
can  imagine, for example,  that when government attempts to move 
social norms in a particular direction, it may  fail miserably. Nancy 
Reagan's  "Just Say No"  policy with respect to drugs may well be an 
example.  It is necessary  to ensure that those who  engage  in norm 

Volume 9, Number 2 

59 

This content downloaded from 131.172.36.29 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 06:23:01 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

management are trusted by the people whose  norms are at issue. For 
this reason it may  be best for government to attempt to enlist inter 
mediate  organizations, so as  to ensure that people with authority in 
relevant communities are participating in the process. 

Some  people would  go further than this. On  one view, any effort 
at norm management  is illegitimate; this is a project that is off limits 
to government. But  it is hard to see how  this argument might be 
made  persuasive. Effects on social norms are not easily avoided; any 
system of government  is likely to affect 
norms, including creation of the basic  sys 
tems of contract, tort, and private property. 

intentional 

norm  management 

Moreover, 
is a conventional and time-honored part of 
government. Of  course we  could  imagine 
abuses,  even unspeakable  ones.  But  the 
proper response is to insist on a wide  range 
of rights-based constraints on the manage 
ment of social norms through law. 

Many  debates over the 
appropriate 
are 

content 
of lavo 
really debates  over the 
statement that law makes, 
independent of its (direct) 

consequences. 

There  is a final point. The  social mean 
ing of  law will  constrain the permissible 
content of law. The meaning,  set as  it is by 
social  norms, may  make  government 
efforts unsuccessful. Debates  over criminal sanctions are strongly 
affected by this problem. So-called  intermediate sanctions for crimi 
nal violations are often unpopular because  they are taken to "mean" 
something other than public opprobrium. When  a violator is told to 
engage  in community service, he appears have "gotten off," even  if 
the service  is, to him, worse  than a  short period  in jail. Hence  the 
social meaning  of the law makes  the law unacceptable  to the com 
munity  at  large. If intermediate sanctions  are  to be  feasible,  the 
norms that accompany  them must shift as well. 

The  point is a general one. The meaning  of legal statements is a 
function of social  norms, not of speaker's  intentions. The  govern 
ment may  take a range of steps to discourage  teenagers from smok 
ing, but if those steps make  smoking seem like a delicious  forbidden 
fruit, they may be counterproductive. Measures  designed  to discour 
age unwed parenthood may  actually encourage unwed parenthood. 
This  is simply a  special  case  of the general phenomenon of unin 
tended consequences.  Of  course,  unintended  effects?realized 
because  of existing norms, or in the form of unanticipated changes 
in existing norms?may  be good as well  as bad. 

Conclusion 

There  can be  no doubt  that law, like action  in general, has  an 
expressive function. Some people do what  they do mostly because  of 
the statement the act makes;  the same  is true for those who  seek 
changes  in law. Many  debates  over  the appropriate content of  law 
are really debates over the statement that law makes,  independent of 
its (direct) consequences.  I have  suggested that the expressive func 
tion of law has a great deal  to do with the effects of law on prevail 

60 

The Good Society 

ing social  norms. Often  law's  "statement"  is designed  to move 
norms in fresh directions. 

Least  controversially, law may  attempt to generate norms that 
will  solve collective action problems. The  central point here is that 
from the standpoint of  individual agents, norms are given  rather 
than chosen, and agents would  sometimes  like norms to be  other 
than what  they are. Often  shifts in norms are a  low-cost method of 
achieving widely  or universally held  social goals?as 
the intrinsic 
value  of choice  stays constant while  the 
reputational consequences  of choice begin 
to shift. Far more  controversial is the use 
of  law  to fortify social  norms  involving 
the permissible  use  of money. A  liberal 
society ensures  a measure  of sphere dif 
ferentiation, in which  the realm of markets 
and market  thinking is not coextensive 
with  the realms of politics and family life. 
Hence  social  norms regulating the use of 
money  are  an  important part of a well 
functioning  liberal  society.  Sometimes 
law  is used  to fortify those norms or  to 
prevent  them from becoming  atrophied. 
Bans  on the sale of sexual and reproductive capacities  are an impor 
tant illustration. 

For purposes of legal policy, some of the most  interesting cases of 
norm management  through law involve the control of risky behavior 
and the promotion of social equality. Risky behavior is often a prod 
uct of social norms that people would  very much  like, on reflection, 
to change. And with respect to risk, American  society has witnessed 
dramatic changes  in prevailing norms in the last decades.  Cigarette 
smoking is the most dramatic example, but similar shifts can be seen 
in the areas of alcohol use, drug use, seatbelt use, carrying guns, and 
diet and exercise. If government sees prevailing norms as a tax on or 
a  subsidy  to choice,  it might  seek  to change  norms as  a way  of 
changing choices. Certainly the point helps account for antidiscrim 
ination policy, where  a goal  is to alter norms associated with both 
taste-based discrimination and rational stereotyping. 

Are  efforts at norm management  unacceptably  paternalistic or 
illiberal? In many  cases  they are not. As  I have emphasized, norms 
are generally given rather than chosen.  Sometimes  people  would 
like norms to be changed; often they do not have a considered view 
about which  norms are best, but they would,  if they reflected a bit, 
wish  norms to be  something other than what  they are. When  this is 
so, it is entirely legitimate to use  law to alter norms that (for exam 
ple)  encourage people  to shorten their own  lives, at least when  they 
do  so  in order to avoid  reputational cost and without much  in the 
way  of increased intrinsic value. Certainly efforts at norm manage 
ment are more  legitimate if they have a democratic pedigree. More 
generally, attention to the effects of social  norms helps  show that 
"choices"  should not be  taken as  sacrosanct. 

This content downloaded from 131.172.36.29 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 06:23:01 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

All  this leaves  open  a number of questions. Among  the most 
pressing are empirical ones. To what  extent have  shifts in norms 
been a function of law? How  can  law be made  effective in shifting 
norms? What  variables  account for effective norm-change? There 
are  also 

issues  about  constraints 

on  norm  man 

theoretical 

important 

agement. It is particularly important to decide how  to handle  situa 
tions in which  laws motivated by expressive goals have mixed or bad 
consequences.  I have  suggested that legal "statements" producing 
bad consequences  should not be endorsed. But my  simplest sugges 
tion here is that we  begin to make  sense of law's expressive function 
if we  attend to the role of law in the management  of social norms. 
No  system of law can entirely avoid  that role; even markets  them 

much 

a  creation 

of  law?are 

selves?very 
agement. In these circumstances it is best for government to proceed 
pragmatically and contextually, seeing which norms are obstacles  to 

exercises 

in norm  man 

well-being,  and  using  law when  law  is effective  in providing 
correctives. 

Cass  R.  Sunstein  is Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service 
Professor  in the Law  School and Department of Political  Science  of 
the University of Chicago. 

Endnotes 

1.  163 US  537 (1896). 

2.  347  US  483  (1954).  On  law  and  social  meaning, 

see Lawrence 

"The  Regulation 

Lessig, 
Law Review 943 (1995), to which I am much indebted. 

of Social  Meaning," 

61  University  of Chicago 

This  essay  draws  on Cass  R.  Sunstein,  "On  the Expressive  Function 

of  the Law,"  144 V.  Pennsylvania  Law  Review  2021  (1988)  and Cass  R. 

Sunstein,  Free  Markets 

and  Social  Justice,  Chapter  2. 

Constitutionalism and Constitutional Failure* 

Mark  E.  Brandon 

I. The  Necessity  of Failure 
We  are accustomed to thinking of constitutions as devices for cre 
ating and holding together a political world. That  customary mode 
of thought makes  a certain sense. After all, making and maintaining 
a politics are central objectives  of constitutionalism. They  are not 
only part of what a constitution ostensibly does, but also part of what 
it should do, or must do,  if it is to succeed. But  this sensible notion 
has  taken on perverse forms, especially  after the Civil War  of the 
United  States, where  constitutional success has  sometimes come  to 
be viewed  strictly in terms of the perpetuation of a constitution or a 
regime.1 It is almost as  if longevity itself were  sufficient evidence of 
constitutional 

success. 

Such a view of things is unsatisfactory, however, for reasons other 
than the simple fact that constitutions can and do fail. Constitutional 
failure  is more  than an empirical  reality. It is also  a  theoretical 
necessity. But  the theoretical necessity arises from empirical fact. 
Constitutions are "made"  things. The  very facts that they appear on 
the scene at a particular time and displace  existing forms of poli 
tics?perhaps  even existing constitutions?subvert most  claims  to 
perpetuity as a constituent element of any constitutional regime. Of 
course, those facts need not prohibit a constitution or constitutional 
order from aiming at perpetuity. But  they do mean  that the manner in 
which  constitutions are born and justified leaves them normatively 
defenseless  against  some forms of fundamental alteration or even 
displacement. Just as a constitution displaces  a prior constitution or 
order, it too may  be displaced under the certain circumstances. 

But constitutional failure is not always so grand as the breakdown 
of an order or a constitution. Constitutional failure can occur in sub 
tler, smaller ways. These  subtle forms of failure arise from the very 
character of constitutionalism, which  is insensible without a  theory 
or set of standards that give  the political world  form and  limits. Of 
course,  the "character of constitutionalism"  is a  tricky matter, for 
constitutionalism is multifaceted. For  example,  constitutionalism 
may  aim at any of several basic objectives. It may  take as  its purpose 
the making of a people,  sustaining ways  of life, or creating or autho 
rizing political power. But constitutionalism arises in history primar 
ily as an attempt to solve a persistent problem in human experience: 
how  to constrain and direct political power.2 That  is, it is fundamen 
tally, though not exclusively, concerned with the problem of limits. 
The problem of limits presents itself to Western  thought (as we  have 
inherited it)  in  the form of  a  dialogue  between  Socrates  and 
Thrasymachus in Plato's Republic. There Thrasymachus claimed that 
justice is nothing more  than the rule of the stronger. The  significance of 
such a claim is not simply that its logical ethical corollary is that might 
makes right, but also that it empties the very idea of justice of any nor 
mative force in the ordering and operation of political societies. Much  of 
Western political thought from Plato  to Nietzsche  has represented an 
attempt to meet  the challenge of Thrasymachus.  (It is not clear that 
Socrates succeeded in doing so.) One  reason for the persistence and nor 
mative power of constitutionalism is that it has represented an especially 
useful strategy for dealing with the problem of limiting political power. 
Its strategy is encapsulated in the notion "higher law," a law binding not 
only subjects and citizens, but even the ruler (eventually, the state). 

Volume 9y Number 2 

61 

This content downloaded from 131.172.36.29 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 06:23:01 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

