Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
The Michigan Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Michigan Law Review. 
This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions 
Whatis permitted,and what is prohibited,by the equalityprinciple of a liberal democracy? Does affirmativeaction run afoul of that principle? And where should we look to answer these questions? 
Many critics of affirmativeaction take it as axiomaticthat affirmativeaction violates the equalityprinciple. But this is far from clear. Every law classifies. The currentlaw of equalityitself classifies by, for example,treatingdiscriminationon the basis of race differentlyfromdiscriminationon the basisof age. No one thinksthat the law of equality is, for this reason, inconsistentwith the Equal ProtectionClause. No one thinksthat constitutionaldoctrinegives a "specialpreference"to race discrimination.Whetheraffirmative actionviolates the equalityprincipledependson the content of that principle. 
Thereis good reasonto thinkthat the best understandingof the equalityprincipleof the United StatesConstitutionhas a greatdeal to do with a prohibitionon second-classcitizenship,or "caste."1 An anticasteprinciplecan claimconsiderablesupportfromthe theory and the practiceof those who defend the FourteenthAmendment. Such a principlealso fits well - far from perfectly,but well - with the generalfabricand thrustof constitutionaldoctrine. As a matterof politicaltheory, the anticasteprinciplealso has considerable appeal,connectedas it is with some of the definingideals of liberal democracy,which is designed to ensure that morallyirrelevant characteristicsare not turnedinto a systematicbasis for social disadvantage.2The anticasteprincipleseems to serve as a promising basisfor both organizingand reformulatingmanyaspectsof the law of equal protection. 
Of course the implicationsof the anticaste principle must be specified,and here reasonablepeople can differ. I have urged,for 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. - Ed. 
2410 (1994). 

1311 example, that the principle forbids government from turning morally irrelevant and highly visible characteristics into a basis for systemic social disadvantage. Whether or not that particular specification is valid, and whether or not it counts as a sufficient specification, it seems clear that the anticaste principle would raise no serious questions about affirmative action policies. The basic reason is that it is implausible to say that such policies entrench second-class citizenship. No one urges, or could urge, that such policies would make whites, or for that matter African Americans, into second-class citizens. This is not to say that affirmative action policies are a good idea. To be sure, they may have stigmatizing effects on their intended beneficiaries, and they may also increase rather than decrease racial antagonism. But these are essentially political complaints, not constitutional ones. Some people, for example, object that affirmative action programs reflect pity and condescension toward African Americans3 - an interesting objection to the meaning and consequences of such programs, not entirely disconnected from the problem of second-class citizenship. But this objection, partly empirical in nature, is best heard in legislatures rather than courtrooms. 
Clark Cunningham and N.R. Madhava Menon have contributed a great deal to the debate over racial equality through their intriguing discussion of caste, and anticaste, in India. American legal debates are often remarkably parochial, and the American debate over the anticaste principle has given strikingly little attention to comparative questions. This is an especially serious omission in light of the fact that the caste system in India seems to be a primary inspiration for those complaining about caste-like features of American life. Let me emphasize a few of the valuable points that Cunningham and Menon offer. First, they suggest that the Indian caste system operates without "highly visible" characteristics. 
High-caste Indians might look much like low-caste Indians. Second, they suggest that in India, systemic social disadvantages began first, and only later created stigmatic differences to "mark the disadvantage." In America, the sequence was, or seems to have been, just the opposite. Thus, in India caste is "clearly a social construction," unlike in the United States, where it is believed that "race" is an immutable and obvious physical condition. 
Third, and perhaps most interestingly, India has gone down the route not traveled by the United States, which has adhered to the view that past discriminationis sufficient justification for affirmative action. India has tackledwith some sophisticationthe issue whetherdifferent,particulargroupshave differentneeds for affirmative action. For example,the Indiangovernmentlooks to various factorsindicatinggroup status,placingimportanceon whether the relevantunit "practicesextensiveendogamy,restrictingmarriageto other group members." In India, social and economic factorshelp undergirdthe judgmentaboutthe kindof compensatorymeasureto which membersof the relevantgroup are entitled. 
Severalfeaturesof this discussionare particularlystriking. Perhapsthe most strikingis the very differentnatureof Indiandebates over affirmativeaction. While Indiahas not avoidedthe high level of contentiousnessthat has characterizedAmericandebates, it has self-consciouslygone in the direction of a highly programmatic method for redressingpast social discrimination- an experiment in social engineeringfar beyond anythingin Americanlaw. From the authors' description,moreover, it is unclear to what extent there is a widespreadperception of a pervasive conflict between merit and affirmativeaction, or between libertyand equality,or of affirmativeaction as an insidiousway of providingprotectionto a "specialinterest." 
Cunninghamand Menon deserve a great deal of credit for the simplefeat of bringingnew informationto bear on the debate over affirmativeaction. Too often the Americandebate has operatedin a factualvacuum- a vacuumaboutboth internationaland domestic experience. Their new facts should spark fresh discussion. I would like to begin that discussion by offering three comments. 
The firstinvolves the criticalrole of facts in constitutionallaw;the second involvesthe potentialvirtuesof rule-freeconstitutionallaw; the thirdinvolvesthe uses and limitsof comparativeconstitutionalism. The first two are inspired by what Cunninghamand Menon have to say, but I do not directlyengagetheirargument;in the third comment,I attemptto do this. 
I. FACTS RATHER THAN CONCEPTS 
Constitutionaland political debates about equality and liberty often operate at a high level of abstraction. They raise questions, for example,aboutwhetherwe are committedto equalityof opportunity or instead equality of result, to individualrights or group rights, or to equality over liberty or vice-versa. Often the arguments work by choosing one concept over another,by assembling some particularpracticethat is said to tell, decisively,againsta certain claimor allegedprinciple(for example,the generallyaccepted preferentialtreatmentgiven to childrenof alumni),by suggesting that a certainconcept necessarilymeans a certainthing (as in the view that equality necessarilyforbids, or requires,affirmativeaction), or by specifyinga conceptwith the suggestionthat this,rather than that, is the best specification(perhaps because it fits better with the rest of what we believe). 
These debates, though common and frequently illuminating, often seem hopelesslyconceptualandinterminable,stylized,a form of Kabukitheater;often no one is convincedat all, and,even worse, often no one learns anything. I think that a great deal of further progressmightbe madeby learningmore aboutthe facts. It is very hard to know where to stand on affirmativeaction programswithout investigatingsome empiricalquestions. Whatdo suchprograms look like? How do they differ? The term "affirmativeaction"is extremelybroad,and it covers a wide rangeof activitiesin the private and public sectors and at the national,state, and local levels. 
Do such programsactually stigmatize people, and if so in what sense? These are empiricalquestions,not (only) conceptualones. 
And what are the actual differencesin qualificationbetween the programs'beneficiariesand theirvictims,and how much difference do these differencesmake? What would happen if affirmativeaction programswere abolished? What would happenif some alternative short of affirmativeaction were adopted, such as wealthbased admissionsjudgments? What are the effects of affirmative action programsfor their intended beneficiariesin, for example, college, medicalschool, and law school? Do such programsmake people better off, and if so in what sense?4 
These questionsareimportantbecausewhen progresscannotbe made on conceptual matters or on issues in high-level theory, it might instead be made by investigatingfacts. This is the great promise of empiricalwork: to enable progress and even closure when conceptualdebates produceuncertainty,holy wars,or blank stares. I hypothesize, for example, that many people would be skepticalof affirmativeaction programsto the extent that the record shows that they involve hiringpeople whose qualificationsare not marginallylower, but actuallymuch lower than those of their (majoritygroup)competitors. It also seems likely that manycritics of affirmativeaction would be less criticalif it appearedthat the 
seems to me to be the most valuable contribution to the affirmative action debate in the last decade. abolition of affirmativeaction would mean that only a handfulof AfricanAmericanswould be able to attend the majorlaw schools. 
When people disagree on high principle, they can often be broughtinto agreement,or at least make progress,if they investigate the facts.5 In the context of affirmativeaction we need much more in the way of facts. A SupremeCourtbrief dealingwith the consequences of a principle of colorblindnesswould be far more helpfulthan a briefquotingfrompast cases andpushingconceptual arguments one way rather than another. The discussion by Cunninghamand Menon is very muchin this spiritinsofaras comparativework bringsactual experienceto bear on equalityclaims. 
II. AGAINST RULES, AGAINST JUDICIAL RESOLUTIONS6 
It is tempting to think that the Supreme Court has erred in maintaining its casuistical, rule-free, fact-specific course in the context of affirmativeaction. Thiscoursemightwell seem to represent a failure of the rule of law. But there are good reasons for the Court to have followed this path. No clear constitutional commitment forbids affirmativeaction programs;as a matter of text and history,the attackon such programsis remarkablyweak.7 It is imperativethat constitutionallaw not be used to strikedown political judgmentsabout which reasonablepeople differ and to which the Constitution does not clearly speak - especially in light of the absence of much factual knowledge by the judiciary of domestic or internationalexperienceswith affirmativeaction. My emphasison the centralityof facts to the legal questionis thus a reasonfor caution from the judiciary,which ought not to invoke a controversial readingof the Constitutionwhen it is at least possible that a good understanding of the facts would lead in another direction. 
At the same time, it would be wrong to celebrate the democratic character of the institutions that have adopted affirmative action programs. On the contrary, the nation has not, until recently, had much of a debate about affirmative action, and some of the relevant programs have been adopted with far too little deliberation and far too little democracy. In these circumstances, the Court has adopted, perhaps by inadvertence, an intriguing alternative to the three conventional options of validation, invalidation, and denial of certiorari. That alternative consists of rulings that draw sharp at 

See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, LEGAL REASONING AND POLITICAL CONFLICT (1996). 
tention to underlyingquestionsof policy and principle- whichactivatespoliticaldebate - but that do not displacepublicdiscussion and that leave a great deal undecided. This may well be taken as a democraticapproachto judicialreview, one that falls in the basic categoryof representation-reinforcement. 
I think that Cunninghamand Menon fortify this basic point. 
They show that any simple solution to the problem may overlook the wide range of possible approaches,and their investigationof India reveals that a nation in some ways like our own has approachedthe issue quite differently. We need much more work of this kindin constitutionallaw. A judicialforeclosureof experimentation informedby internationalexperiencemay well be hopelessly parochial. The point applies not only to the law of equality, but also to other areas of constitutionallaw;the approachto libel law, for example,maywell be improvedby seeing how other nationsdo things. 
III. NOTES ON COMPARATIVE CONSTITUTIONALISM 
Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of the discussion by Cunninghamand Menon involves its depictionof a path not taken by the United States. Recall that India maintainsa list of 3,500 "backwardclasses"and that empiricalfactors,includingsocial discrimination,educationaldeprivation,and economicstatus,are used to determinegroupstatus. Some groups- the most disadvantaged - have their own independent quotas, generally proportionalto population. Other groups also receive a reserve, but one smaller than their population share. Individualentitlementsmay depend on whetherthe relevantindividualshave been raisedin privileged circumstances.Thusthere is a careful,elaborate,and quite refined methodfor determininghow governmentpolicieswill counteractor even dismantlethe system of caste. India appears,in short, to be engaged in a process of social engineeringthat goes well beyond anythingin Americanpractice. 
A full assessmentof India'sprogramwould requireanswersto two questions: (1) Does the Indianapproachmake sense for India? (2) Wouldthat approach,or some variationon that approach,make sense for the United States? I cannot attempt a full assessment here, but let me venturea few puzzlesandthoughts. The firstquestion itself raises several questions. 
Does this kind of close attention to caste backgroundincrease or decrease social antagonism? Timur Kuranhas written of the dangersof "ethnification,"in which small shocks to a system can shape in the firstinstance.) create widespread consciousness of ascriptive (or other) differences, in a way that eventuallycauses segregation,resentment,hatred, and even violence.8 Is there any similar problem in India? Cunninghamand Menon suggest the possibility of an affirmative answer. A great risk of race-consciousor ethnicity-consciouspolicies is that they can heighten attention to questions of race and ethnicity in a way that compromisessocial cohesion. (Of course social cohesion is not the only social goal, and may not be in good 
Does the system create, or is it perceived to create, a kind of caste spoils system? Judgmentsabout the degree of disadvantage are hardly a purely scientific enterprise, and controversialjudgments are likely to enter into any decisionaboutwho countsas sufficientlydisadvantaged.Thereis also a naturalriskhere of strategic and self-interestedbehavior,in which groupsjockey with one another for position as "most disadvantaged,"with harmful consequences for society as a whole. Nor is it an unambiguousgood if membersof one or anothergroup play the game of "morevictimized than thou." Does this happen in India? 
Does this system significantlyweaken the Indian economy? Does it compromiseperformance-relatedgoals, and if so to what extent? It is surely imaginablethat such a system might compromise merit,rightlyconceived (thoughof coursethis is a contestable ideal). From what Cunninghamand Menon have said, however, there is no clear answerto this question. 
The fact that India seems to have arrived at its approach throughsomethingclose to agreement(if that is a fact) is extremely illuminating,but it is not by itself a sufficientreason to think that the approachis justified. It would be helpful if Cunninghamand Menon would, in the future,say a bit more about the above questions. Their currentdiscussionfocuses more on describingthe Indian practice than on demonstrating its success, or even on identifying the criteria by which success or failure might be measured. 
What about America? Cunninghamand Menon appearto believe that America should have taken the road suggestedby some Justicesin Bakke: that is, the Courtshouldhave allowedthe political branchesto concludethat past social discriminationis sufficient to justify affirmative action programs.9 I very much agree with this judgment: if the nation, or a state, would like to compensate for the continuing effects of past discrimination, there should be no constitutional problem so long as the program is reasonably well-tailored. 
The Court should have allowed the government room to maneuver in this way, and future courts should allow the democratic process to handle this sharply contested issue in any reasonable manner.10 But the further question remains: Should the political process in America attempt to do something like what India has done? 
The most obvious response is that this is a genuinely academic question. There is no possibility that the United States would attempt to identify the fifty groups, let alone the 3,500 groups, which ought to qualify as backward classes. But as in India, the existence of a political consensus or obstacle cannot be decisive; perhaps the consensus or obstacle is wrong. Our own anticaste principle, reflected in our history and our practices, seems to emphasize highly visible identifying characteristics (most notably race and gender), on the theory that such characteristics present the greatest opportunities for unjustified and pervasive subordination. The anticaste idea builds narrowly from the cases of African Americans to pick up women and the handicapped (with a partial, limited inclusion of homosexuals). This limitation is not entirely without appeal. A decent society does not humiliate its members,1l and humiliation is especially likely when the government discriminates against people whose characteristics are highly visible. (Of course it is not limited to those cases.) 
In addition, and perhaps most importantly, it is easiest to maintain a caste society, even when market forces are quite vigorous, when the characteristics that lead to lower-caste status are highly visible. It is in such circumstances that customers and coworkers can most easily entrench existing inequality.12 It is in such circumstances that rational discrimination may result in the use of sex and race as proxies. And it is in such circumstances that screening strat 
and Blackmun, JJ., concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part). 
F.3d 932 (5th Cir. 1996), was a mistake, indeed a form of hubris; a lower court should not forbid educational institutions from proceeding in this way without a much clearer signal from the Supreme Court. 
Goldblum trans., 1996). 
Harry J. Holzer & Keith R. Ihlanfeldt, Customer Discrimination and Employment Outcomes for Minority Workers, 113 Q.J. ECON.835 (1998). egies may perpetuatesocial subordination.13Marketforces are especially unpromisingcorrectives to caste-like aspects of society when a highlyvisible characteristicis at work in the context of systemic social disadvantages. 
None of these points suggeststhat this limited anticasteprinciple, understoodby reference to American understandingsand experiences,is ideal, even for America. Surelythe anticasteprinciple does not exhaustthe content of the notion of equality. At a minimum, there is also a place for an antidiscriminationprinciple,for fairequalityof opportunity(an idea that cutsvery broadly),andfor programsof redistributiondesignedto ensurethat everyonelives in minimallydecent conditions. These ideas overlapwiththe anticaste principlebut are independentof it. It is even possible to thinkthat the three ideas would do most of the good work done by the anticaste effortsin India,perhapsmoresuccessfully.Thus,for example, I might speculatethat an effort to ensure fair equalityof opportunity, andminimallydecent conditionsfor all, bearssomethingof the same relation to the Indian experience as a negative income tax bears to minimumwage legislation. A negativeincome tax is a far more effective and directway of assistingthe poor than a minimum wage increase.14So too, an insistence on fair equalityof opportunity and minimallydecent conditionsmight well be a far more effective and direct way of dealing with systemicdisadvantagesthan India'sextremelycomplex affirmativeaction program. 
For America, with its very differenthistory,a large question is whether a limited anticaste principle,suitably supplementedwith these other ideals, is not a better approachto the problem of inequalitythan an approachthat would attemptcompensatorymeasures for a wide range of socially disadvantagedgroups. It is even possible to wonder whether India might not have done better to adopt a narroweranticaste principle for the most disadvantaged groups,and to attemptto promote other equalitygoals with other policies, includingbetter education and job training,and minimal economic and social guaranteesfor all, ensuringagainstdesperate conditions.15But it is very hardto disentanglethis normativejudgment from an awarenessof political and culturalunderstandings, whichobviouslydivergebetween Indiaand America,perhapsespecially so in their differentconceptionsof what it means to undo a system of caste. 
CONCLUSION 
Forconstitutionalpurposes,the Americanequalityprinciplehas been an anticasteprinciple- one that forbids governmentfrom turninga morallyirrelevantand highlyvisible characteristicinto a systemicbasisfor second-classcitizenship. Thisprincipleought not to be taken to authorizefederaljudges to invalidatereasonableaffirmativeaction programs. The appropriatecontent of such programsshould be a democraticratherthan a judicialresponsibility; the most extreme judicial attacks on affirmativeaction programs are a form of hubris. 
On the other hand, we know far too little to declare that our currentprogramsare workingwell. There are two promisingpaths for the future,both of them involvingfacts. The firstis to learn a greatdeal more aboutthe operations,achievements,and failuresof multiple approaches, race-conscious and otherwise, and to see whichof them providesa good model for the future.16The second is to see what might be learned from the experience of other nations. The analysisprovidedby Cunninghamand Menon offers no unambiguouslessonsfor the United States,but it offersa greatdeal of illuminationabout our possibilitiesand prospects. 

