Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 132.174.255.116 on Wed, 09 Mar 2016 20:22:40 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions As Government programs and polic es become more complex and far eaching, we must be sensit ve to the articulation of new rights of action that do not 
Informational regulation takes everal dif erent forms. Sometimes the government at empts to improve the behavior of private industry by requiring companies to disclose information about, for example, toxic rel ase , 
For many years it has be n unclear whether, and under what circumpromise to provide many of the most important public law case in the next several decades. The outcome of thes strug les wil have signif cant con 
Federal Election Com is ion v. Akins15 is by far the most important pronouncement on the general is ue of standing to btain information. More congres ional rather than judic al resolution. It fol ows that whether someone has informational standing depends on what Congres has aid. If "injury" can ot be decided in the abstract, or sole y by reference to the "facts"; it urns instead on posit ve law. Many sta utes and regulations now require the disclosure or even the growing out of laws involving health, safety, and the nvironment-is a post-1960s phenomenon. Mandatory disclosure was a central part of the 
24See the discussion of informational strategies in ROBERT V. PERCIVAL ET AL., ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATION: LAW, SCIENCE, AND POLICY 612-27 (2d ed. 1996). 
Consider the eco-label required by the European Union. See Council Regulation general y Kleindorfer & Orts, supra note 4. contain sac harin.29 There are numerous other il ustrations, but several post-1980 in tiatives are special y strik ng and es rve brief description by way of il ustration and for purpose of understanding the standing question. 
In 1983, the Oc upational Safety and Health Admin stration ("OSHA") is ued a Haz rd Com unication Standard ("HCS"), ap licable to the manufacturing sector.30 In 1986, the HCS was made general y ap licable.31 Under the HCS, chemical producers and importers must evaluate the haz rds of the chemicals they produce or import; develop technical haz rd information for material safety dat she ts, and labels for haz rdous ubstances; and, most importantly, transmit his information to users of the rel vant substances. Al employers must adopt a haz rd com unication program-one that includes indiv dual train g-and inform workers of the rel vant risks.32 tious et of proposals, the FDA required a form of disclosure that af ected nearly al fo d and rink purchased in the United Sta es. The FDA (1) compel ed nutrit onal abeling on nearly al proces ed fo ds, including information relating to cholesterol, saturated fat, calories from fat, and fiber; (2) required compliance with government-specif ed serving sizes; (3) compel ed companies to conform to government defin tions of standardized terms, including, "reduced," fresh," fre ," and "low"; and (4) al owed health claims only if the claims (a) are sup orted by scientif c evidence and (b) com unicate clear and complet information about such mat ers as fat and heart disease, fat and cancer, sodium and high blo d pres ure, and calcium and osteoporosi .3 
Act (TSCA) ; 40 C.F R. ? 156.10 (19 8) (detail ng EPA regulations requir ng warni g labels on pestic des promulgated under the Federal Insectic de, Fungic de and Rodentic de Act (FI RA) . standard requir ng that he swe tener cause cancer in laboratory animals). 
29 Se 21 U.S C. ? 343(o) (19 4) (requir ng a warni g on products contain g sac harin 30 Se Haz rd Com unication, 29 C.F R. ? 1910.120 (19 8). OSHA promulgated a al chemical manufacturers and importers to as es the haz rds of chemicals which they produce or import, and al employers having workplaces in the manufacturing div sion, . to provide information to their employe s concerni g haz rdous chemicals by means of haz rd com unication programs including labels, material safety dat she ts, train g, and ac es to writ en records. 
Id. programs."). 
31 Se 52 Fed. Reg. 31,852 (1987) (expanding the scope of the HCS to "cover al em32 Se id. ("Expansion of the scope of the HCS requires non-manufacturing employers to ployers with employe s exposed to haz rdous chemicals in their workplaces"). establish haz rd com unication programs to transmit information on the haz rds of chemicals to their employe s by means of labels on containers, material safety dat she ts, and train g 3 Se 58 Fed. Reg. 2,927 (19 3). 
A great deal of rec nt at ention has be n given to informational regulation in the particular context of the com unications industry. As an alterpose of disclosure is principal y to trig er polit cal safeguards coming from the government's own judgments or from external pres ure.41 Hence, any governmental indif erence to adverse nvironmental ef ects is perfectly acceptable under NEPA. The idea behind the sta ute is that if the public is concerned, then the government wil have to give some weight o environmental ef ects. 
In 1986, Congres enacted an ambit ous ta ute, the Emergency Planni g and Com unity Right- o-Know Act ("EPCRA").42 Under this ta ute, firms and indiv duals must report o sta e and local governments the quantities of potential y haz rdous chemicals that have be n stored or el ased into the nvironment. Users of such chemicals must report o their local fire departments the location, types, and quanti es of stored chemicals. They must also give information about potential adverse health ef ects. On the basi of the rel vant results, the EPA publishes pol ution dat about he release of over 30 chemicals from over 20, 0 facil ties.43 This has be n an exceptional suc es story, one that has wel exce ded the xpecta ions at he time of the sta ute's enactment.4 A detailed report by the General Accounting Of ice sug est that EPCRA has had important benefic al ef ects, spur ing in ovative, cost-ef ective programs from the EPA and from sta e and local governments.45 into this general category. The Animal Welfare Act is designed partly to ensure public ty about he treatment of animals; thus covered laboratories are required to file reports with the government about heir conduct,46 with the ap arent hought hat he reports wil det r noncompliance and also allow continual monitoring. In ad it on to its various com and-and-control provis ons, the Clean Air Act requires companies to create and isclose "risk management plans" involving ac idental rel ase of chemicals, which 
Many other sta utes involving health, safety, and the nvironment fal the only role for a court is to insure that he agency has considered the nvironmental conseabil ty of information . would enable the public to put substantial pres ure on companies to quences"). the action"). reduce mis ions."). [hereinafter GAO Report]. 
41 Se id. (noting that NEPA is an "area of discretion of the xecutive as to the choice of 42 42 U.S C. ? 1 ,0 1-50 (19 4); se also supra note 5 and ac ompanying text. 43 Se HAMILTON, supra note 34, at 302 (sta ing thes figures for EPA pol ution dat ). 4 Se PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 624, 626 ("Congres antic pated that he avail45 Se General Ac ounting Of ice, Toxic Chemicals, Report o the Congres (19 1) 46 Animal Welfare Act, 7 U.S C. ? 2131-59 (19 4). must include a worst case scenario.47 The Safe Drinking Water Act was amended in 19 6 to require an ual "consumer confidence reports" to be developed and is eminated by com unity water sup liers.48 Sta utes governi g mortgages, crime, discrimination, sexual violence, and medical care also se m partly com it ed to the idea that "sunlight is . the best of dis nfectants";49 thus, they require covered insti utions to compile reports about their conduct and compliance with ap licable law.50 As noted, FECA requires polit cal com it e s to disclose a great deal of information about their activ ties. In the same category is a proposed code for tel vis on broadcasters, designed partly to ensure public ty about he public service activ ties of various ta ions. Its goal is to ensure more in the way of such activ ties indirectly, and simply by virtue of the fact hat here wil be a public ac ounting.51 
42 U.S C. ? 7412(r) (19 4). 48 42 U.S C. ? 30 g-3(c)(4) (19 4). 
The phrase comes from LOUIS D. BRANDEIS, OTHER PEOPLE'S MONEY AND HOW THE 50 Se , e.g , Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 (HMDA), 12 U.S C. ? 2801- 0 BANKERS USE IT 62 (Torchbo k ed. 1967). (19 4) (requir ng banks to maintain records of where they make mortgage loans and to make such records available to the public); Com unity Reinvestment Act of 197 (CRA), 12 U.S C. ? 2901-07 (19 4) (subjecting banks to detailed reporting requirements and rating the banks based on the xtent o which they serve their com unity); Crime Awarenes and Campus Security Act of 19 0 ? 204(a), 20 U.S C. ? 1092(f)(1)-(6) (19 4) (requir ng that col eges develop olic es to encourage the prompt reporting of crimes to police and col ege of ic als); Higher Education Amendments of 19 2 ? 486(c)(1)-(2), 20 U.S C. ? 1092(f)(1)(F), (f)(7) (19 4) (requir ng that col eges compile and report sta istics on listed crimes including sexual as ault, and requir ng that col eges promulgate and enforce polic es against sexual as ault); Federal Water Pol ution Control Act, 3 U.S C. ? 1319, 1342, 1369 (19 4) (requir ng permit holders to sample their discharges and then submit he results in the form of dischargemonitoring reports ("DMRs") to the proper authority; thes DMRs are made available to the 
It is increasingly recognized that information is often a far les expensive and more f ic ent strategy than com and-and-control, which consi ts of rig d mandates about regulatory ends (a certain percentage reduction in sulfur dioxide, for example), regulatory means (a technol gical mandate for cars, for example), or both.54 A chief advantage of informational regulation is its compar tive flexib lity. If consumers are informed of the salt or sugar content of o ds, they can proce d as they wish, trading of various product char cteristics however they se fit. If workers are given information about the risks posed by their workplace, then they can trade safety against other pos ible variables (such as al ry, investments for children or etirement, and leisure).5 From the standpoint of ef ic ency, information remedies can be bet er than either com and-and-control regulation or eliance on unregulated markets alone. substantial advantages. A wel -functioni g system of deliberative democracy requires a certain degre of information, so that cit zens can engage in their monitoring and eliberative tasks. Subject as they are to parochial pres ures, segments of the government may have insuf ic ent incentives to disclose information on their own; consider FOIA or FECA, where the selfinterest of the government or private groups may pres in the direction of to lit le disclosure. A go d way to enable cit zens to verse government action and also to as es the ne d for les , more, or dif erent regulation, is to inform them of both private and public activ ty. The very fact hat he public wil be in a posit on to engage in general monitoring may wel spur desirable outcomes. largely unantic pated reductions in toxic rel ase have come about without anything in the way of direct regulation.56 This ap roach ap ears to be emerging as the wave of the future.57 In the area of broadcasting, it is possible to hope that disclosure of public interest program ing, and the mere ne d to compile the information each year, wil increase ducational and public af airs program ing without involving overnment mandates at al .58 
Se BREYER, supra note 4, at 161-64 (analyzing disclosure as an alternative regulatory regime); OGUS, supra note 4, at 121-49 (explaining the les interventionist strategy of infor5 Se CAS R. SUNSTEIN, FRE MARKETS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE 327-28 (19 7) (dismation regulation). cus ing ef ic ency and information). increase ducational program ing). 
56 Se PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 612-16 (discus ing the f ica y of informational ap roaches to toxic substance regulation). 
A primary virtue of informational regulation is that it rig ers polit cal safeguards and al ows cit zens a continuing oversight role-one that is, in the best case , largely self-enforcing. 
Consider, for example, the fact hat he government estimated the cost Under imaginable as umptions uch regulation wil be inferior to com andand-control regulation and to reliance on markets unac ompanied by disclosure requirements. There are two problems with informational strategies. 
First, provid ng information may be xpensive, sometimes costing more than it is worth. Second, the provis on of information is ometimes ineffectual, or even counterproductive. of the FDA disclosure rules as "$1.7 bil ion over twenty years."59 The president of the National Fo d Proces ors As ociation claimed that he firstyear cost alone would exce d $2 bil ion.60 In either case, the cost is ignif cant, and an important question is what improvements-in terms of reduced mortality or morbid ty-are produced in return. OSHA's haz rd com unication policy is estimated to save 20 lives per year-a large number-but at an an ual cost of $360 mil ion.61 The xpenditure per life saved is therefore $1.8 mil ion. This is far bet er than a large number of regulations, and is probably an amount wel worth spending; but it is more than many agencies pend for life-saving regulations.62 The OSHA rule does not stand out as a means of saving lives especial y cheaply.63 (Of course there 
59 Nancy Ryan & Linda M. Har ington, FDA Of ers New Rules on Fo d Labels, Claims, CHI. TRIB., Nov. 7, 19 1, at 2. 
60 Se id. 
61 Thes figures come from John F. Mor al I , A Review of the Record, 10 REGULATION 25, 30 (Nov./Dec. 1986), which was crit cized in Lisa Heinzerling, Regulatory Cost of Mythic Proportions, 107 YALE L.J 1981, 19 9-20 0 (19 8). 
FOR RISK 264 (19 2). 
62 Se W. KIP VISCUSI, FATAL TRADEOF S: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RESPONSIB LIT ES 63 When informational strategies are costly, there are two pos ible response from the government. The first is to do nothing. If the savings-in terms of health, life, and informed choice-are relatively low, then costly strategies, even informational ones, make lit le sense. There wil , therefore, be circumstances in which a government remedy for an absence of information is unwar anted. 
The second pos ib lity is to impose a regulatory strategy rather than to require disclosure. By a regulatory strategy I mean a mandatory outcome, such as a flat ban on the materials in question, or governmental specif cation of a particular outcome, as in a mandated maximum level of carcinogens in the workplace. Sometimes the regulatory strategy wil be cheaper because the price of disclosing information-changing packaging and so forth-is o high. This is likely to be the right response when most or al people would respond to the information in the same way. In that case, it is un ec s ary to provide information, and bet er simply to dic 
For example, California's Proposit on 65, an in tiative designed to proare likely to be large morbid ty and other gains that are not captured in the "lives aved" number.) they may be inef ectual and thus have low benefits; they may even be counterproductive. This is o for various reasons, and here a great deal more work remains to be done. People have a limited abil ty to proces information.64 They have a notoriously dif icult ime thinking about lowprobabil ty events. Sometimes people discount such events to zero; sometimes they treat hem as much more dangerous than they actual y are. If people are told, for example, that a certain substance cause cancer, then they may think that it is far more dangerous than it is in fact.6 But some carcinogenic substances pose lit le risk of cancer. There is also a pervasive risk of "al rmist bias," as frighteni g information is more salient and potent than comforting information, regardles of what is true. mote cit zen awarenes of risk levels, requires warni gs for exposure to carcinogens.67 At first glance, the requirement se ms entirely unexceptionable, inde d an important advance. But it has in some ways be n counterproductive. Consumers ap ear to think that welve of every 10 users of a product with the required warni g wil die from cancer, an estimate that exce ds reality by a factor of 10 0 or more.68 With respect o information, les may be more. If information is not provided in a clear and usable form, it may actual y make people les knowledgeable than they were before, producing over eactions, or under eactions, based on an abil ty to understand what he information actual y means. People also face a pervasive risk of "information overload," causing consumers to treat a large amount of information as ta e an outcome that, by hypothesi , is general y or almost universal y prefer ed. For an especial y dangerous ubstance, one that reasonable people would cho se not o encounter, a flat ban is ap ropriate. enough"). et al. eds., 1982); Christine Jol s et al., A Behavioral Ap roach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV. 1471, 153 -37 (19 8) (discus ing how simply provid ng information "is not 64 Se JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES (Daniel Kahneman Se W. KIP ViscusI, PRODUCT-RISK LABELING: A FEDERAL RESPONSIB LITY 1 -16 (19 3) (analyzing the results of California's Proposit on 65); W. KIP VISCUSI, RATIONAL RISK POLICY 5 (19 8) (sug esting that "[i]ndiv dual risk perceptions are often in er or"). 1657, 16 6- 7 (19 7) ("[T]he fear of the worst case scenario rec ives greater weight han 6 Se W. Kip Viscusi, Alarmist Decis ons with Divergent Risk Information, 107 ECON. J. does the low risk as es ment."). the information problem). 
67 Se PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 616-21 (describ ng California's ap roach to 68 Se W. Kip Viscusi, Predicting the Ef ects of Fo d Cancer Risk Warni gs on Consumers, 43 FO D DRUG COSM. L.J 283, 28 (198 ) (finding that "indiv duals have a dif icult time in proces ing refined istinctions betwe n very min scule probabil ties"). With respect o industry response , companies may respond to certain equivalent o no information at al .69 Certainly this is true when disclosure campaigns are fil ed with details that can ot be proces ed easily. disclosure requirements by refusing to provide information at al (if this is an available option). The result wil be the removal from the market of information that is useful overal . If industry responds to a requirement of evidentiary sup ort for scientif c laims with mere "puf ing," then consumers may have les information than they di to begin with. If advertisers must conduct extensive test before they are permit ed to make claims, then they wil be given a strong incentive to avoid making claims at al .70 
There is a further problem: optimistic bias.71 People often believe themselves to be im une from risks that hey acknowledge are signif cant and real with respect o thers. About 90% of people believe that hey are above-average drivers, les likely than others to be involved in automobile ac idents.72 In one study, 97% of those surveyed ranked themselves as average or above average in their abil ty to avoid both bicycle and power mower ac idents.73 If most people think that he information does not ap ly to them, disclosure requirements may have lit le f ect. people who are undereducated, elderly, or po r. If this is o, the disadvantaged may continue to face the risks that informational disclosure strategies are aimed to counteract (at least if market forces fail to induce general changes from producers).74 And when risks are placed on outsiders who are 
HEALTHY MIND 10-1 (19 3). 
69 Se Jacob Jacoby et al., Cor ective Advertis ng and Af irmative Disclosure Sta ements: Their Potential for Confusing and Misleading the Consumer, 46 J. MARKETING 61, 70 (1982) (describ ng how the language used in remedial sta ements designed to cor ect misleading advertis ng mes ages may be more confusing to the consumer than the advertis ng mes age it70 Se Richard Craswel , Interpreting Dec ptive Advertis ng, 65 B.U. L. REV. 658, 71971 Se Christine Jol s et al., A Behavioral Ap roach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. 25 (1985) (noting the various incentives that sel ers have to not disclose useful information). REV. 1471, 1524-27 (19 8) (describ ng optimistic bias as "[a] com on feature of human behavior" where "[p]eople tend to think that bad events are far les likely to hap en to them than 72 Se SHEL EY E. TAYLOR, POSIT VE IL USIONS: CREATIVE SELF-DECEPTION AND THE 73 Se id. at 1 6. 
74 Se George W. Schucker et al., The Impact of the Sac harin Warni g Label on Sales of Diet Soft Drinks in Supermarkets, 2 J. PUB. POL'Y & MARKETING 46, 54-56 (1983) (finding no change in diet soft drink sales in po r, undereducated areas after the FDA ad ed warni g Thes points hould be taken as cautionary notes, and not as ug esnot in a contractual relationship with the wrongdoer,75 information may do lit le go d, because the outsiders are not in a posit on to extract a higher In ad it on, both private and public agencies may have an incentive not some help. The incentive not o disclose takes multiple forms. People may not want o disclose because of the she r economic burden of doing so in the first instance. It can be quite costly to compile and is eminate the rel vant reports. Consider the large xpense involved in producing an EIS,79 as wel as other paperwork requirements that may impose substantial burdens.80 to disclose because of the qualita ively diverse problems, and cost , that may fol ow disclosure. The market may wel punish bad news via decreased sales or (perhaps in consequence) decreased stock prices; the punishment may be mild, optimal, or exces ive and al rmist,81 and it can be hard to predict in advance. A cereal company that disclose the nutrit onal content of its fo ds may find itself with much fewer purchasers; a company that disclose workplace risks may have to increase wages or cut back production. An agency and af ected evelopers may resi t compil ng an EIS because once the sta ement is made public, the project itself wil be in jeopardy. The perception of jeopardy may impose costly delays and eventual y development may be blocked entirely-a far from uncom on result of the EIS proces .82 So to , a polit cal organization that disclose its financial backers may find itself ar les influential. 
Thes incentives not o disclose may be special y hard to counteract in light of the fact hat information is often a public go d.83 As noted above, the benefits of disclosure are often obtained by many people, whereas the cost of ensuring disclosure are borne (at least in the short run) by one or a few. In thes circumstances, it is pos ible that with market ordering, or even a law on the bo ks, few or none wil bother to take the nec s ary steps-economic, polit cal, or otherwise-to counteract he unlawful withholding of information. Thus, the conomic and polit cal markets may underproduce disclosure, even in the face of a law that mandates it. 
WIL IAM RODGERS, ENVIRONMENTAL AW 806 (19 4). 3501-20 (19 4 & Sup . I 19 6), was a clear esponse to perceived expense . 
79 Mil ions of dol ars are ap ropriated each year for federal oversight alone. Se 80 Hard at are dif icult o find, but he Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980, 4 U.S C. ? 81 There is a real pos ib lity of an al rmist reaction, producing exces ive punishment; al rmist information is especial y salient and hence memorable, and people might read nonal rmist information in an al rming way. Se Timur Kuran & Cas R. Sunstein, Availabil ty Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 STAN. L. REV. (forthcoming Apr. 19 9); Viscusi, supra note 6 , at 16 8 (concluding that people overvalue risk, over eact o highly public zed risks, and "place considerable weight on the risk information provided to them"). ap roach). 
OGUS, supra note 4, at 121-26 (same). 
82 Se PERCIVAL ET AL., supra note 24, at 1060-65 (discus ing the adequacy of the EIS 83 Se BREYER, supra note 4, at 26 (discus ing the public go d aspects of information); 
Congres may of er a broad grant of standing-perhaps even to cit zens general y-so as to counteract he rel vant incentives. The hope is that some plaintif , whether altruistic or self-interested, wil take steps to ensure the availabil ty of information. FOIA is the most obvious example. The grant of the power to btain information, and to lit gate, to "any person"84 operates to inform agencies that here wil be ready judic al review of any denial of a FOIA request, a factor that should make agencies les likely to engage in unlawful denials. In any case, such denials can and often wil be cor ected if they are unlawful. Or Congres may decide that cit zens general y can bring suit against he FEC to ensure compliance with federal campaign laws, believing that his mechanism wil det r violations of a law central to the lectoral proces . A general grant of standing may help to remedy the problems created by the rel vant incentives and the public-go d char cter of information, for there may be someone, out of a large group of potential benefic aries, who is wil ing to bear the cost of a lawsuit. As we shal se , Akins itself is a prime xample.85 idea. Lawsuits can be xpensive; they also can be diversionary and even frivol us. With respect o information, a grant of standing to al cit zens may divert an agency from its prefer ed course of action and can make sensible priority-set ing extremely dif icult. It even may involve a kind of private conscription of public resources86 in a way that undermines a ful y democratic ef ort, by the agency involved, to al ocate its limited resources to the most serious problems. If al cit zens can bring suit against he FEC to require it o regulate al groups that any cit zen would like to se treated as "polit cal com it e s," then the FEC may have to spend al of its time defending itself in court. If any agency defin tion of "animals" can prompt a federal action by some cit zen asking the government o expand its defin tion,87 the government may have fewer esources to enforce the Animal Welfare Act. Alternatively, the mere risk of a cit zen suit may lead the agency to an outcome that it believes is undesirable, and that perhaps is, in 
After Akins, there are, with respect o information, many easy case . If 
Congres granted standing to cit zens in general to se k information and information has be n with eld, cit zens in general can bring suit. Certainly this is clear if the information bears directly on their behavior as voters. It se ms equal y clear if the information bears directly on the plaintif s' activ ties in their indiv dual or organizational capacit es. Sup ose, for example, that an indiv dual or insti ution is interested in obtain g information relating to enforcement of the Animal Welfare Act, and that indiv dual or organization has a demonstrable interest in the protection of animals from suf ering. In such case , standing is clearly available. se king information invokes no interest expres ly related to the polit cal proces and when that indiv dual or insti ution can ot show that he information would relate to rel vant activ ties on his or its part. The strongest argument for denying standing would be that he plaintif has a purely ideol gical interest, or an interest in law enforcement for its own sake. Sup ose, for example, that an ordinary, relatively young cit zen is e king information about compliance with the Age Discrimination Act. Sup ose the cit zen se ks this information simply because she is curious, or because she general y wants to make sure that he government is enforcing the law. It is pos ible to argue that Akins does not cover this case. As ta ed, the plaintif has no particular interest as a cit zen, and she can ot con ect he denial of information to any tangible activ ty independent of the lawsuit. Thus, there is a plausible basi for denying standing even in light of the outcome in Akins. 
of standing in a case of this kind would probably be consti utional after Akins. (If there is no such grant, then standing should probably be denied on prudential grounds.)18 The first point is analogical and involves FOIA. Under FOIA, anyone can bring suit o btain any information that FOIA requires to be made public.189 The plaintif ne d not show an interest in using the information for anything in particular; simple curiosity is enough. The denial of the information is the injury in fact. No court has held this provision unconsti utional. It is hard to distinguish the countles imaginable FOIA case from the hypothesized case. 
189 See 5 U.S.C. ? 552 (1994) (stating that agency rules, opinions, orders, records, and proce dings are public information). 
sued a nar ow ruling, saying that when cit zens bring suit o btain information directly involving the polit cal proces , there is no consti utional obstacle to a congres ional grant of standing. As noted, there is ome language in Akins emphasiz ng that he case itself involved voting, "the most basic of polit cal rights,"190 and it would be pos ible to seize on this language to confine the opin on's reach. A nar ow understanding of this kind, however, would not be consi tent with the spir t of the decis on, for the Court spoke far more general y about Congres 's creation of a legal right o information and its grant of a right o bring suit o vindicate that interest. The remark about "the most basic of polit cal rights" was in the nature of an exclamation point, and not in any sense central to the Court's reasoni g. guish betwe n cit zens e king information directly bearing on the polit cal proces and cit zens e king other kinds of information. If the question is whether the plaintif has uf ered injury in fact, then why would that line be ap ropriate? At best, such a line would invite strategic behavior and ingenious pleading; almost any information can plausibly be char cterized as bearing on voting behavior. In the hypothesized case, for example, the plaintif could contend, at least as plausibly as the cit zens in Akins, that he rel vant information would bear on her decis on about how to vote, and in what kinds of polit cal activ ty to engage. Put ing the risk of strategic behavior to ne side, nothing in Article I sup orts the view that Congres may create cit zen standing in case involving denial of information bearing on the right o vote, but may not do so when voting is not at stake. Article I requires a legal right-if Congres has created a legal right o information, that requirement is atisfied. 
I conclude that after Akins, the injury in fact est is not a bar ier to explic t congres ional grants of standing to cit zens e king information to which they have a legal right. The real dif iculties lie lsewhere; they have to do with redres abil ty and with congres ional instructions. 
Sup ose that he government or some private nti y refused to disclose information, or sup ose that he government failed to require disclosure of information by some third party, either public or private. Sup ose, to , that the nondisclosure is unlawful. If a plaintif sues to btain the information, there is injury in fact, and the plaintif me ts the redres abil ty requirements under Akins. Now instead sup ose that he information has be n disclosed 190 Akins, 118 S. Ct. at 1786. after the fil ng of the complaint but before the judgment, and that he plaintif se ks declar tory relief or the imposit on of monetary penalties. The problem is far from hypothetical. Congres sometimes al ows plaintif s to impose financial burdens on both those who have failed to disclose information191 and pol uters (and others) who sometimes disclose information only after a lawsuit has be n threatened or insti uted. Is there a standing problem? would go directly to the plaintif . If a plaintif stands to rec ive compensation for information unlawful y with eld, then the case is akin to many conventional case in which a plaintif se ks damages for il egality, and there is no standing question at al . If the plaintif stands to rec ive a "penalty" not repres nting compensation but aking the form of a bounty, then the problem is a lit le harder, but here should be no problem here ither. A potential award of a penalty or a bounty would make the case akin to several old prerogative writs, such as quo war anto, informer's actions, and qui tam actions.192 In Lujan, the Court sug ested that a grant of a bounty to the cit zen-plaintif s would solve the consti utional dif iculty,193 and there is upport for this idea in the qui tam action, as ug ested by early congres ional practice and in several Supreme Court decis ons.194 al ; sup ose that he plaintif is enti led only to a declar tory judgment, with ap ropriate fines going to the U.S Treasury. In a case of this kind, the Court rec ntly held that here can be no informational standing. Ste l Co. v. Cit zens for a Bet er Environment involved a complaint, by a public interest organization, that Ste l Company failed to disclose its toxic rel ase , in 
191 Se EPCRA, 42 U.S C. ? 1 045(c) (19 4) (imposing civ l and admin strative penal192 Se Sunstein, supra note 137, at 168-79 (describ ng the history of standing in the 193 Se Lujan v. Defenders of Wild ife, 504 U.S 5 5, 572-73 (19 2) (distinguishing Luties for fail ng to me t he reporting requirements of EPCRA). 
English and American systems). for the victorious plaintif '). jan from the simple case where standing exist because Congres has provided "a cash bounty 194 Se , e.g , Act of May 19, 1796, ch. 30, ? 18, 1 Sta . 469, 474 (awarding private cit zens bounties for informing the U.S government of violations of the Act); Act of Mar. 2 , 1794, ch. 1 , ? 4, 1 Sta . 347, 349 (of ering a bounty to persons who prosecute violations of the Act); Act of Feb. 20, 1792, ch. 7, ? 25, 1 Sta . 232, 235 (granting one half of the penalties col ected to the person "informing and prosecuting" the violation); Act of March 3, 1791, ch. 15, ? 4 , 1 Sta . 19 , 209 (provid ng one half of al penalit es col ected for violation of the Act to the person who discovers the violation); United Sta es ex rel. Marcus v. Hes , 317 U.S 537, 541 n.4 (1943) (sup orting the Court's as ertion that "[q]ui tam suits have be n frequently permit ed by legislative action"); Marvin v. Trout, 19 U.S 212, 2 5 (1905) (as erting the standing of the plaintif s to sue in qui tam actions). 
plain violation of EPCRA.195 Al sides agre d that Ste l Company had not done what it was legal y obliged to do. So n after Cit zens for a Bet er Environment sent Ste l Company a sta utory notice of intent o sue, however, the company filed the overdue forms and isclosed the rel vant information. The plaintif claimed that he sta ute nti led it o various kinds of "ap ropriate" relief: a declar tory judgment hat he company violated EPCRA, civ l fines (of $25,0 0 per day) that would be paid to the government, an award of cost , and an order equir ng the company to provide them with copies of al compliance reports ubmit ed to the EPA.196 whether "being deprived of information that is up osed to be disclosed under EPCRA-or at least being deprived of it when one has a particular plan for its use-is a concret injury in fact hat satisfies Article I ."197 (Akins answers that question af irmatively, though without he ap roval of Justice Scalia, who wrote the opin on in Ste l Co.) Instead the Court simply concluded that he plaintif could not me t he requirements for edres abil ty. If the plaintif won, how, exactly, would its injury be remedied? The Court explained that "[n]one of the specif c items of relief sought, and none that we can envis on as 'ap ropriate' under the general request, would serve to reimburse respondent for los es caused by the late reporting, or to eliminate any ef ects of that late reporting upon respondent."198 The result might have be n dif erent if the civ l penalties could be "viewed as a sort of compensation or edres to" the plaintif , but he fact hat he penalties would go to the Treasury sug ested that he plaintif instead sought "not remediation of its own injury. . but vindication of the rule of law."19 formational standing: a plaintif must show not only that here has be n a deprivation of information, but also that he plaintif stands to gain something from a decre in its favor. To be sure, it is reasonable to doubt he Court's decis on, which was, on the consti utional is ue, quite cavalier.20 As a mat er of irst principles, or as a mat er of consti utional text and history, why is Congres prohib ted from concluding that cit zens who have suf ered an injury should be al owed to require violators of the law to pay ap ropriate penalties to the government? The history sug est a far broader Ste l Co. is important because it sug est a signif cant obstacle to in195 1 8 S. Ct. 10 3 (19 8). 198 Id. 19 Id. 
20 Se id. at 1027-30 (Stevens, J., concur ing) (noting the Court's ubstantial departure from its previous treatment of case without redres abil ty). The outcome in Ste l Co. was presaged by an intriguing court of apunderstanding of legislative power.201 Nonethel s , Ste l Co. is consi tent with the thrust of the Court's rec nt redres abil ty holdings. It hus ug est that a plaintif se king information must show that if the suit is uc es ful, the plaintif wil rec ive something for its trouble. If the plaintif would receive the information, there is no problem. There is also probably no problem if the plaintif would rec ive compensation or a bounty. If, however, the plaintif stands to gain nothing else, standing wil be denied. peals case rais ng a similar problem of informational standing in a quite different set ing. In Com on Cause v. FEC, the court of ap eals rej cted a claim of standing on behalf of the plaintif , a wel -known organization interested in campaign finance is ues.202 Com on Cause al eged that in the 198 Senate lection in Montana, the Montana Republican Party and the National Republican Senatorial Com it e had violated federal campaign el ction law by making exces ive contributions and expenditures and by fail ng to ac urately report hes contributions. The lat er claim sug ested an interest in obtain g information. In denying standing, the court said that the mere fact of deprivation of knowledge as to whether there had be n a violation of the law could not, by itself, create standing; this, ac ording to the court, would be quivalent "to recogniz ng a justic able interest in the enforcement of the law."203 But if Com on Cause was "as erting an interest in knowing how much money a candi ate spent in an el ction," then it would have standing to protect hat "legal y cognizable injury in fact."204 (This point is very much in line with the conclusion in Akins.) of monetary penalties, rather than disclosure itself. Thus, a central problem for standing was that he monetary penalties would not benefit Com on Cause at al . Concur ing, Judge Sentel e stres ed this point and its con ection to the problem of redres abil ty. In his view, the imposit on of monetary penalties would only speculatively produce future compliance with the law-penalties themselves would not redres any injury.205 But Judge Sen201 Se Sunstein, supra note 137, at 173-74 (discus ing the sug estion of a historical survey that "the public action-an action brought by a private person primarily to vindicate the public enforcement of public obligations-has long be n a feature of our English and American law" (cita ion and internal quota ions omit ed) . 204 Id. 
205 Se id. at 419 (Sentel e, J., concur ing) ("If the injury al eged were the cognizable deprivation of information upheld in Akins, admin strative discipline of the al eged wrongdoers would not remedy that injury.") We may thus draw several conclusions. There is no problem with retel e also acknowledged that he "redres abil ty requirement can be satisfied by requesting that he wrongful y with eld information be disclosed."206 dres abil ty if the plaintif se ks to btain information, compensation for information with eld, or (though this is les clear) a bounty for information with eld. But a problem of redres abil ty wil arise if Congres grants cit zens tanding to se k declar tory judgments, at orney's fe s, or penalties to be paid to the Treasury for information with eld. If Congres wants to allow standing in case like Ste l Co. and Com on Cause, then it should amend the rel vant sta utes to provide a financial benefit not only to the Treasury, but also to the plaintif s, in the form, perhaps, of ixed or scheduled compensation for information with eld, and also (or instead) a smal bounty for the trouble of bringing suit. This would be asy to do. Although the question is not entirely set led, a sta ute of this kind probably would,207 and certainly should,208 be upheld. granted standing to the plaintif s. But many informational standing case involve the APA, and therefore involve ambiguity about he is ue of standing. The APA grants tanding to any "person suf ering legal wrong because of agency action, or adversely af ected or ag rieved by agency action within the meani g of a rel vant sta ute."209 What does this provis on mean in the context of a request for information? Here there is a question of sta utory interpreta ion; and recal that he Akins Court sug ested that here remains a prudential bar ier to "generalized grievance[s]."210 Thus there is a further question about how prudential bar iers are to be understo d when people se k to btain information from government or private persons. series of case in the D.C Circuit Court of Ap eals. The basic sug estion in thes case is that if the governi g sta ute is ambiguous, then standing wil be denied in informational case where the plaintif is one of a very large group of people. The denial is based on prudential rather than Article 
C. Generalized Grievances Within the Zone? 206 Id. at 420 (Sentel e, J., concur ing). 207 Se supra note 194 (provid ng sta utory and case sup ort for such a bounty system). 
208 Se Sunstein, supra note 137, at 173-79, 232 (discus ing the historical sup ort for, and the substantial merits of, a bounty system). 
209 5 U.S.C. ? 702 (1994). 210 Federal Election Comm'n v. Akins, 118 S. Ct. 1777, 1785 (1998). cho se . The question is whether, and to what extent, this line of argument makes ense in general or after Akins in particular. To answer this question it is nec s ary to investigate the case in some detail. 
principal y involve informational standing. In Hait an Refuge Center v. 
Gracey, the plaintif organization claimed that it had an interest in counseling and repres nting Hait ans who had be n interdicted from entering the United Sta es.21 The court concluded that his interest was not within the zone of rights created by the rel vant laws, and therefore, that he plaintif lacked standing to protect he rel vant rights.212 This conclusion ap lied to the plaintif s particular claim that it should have be n al owed to rec ive pertinent information from the interdicted Hait ans: 
If any person or organization interested in promoting knowledge, enjoyment, and protection of the rights created by a sta ute or by a consti utional provis on has an interest hat fal s within the zone protected or egulated by the sta ute or consti utional provis on, then the zone-of-interest est is not a test because it excludes nothing.213 The court insi ted in particular that he zone of interest test should be 
In the first case using this kind of reasoni g to deny informational read in the light of the ban on standing based on a "generalized grievance";214 if a plaintif claiming to be within the zone was a member of a large clas , then standing should be denied. This was of course not a "pure" information case, since it di not involve a sta ute that required isclosure of information. But it has turned out o be quite important in such case . standing, the D.C Circuit Court of Ap eals refused to al ow the Haz rdous Waste Treatment Council to as ert an unambiguous informational injury.215 The Council sought o sue on the ground that regulated third parties were exempted from certain sta utory reporting requirements under a haz rdous waste sta ute.216 The Council claimed that he xemption would make it harder for the Council to advance its "educational and promotional activ ties."217 In denying standing, the court di not deny that here was an injury in fact. Instead it said that he Council's goals di not fal within the rel 212 Se id. at 813-16 (examin g the zone of interest that is created by the rel vant laws). 21 809 F.2d 794 (D.C Cir. 1987). 
214 Id. (cit ng Schlesinger v. Res rvist Com . to Stop the War, 418 U.S 208 (1974), and United Sta es v. Richardson, 418 U.S 16 (1974) . (holding that a plaintif can ot at ain standing for a generalized grievance simply by forming an organization that has as its goal furtherance of the interest at he heart of the grievance). 217 Id. at 286-87. 
215 See Hazardous Waste Treatment Council v. EPA, 861 F.2d 277, 287 (D.C. Cir. 1988) vant sta ute's zone of interest , beyond a "general coincidence of goals."218 In so concluding, the court implied that it would read the prudential bar ier in light of the ad it onal prudential bar ier that operated against generalized grievances.219 Thus the court sug ested that he two prudential bar iers would have a kind of synergy, preventing members of large clas es from claiming information unles there was a clear indication that Congres intended them to be able to do so. 
Espy.2 0 In that case, the Animal Legal Defense Fund and the Humane Society of the United Sta es chal enged the government's relatively nar ow defin tion of "animal" for purpose of the Animal Welfare Act.2 1 More specif cal y, they complained that "the xclusion of birds, rats, and mice from the defin tion of 'animal' [would] hamper[] their at empts to gather and is eminate information on laboratory condit ons for those animals."2 2 A broader defin tion would require laboratories to provide more information about heir treatment of animals to the government, which would mean that such information would be included in an an ual report o Congres . The rel vant organizations contended that hey would use this report in "public education and rulemaking proce dings."2 3 In ad it on, the nar ow defin tion of "animal" would make it harder for the organizations to educate the laboratories about "the humane treatments of birds, rats, and mice."2 4 The Animal Legal Defense Fund thus urged that it had standing to ensure that the information was disclosed, especial y because the information would be central to its activ ties. fal within the zone of interest of the sta ute under which suit is brought."2 5 The key point was that he Animal Legal Defense Fund was not at empting to promote its members' own legal rights, but "simply to educate al those who desire to promote the sta ute's ubstantive pur 
The court concluded that "informational injury, without more, does not 218 Id. at 287. 
219 Se id. (arguing that if any organization could secure standing by showing a general coincidence of goals with a sta ute, anyone could secure standing to chal enge any action taken by the agency implementing that sta ute). 
F.3d 426 (D.C Cir. 19 8) (finding standing for someone claiming an aesthetic interest in observing animals). 
2 4 Id. 225 Id. at 502. 220 23 F.3d 496 (D.C. Cir. 1994); cf Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 pose ."2 6 To have informational standing under the zone of interest test, an organization must show far more than a "general corporate purpose to promote the interest to which the sta ute is ad res ed . [I]t must show a congres ional intent o benefit he organization or some indication that he organization is 'a peculiarly suitable chal enger of admin strative neglect.'"2 7 Here, an unusual provis on of the sta ute itself prohib ted any such showing. The Animal Welfare Act creates an oversight com it e consi ting of private cit zens designed to ensure compliance with the Act.2 8 In the court's view, "on the face of the Act he organizations are not he intended repres nta ives of the public interest in animal welfare."2 9 an important case in which organizations were held to have fulfil ed the prudential requirements for informational standing. In Action Al iance of Senior Cit zens v. Heckler,230 the court permit ed a senior cit zens' group to chal enge regulations that restricted the flow of reports from third parties involving compliance with the Age Discrimination Act. The Action Al iance contended that hes regulations would interfere with its basic mis ion. 
The court agre d, noting that he regulations would make it harder for the plaintif organization to help elderly people now and to protect heir legal interest in the future.231 In the court's view, this injury was wel within the sta ute's zone of interest . The distinction betwe n Action Al iance of Senior Cit zens and Espy is thin. The best argument would stres the xistence of a special private insti ution designed to ensure compliance with the Animal Welfare Act, but it is far from clear that his is a convincing distinc 
tion.232 Cir. 198 ) . 
To what extent must an organization se king information con ect its interest o the substantive purpose of the sta ute? This question was not 2 6 Id. 227 Id. (quoting Hazardous Waste Treatment Council v. EPA, 861 F.2d 277, 283 (D.C. 228 See 7 U.S.C. ? 2143 (1994) (discussing the "standards and certification process for 229 Espy, 23 F.3d at 503. 
230 789 F.2d 931 (D.C. Cir. 1986), vacated on other grounds, 494 U.S. 1001 (1990). humane handling, care, treatment, and transporta ion of animals"). 
231 Se id. at 937-38 (identifying ad ed expense and if iculty as the likely results of the 232 Se infra text fol owing note 24 (arguing that Congres 's creation of a cit zen review restrictions on information). board in conjunction with the Animal Welfare Act does not adequately explain the preclusion of suit by the Animal Legal Defense Fund); se also Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. 
Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 4 5 (D.C Cir. 19 8) (noting that he Animal Welfare Act di not establish private cit zen com it e s to verse animal exhib tions, but "antic pated the continued monitoring of concerned animal overs to ensure that he purpose of the Act were honored"). pres ed in the case just discus ed, al of which involved a close con ection betwe n the plaintif 's interest and the sta ute's basic oncerns. In the leading case, Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute v. National Highway Traf ic Safety Admin stration,23 two rganizations, the Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute and Consumer Alert, brought suit o chal enge the National Highway Traf ic Safety Admin stration's ("NHTSA") decis ons that lowered the min mum Corporate Average Fuel Economy ("CAFE") standards for passenger cars. Both organizations complained of NHTSA's failure to produce an EIS discus ing the adverse safety ef ects of the CAFE standards. They argued that he absence of such a sta ement made it harder for them to btain and is eminate information that was central to their organizational activ ties. In the abstract, their complaint had a high degre of plausib lity insofar as fuel economy standards may have adverse safety ef ects-a point that, it is reasonable to think, des rves public at ention when an agency is decid ng how much to require in the way of uel economy.234 for federal jurisdiction when the information is "es ential to the injured organization's activ ties" and when "the lack of the information wil render those activ ties infeasible."235 To me t his tandard, the organization "must as ert a plausible link betwe n the agency's action, the informational injury, plaintif organizations di not have standing under this test o contest he agency's failure to provide an EIS. This was because there was no showing of "how the lack of that as es ment from NHTSA ha[d] signif cantly harmed their abil ty to educate and inform the public about highway safety."237 The court acknowledged that, under previous case ,238 NEPA had be n held to have created a right o information about he nvironmental ef ects of government action, and that a denial of that information "consti 
233 901 F.2d 107 (D.C. Cir. 1990). 234 Se John D. Graham, Saving Gasoline and Lives, in RISK VERSUS RISK: TRADEOF S IN PROTECTING HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT 87, 98-102 (John D. Graham & Jonathan Baert Wiener eds., 19 5) (discus ing the important role of the Insurance Insti ute for Highway Safety in bringing the safety risks as ociated with stricter CAFE standards into the public policy debate). 
235 Competitive Enter. Inst., 901 F.2d at 12 . 236 Id. 
238 Se National Wildlife Fed'n v. Hodel, 839 F.2d 694, 712 (D.C. Cir. 198 ) (finding that the "elimination of the op ortunity to se and use an EIS prepared under federal aw does consti ute a consti utional y suf ic ent injury on which to ground standing"), rev'd on other With respect o the ap lication of prudential requirements to informatutes a consti utional y cognizable injury, without further inquiry into causation or edres abil ty."239 In such case , however, it would be nec s ary to show that he information sought involved a specif cal y environmental harm; "there is a crit cal dif erence betwe n se king an EIS for the purpose of dis eminating information about potential environmental harm and se king an EIS as a vehicle for obtain g or dis eminating information on a nonenvironmental is ue."240 The court emphasized that he plaintif s, who di not invoke nvironmental concerns, were not within NEPA's zone of interest , which involved strictly environmental consequences of government action.24 tional actions, the lower court rulings thus reflect considerable complexity. 
But hre proposit ons e m to underlie the rulings, and we can organize the law in the fol owing way. First: An organization may sue to btain information when that information is important o protect its members' (noni formational) sta utory legal rights, at least if the injury is not widely generalized. This premise is the basic point of Action Al iance of Senior Cit zens. 
Second: When an organization se ks information and when its interest are very widely shared, the courts wil deny standing on prudential grounds, apparently even if the information is important o the organization's mis ion. 
Third: Under NEPA (designed to safeguard environmental goals) and other sta utes designed to protect interest that are not purely informational, an organization can bring suit o require an EIS or otherwise to btain information es ential to its activ ties if the reason for bringing suit is to protect interest that are specif cal y environmental or otherwise in line with the sta ute's ubstantive goals. This third proposit on, however, is ubject o qualif cation from the second. With suitable amendments, thes propositions ap ear to ap ly to indiv duals as wel . conclusions-Akins ug est only (what he lower court case do not deny) that Congres can grant purely informational standing if it cho se . If the lower court case remain go d law, then most of the doctrinal work in challenging at empts to bring suit for information wil be prudential. Courts wil ask (1) whether the plaintif fal s within the sta ute's zone of interest ; (2) 239 Competi ve Enter. Inst., 901 F.2d at 123. 240 Id. 
241 Se id. (stres ing that standing under NEPA has only be n granted when the plaintif s' interest relate to environmental interest protected by NEPA). For those who believe, as Akins itself sug est , that he key standing is 
Consider, for example, the Animal Welfare Act. If an ordinary cit zen from age discrimination). It is rel vant in this regard whether the zone of interest test is general y meant o be strict or lenient; the Court's most recent pronouncement in National Credit Union Admin stration v. First National Bank & Trust Co.,242 sug est great leniency, in line with the basic thrust of other Supreme Court decis ons.243 sue is whether Congres has authorized the suit, the problem in al of thes case is imple to pose: Is this the kind of plaintif whose interest are safeguarded by the legal provis on at is ue? If this is the proper question, then perhaps tanding should have be n al owed in al of the case above, with the xception of Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute, in which the plaintif s' complaint lay far outside the domain of sta utory concerns. Thus, there is reason to think that some or many of the lower court case should not survi e Akins. concerned with animal welfare sought o require the regulations at is ue in Espy, a response might be that he ordinary cit zen should not be al owed to sue unles she can show a distinctive personal or profes ional interest in the protection of animals or in the use of the rel vant information; otherwise, the case would se m to involve an interest in law enforcement for its own sake. Espy itself, however, was quite dif erent. The Animal Legal Defense Fund had a special and particularized interest in the rel vant information and in dis eminating it, as a way of protecting the legal rights protected by the Animal Welfare Act. Thus, the Animal Legal Defense Fund was wel within the sta ute's zone of interest and had no widely generalized injury. 
Congres implic tly precluded the suit by creating a cit zen review board. 
This would sug est hat he outcome was a nar ow one, based on the distinctive structure of the Animal Welfare Act. Perhaps one could argue not 242 118 S. Ct. 927, 938 (1998) (finding that the "interest [of competing financial instituSee Clarke v. Securities Indus. Ass'n, 479 U.S. 388, 396 (1987) (finding that the trade tions] in limiting the markets that [federal] credit unions can serve" is within the statute's zone of interests); see also Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 444 (D.C. Cir. 1998) (stating that "the zone of interests test is generous and relatively undemanding"). administrative action"). But see Air Courier Conf. v. American Postal Workers Union, 498 U.S. 517, 517-18 (1991) (arguing that the union's interests were outside the zone of interests because the monopoly statute's purpose was to give an economic advantage to the Postal Service and not to protect postal jobs, and, therefore, holding that postal workers have no standing to chal enge the Service's decision to al ow competition in international remailing services despite its tatutory monopoly). that here was a prudential bar ier to standing, but instead, that Congres implic tly had prohib ted the suit. Such an argument is analogous to the reasoni g of Block v. Com unity Nutrit on Insti ute, in which the Court denied standing on similar grounds.24 If the creation of the review board id in fact repres nt a decis on not o al ow private supervis on in the form of suits by people within the zone of interest , a denial of standing would be perfectly ap ropriate. As a mat er of sta utory interpreta ion, however, this argument is fragile. Why should we view the review board and the courtro m as competing rather than complementary? Since the plaintif s had a distinctive organizational interest in the rel vant information, standing should have be n granted. 
under NEPA. Note first hat in the ordinary NEPA case, the plaintif se ks not information but a delay in the completion of a project until an EIS is produced; hence, the plaintif must show, as a mat er of interpreta ion of NEPA, that he has a distinctive stake, usual y environmental, in the action.245 For example, a cit zen of Wyoming who complains about he failure to compile an EIS about a development in New York must show that he development would in some way af ect his aesthetic, recreational, or material interest . This cit zen should ordinarily be denied standing because no interest protected by NEPA sup orts his action. But a question remains. EIS to protect his environmental interest in New York, but hat he sought an EIS in order to rec ive information about important is ues bearing on his duties and activ ties as a voter? The mere fact hat he rel vant EIS would produce information of personal or profes ional interest is not enough-not, it must be ad ed, as a mat er of 
The best answer is that he cit zen of Wyoming could not so contend. 
24 467 U.S 340, 348 (1984) (holding that consumers may not obtain judic al review of milk market orders under the Agricultural Marketing Agre ment Act because the Act does not contemplate such suits). standing because it failed to show "indiv dualized harm to itself or its members"). Ac ording to this view, the holding in Sier a Club is largely an interpreta ion of NEPA. There is no injury in fact because NEPA created no legal interest! If this formulation se ms od , consider its imilarity to the analysi in Akins. Akins had an injury in fact because he had a legal interest. Extending this analysi , Sier a Club is very similar to United Sta es v. Richardson, 418 U.S 16 (1974), in which the Court held that he taxpayer di not have standing because he failed to show an injury or im ediate danger of legal y cognizable injury. In both case , standing was denied because the rel vant provis on of law di not create indiv dual rights. 
245 See Sierra Club v. Morton, 405 U.S. 727 (1972) (holding that the petitioner lacked enacting NEPA.246 It is here that he zone of interest test and the prudential bar ier to generalized grievances me t-not as inferences from Article I or even the APA, but as a somewhat crude and indirect way of get ing at he key question, which relates to the text and purpose of the sta ute pursuant to which the plaintif in tiates uit. Thus, the ap ropriate conclusion is that when a court denies tanding to a plaintif on the ground that its interest is both highly generalized and not within the zone of sta utory interest , it is real y saying that he underlying sta ute is best read not o al ow suits by plaintif s of that sort. As we have se n, this is the best defense of the "injury in fact" and "redres abil ty" standards as wel . And the best defense of the lower court case denying standing on this rationale is that when the injury is highly generalized, there should be a presumption against standing on the ground that such injuries are best redres ed polit cal y. Congres can overcome that presumption if it cho se to do so. 
With thes basic onclusions, we can as es a series of stylized case , 1A. A group of workers in a plant in Detroit brings uit against he drawing on the discus ion thus far. plant for fail ng to disclose workplace risks. They se k ful information about hose risks, as is required (in their view) by the governi g law. This is an easy case. Standing should be granted, even in the absence of an explic t sta ute authoriz ng standing. The plaintif s have shown both injury (nondisclosure of information undoubtedly rel vant o them) and redres abil ty, and no problem exist under the prudential requirements. 
1B. Cereal consumers bring suit against General Cereal for false and incomplet sta ements involving the nutrit onal content of o d. They se k ful disclosure and compensatory damages. Standing should be granted, even in the absence of an explic t sta ute. The case is lightly harder, but basical y the same as case 1A. The strongest argument against standing is 
246 If Congres al owed anyone to bring suit o require compliance with NEPA-not because of any specif cal y environmental interest but because of a general interest in the information at stake-there would probably be no Article I is ue. The strongest op osing argument would be that it is nec s ary to have a distinctly environmental interest in the backdrop, as in a case in which people located near a proposed causeway chal enge the failure to prepare an EIS. As NEPA now stands, an environmental interest is inde d a requirement, and this view is best justif ed as a reading of NEPA itself, perhaps informed by prudential considerations. 
1C. Tel vis on viewers bring suit against he American Broadcasting eralized, trig ering a prudential bar ier against standing. But since the plaintif s are unambiguously within the rel vant zone of interest , and since the dif erence from case 1A is only one of degre , standing is available under Akins. The clas of plaintif s is not so extremely large as to trig er any prudential bar iers. 
Company ("ABC"), complain g that ABC has failed to rate its programs adequately and thus failed to comply with the Tel com unications Act of 19 6. As in example 1B, the strongest argument against standing is that he on prudential grounds. If the plaintif s consi t of tel vis on viewers as such-which is to say the vast majority of Americans- tanding should probably be denied for that reason. The case would be dif erent if brought by parents of scho l age children, a more limited group whose members fal squarely within the zone of interest protected by the Tel com unications Act. The case would also be dif erent if the plaintif was an organization particularly interested in the content of tel vis on program ing; in that case, it would closely res mble 1B, and standing should be granted. 
OSHA that firms in Il inois have not be n required to disclose workplace risks. In the face of OSHA inaction, the cit zens in New York and Connecticut bring suit, contending that he information would help them in their capacity as cit zens; if they learn about workplace risks, then they wil know more about how to vote and about what polit cal activ ties would be most worthwhile. Standing should be denied. The plaintif s do not fal within the zone of interest protected by the Oc upational Safety and Health Act. 
2B. Cit zens for Safe Workplaces ("CSW"), a Washington, DC organization, brings uit against OSHA, contending that it has failed to require disclosure of workplace risks in Detroit. CSW has no members in Detroit, but its members include many people interested in promoting workplace safety and workers in various ta es. CSW se ks disclosure of the information on the ground that CSW could use that information in its various educational and polit cal activ ties. This is a hard standing case. The best argument against CSW is that CSW does not include Detroit workers and therefore is not within the zone of interest protected by the sta ute, a conclusion that could be fortif ed by invoking the prudential bar ier to generalized grievances. Because CSW would use the information in activ ties directly related to workplace safety, however, it stands out from the public at organilarge, and CSW should be permit ed to bring suit. This conclusion is consi tent with the analysi of NEPA in Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute.247 zation based in California, at acks the adequacy of an EIS produced in connection with a nuclear power plant o be built in Mas achuset s. The organization contends that an adequate sta ement would be xtremely helpful in its polit cal and educational activ ties. This is also a hard standing case, is highly generalized and that only those in Mas achuset s, with environmental interest at stake, should be permit ed to bring suit. Probably the bet er conclusion, however, is that informational standing should be granted on the theory that he plaintif s are wel within the zone of interest protected by NEPA; Competi ve Enterprise Insti ute sup orts this conclusion.248 failure to provide adequate information about its performance in con ection with the Safe Water Drinking Amendments of 19 6.249 They se k the rel vant information, which they contend is rel vant o their behavior as consumers of water in the local area. This is an easy standing case; it is akin to case 1A above. 
5A. A reporter for The Washington Post brings uit against he Department of Health and Human Services, complain g that his work has be n hindered by the government's unlawful failure to require disclosure of certain practices under the Medicaid sta ute. The plaintif contends that he rel vant information would be xtremely valuable in his profes ional activ ties. Standing should probably be denied on the ground that reporters are not within the zone of interest protected by the Medicaid sta ute. people, brings the same suit as in 5A, contending that it ne ds the informa5B. The Gray Panthers, a group dedicated to the welfare of elderly 247 Se 901 F.2d 107, 12 -24 (noting that, even under the more liberal standing requirements used in NEPA-related case , a "right o specif c information under NEPA has o far be n recognized for standing purpose only when the information sought relates to environmental interest that NEPA was intended to protect"). to an interest within the zone of interest protected by [NEPA]"). tle XIV of the Public Health Service Act, regulating drinking water). 
248 Se id. at 12 (sta ing that standing is granted to those who have suf ered "[an] injury 249 42 U.S.C. ? 30 j-21 (19 4 & Sup . I 19 6) (outlining ad itional requirements to Tition in order to perform its various public interest activ ties and in order to promote the wel -being of its members. Standing should be granted because members who are unambiguously within the zone of interest protected by the sta ute. 
5C. A daughter of an elderly woman rec iv ng Medicaid brings the same suit as in 5A, contending that she would like to se the rel vant information in order to ensure that her mother is being treated in ac ordance with those of a benefic ary of the Medicaid program, and the child of a benefic ary has a distinct and not merely ideol gical interest in the problem. On the 5B) and a large number of people might reasonably claim that hey are interested, financial y or otherwise, in the legality of the government's behavior under the Medicaid sta ute. Clearly, Congres could grant standing in this case if it chose to do so, but if there is no expres grant, then standing should probably be denied on the ground that he case is omewhat closer to 5A than to 5B. 
How does al this bear on standing in general? Several important points are clear. So long as there is an injury, Congres can grant standing to plaintif s even if their injuries are very widely shared. Whether there is an injury depends largely on what he law says. In ad it on, whether the case involves information or something else, there is no redres abil ty problem even if an agency, having lost on the legal question at is ue, might have discretion to do what it orig nal y di on some other ground. Thus a majority of the Court has repudiated the plurality opin on in Lujan insofar as it concluded that here would be a serious problem with redres abil ty.250 novel egal interest and to give people the power to bring suit o protect those interest in court. Congres might, for example, give veryone an interest in information of a certain sort (as it di in both FOIA and FECA, and might do in other contexts as wel ); Akins plainly says that his is consti utional. If Congres can do that, perhaps it also has a great deal of ro m to 
create novel interest that do not involve information. Perhaps Congres could give al cit zens a property interest in the continued existence of ena property interest in clear skies above the Grand Canyon, a property interest hat exist regardles of whether the cit zens in question actual y vis t he Grand Canyon?251 
would be unconsti utional because those who do not vis t he Grand Canyon lack an "injury in fact."252 The same might be said about he hypothesized Congres says that hey have an injury in fact, why should courts disagre ? Note that "existence value" is often treated as a kind of property interest for purpose of environmental valuation;253 it is now conventional in contingent valuation studies to consider the amount hat people are wil ing to pay in order to maintain a certain sta e of af airs. This very practice treats the continued existence of that sta e of af airs as a kind of property interest. Why can't Congres do the same thing? In any case, a property interest often is a cause of action in a certain sta e of af airs and grants that cause of action to al Americans, there ap ears to be no consti utional bar ier, especial y after the Akins Court's unambiguous holding that he obstacle to generalized grievances is merely prudential. to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that wil give rise to a case or controversy where none xisted before."254 Justice Ken edy joined the Lujan opin on only because in creating cit zen standing under the En 
251 People are often wil ing to pay a go d eal for the "existence" of certain environmental amenit es, and that existence value often plays a role in contingent valuation studies. 
252 Cf Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560 ("[T]he plaintiff must have suffered an 'injury in ment). "option value"). 464 (D.C Cir. 1989) (upholding contingent valuation that al ows use of "existence value" and 254 Lujan, 504 U.S at 580. 253 Se supra note 251; se also Ohio v. United States Dep't of the Interior, 8 0 F.2d 432, dangered Species Act, Congres failed to "identify the injury it se ks to vindicate and relate the injury to the clas of persons enti led to bring suit."25 about he breadth of Lujan insofar as it shows that Congres may recognize an entirely new (and highly generalized) legal interest, one foreign to the court. After Akins, whether a deprivation of information counts as an injury (in fact!) depends on whether it is (al eged to be) against he law. And after least o the xtent hat Congres says this does not mat er. est ? Why, for example, is Congres not permit ed to give standing to al drivers to chal enge acts that increase the risk of ac idents on highways;256 or to give standing to parents of children in scho ls undergoing des gregation plans to al ow them to chal enge the grant of tax deductions to segregated scho ls;257 or to give standing to automobile purchasers and environmental organizations to ensure that he EPA enforces ta utory requirements for fuel economy standards?258 The best answer is that Congres is inde d permit ed to do thes things.259 To the xtent hat similar case have come out unfavorably to plaintif s, it is because the governi g sta utes, interpret d in the light of rel vant prudential requirements, reflect no ef ort by Congres to do so. Akins would not have had standing if Congres had enied him would probably not have had standing if FECA had merely incorporated the APA's tanding provis on. Denials of standing in case involving novel interest foreign to the xisting legal culture are therefore best understo d as interpreta ions of the underlying sta ute. Congres 's chal enge for the future-if it genuinely se ks to grant standing-is to think of imaginative (holding that he union had standing to chal enge the Memorandum of Understanding betwe n the United Sta es and Mexico regarding recognit on of oreign com ercial drivers' license ). the IRS's failure to fulfil its obligation to deny tax exempt sta us on racial y segregated scho ls failed to demonstrate a judic al y cognizable injury). 
258 Se supra note 140 and ac ompanying text. 19 8) (recogniz ng an aesthetic interest in observing animals). 
25 Id. 256 See International Bd. of Teamsters v. Pefia, 17 F.3d 1478, 1483-87 (D.C. Cir. 1994) 257 See Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S. 737, 753 (1984) (holding that parents seeking relief for 259 See Animal Legal Defense Fund, Inc. v. Glickman, 154 F.3d 426, 445 (D.C. Cir. ways to create legal interest in the rights it intends to protect.260 With this 
Typical y information, once provided to ne or a few, is also provided are, and should be, granted standing to btain information; and to understand how al thes points bear on the general aw of standing. We have market and com and-and-control solutions by using information disclosure as a regulatory to l. Sometimes informational strategies at empt o improve the ordinary operations of markets by ensuring that workers and consumers are adequately informed. Init atives involving tobac o products, the nutri 
Sometimes information is required as part of moral suasion and in order to trig er polit cal safeguards. EPCRA and FECA are the chief examples here. to many or al ; and very frequently information is required as a way of protecting against a widely shared injury. In the polit cal context, the injury from nondisclosure may be suf ered by a large number of cit zens. After Congres has concluded that it ought not be. Nothing in the Consti ution forbids Congres from authoriz ng roups of cit zens to bring suit o btain information that hey believe is rel vant o their interest . Nor does anything in the Consti ution forbid Congres from granting cit zens a legal right to information and al owing them to vindicate that right in court. This holding-a crucial part of Akins-is a vindication of Justice Ken edy's highly sug estive concur ing opin on in Lujan, al owing Congres to create injuries quite foreign to the com on law. self, the injury-a lack of information-would have be n redres ed by a fa 
Things are more complicated with respect o redres abil ty. In Akins it260 Examples are briefly given above involving endangered species and vis bil ty. More particularly, Congres might say, for example, that Americans have a shared property interest in the continued existence of endangered species, an interest hat is violated whenever the federal government acts unlawful y under the Endangered Species Act, 16 U.S C. ? 1531-34 strengthened by reference to the role of "existence value" in ordinary case of environmental valuation. I do not sug est hat Congres should o this as a mat er of policy; the answer to that question depends on context. vorable decre . The information itself ne d not have be n linked to any independent interest. Nor was it important hat he FEC might ultimately not be tied to a nonspeculative outcome. It fol ows that courts hould be careful and self-conscious about char cteriz ng the injury of which the explic t confronta ion, on the Court's part, with that important question. 
What about he prudential imita ions? When Congres has not explicitly granted standing to those who se k information, it is important o know there is no dif icult question about whether the plaintif s fal within the zone of interest protected by the sta ute. It is pos ible, however, to imagine case in which those who se k information are at empting to vindicate interest , economic or ideol gical, that have lit le to do with the sta ute's ubstantive goals. In such case , the prudential imits on standing are properly invoked Furthermore, if the plaintif is a member of a large group, or is hard to distinguish from other cit zens general y, the argument for invoking prudential bar iers is trengthened. We have xamined a range of pos ible case to se how this analysi might work. The simplest point is that if an injury is very widely shared, then there is reason to deny standing if the case is, with respect o the zone of interest test, otherwise in equipoise. eral cel bration. It is the first case in a long while to place the law of standing on a solid foundation-an understanding of the particular sta utory and consti utional provis ons that are said to give rise to a legal y cognizable injury. But here is a more particular point, involving the relationship of information to regulatory law. In the same period in which the American economy increasingly has become based on the production and exchange of information, American government has increasingly at empted to control public and private conduct-not via com and-and-control regulation, but by requir ng disclosure of information. And in the same period in which informational regulation has become a hal mark of American government, informational standing has increasingly emerged as a central problem in admin strative law. There is nothing consti utional y problematic about a congres ional judgment hat a deprivation of information counts as legal y cognizable injury. The question is whether Congres has made that judgment. In the area of informational standing, as in the law of standing enerand boundaries, of modem regulatory government. 
This UTC 
