 In the last few years, a number of law professors have been involved in some highly public issues, not least through the circulation of letters with multiple signatories, expressing a view on some issue of national importance. It is not clear that there is anything like a trend in this direction; certainly teachers of law have participated in what some would consider "partisan politics" for many decades. But Neal Devins is right to raise questions about the legitimacy and conse2 quences of political involvement by academics. It is also interesting to consider the relationship between such involvement and academic freedom; if law professors are not concerned with the pursuit of truth, the case for academic freedom is certainly weakened. The Clinton impeachment provides the immediate motivation for Devins's discussion. I offer a few remarks here on academic involvement in the impeachment debate, with a few references to my own experience,3 and t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor ofJurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. Professor Sunstein testified on the constitutional issues relating to the impeachment of President Clinton, see Testimony Before the United States House of Representatives, Comm. on the Judiciay, Subcomm. on the Constitution (Nov. 9, 1998) (statement of Cass R. Sunstein, Professor of Law), available in LEXIS, News Library, Transcripts File. I am grateful to Martha Nussbaum and Richard Posner for valuable comments on an earlier draft, and to Brooke May for research assistance. See Neal Devins, Bearing False Witness: The Clinton Impeachment and the Future of Academic Freedom, 148 U. PA. L. REV. 165, 166 (1999) (arguing that "when a significant number of law professors and historians hold themselves out as experts when they are not... allacademics pay a price"). dislike this sort of thing are encouraged to skip the footnotes. with an eye toward drawing some general lessons about professors and politics, including presidential politics. With respect to the President, the United States has now had three serious impeachment inquiries in its entire history. As the nation began discussion of the impeachment of President Clinton in 1998, many constitutional law professors concluded that no legitimate grounds for impeachment had been identified. On their view, the House of Representatives had started to embark on a constitutionally impermissible path, one with potentially significant consequences. This seemed unfortunate not merely because of the potential removal of the President, and hardly because of the nature of President Clinton's particular policies, but because of the constitutional illegitimacy and potentially destabilizing effect of resort to the impeachment mechanism. 4 For a discussion of the Impeachment Clause, see Cass R. Sunstein, Impeaching the President, 147 U. PA. L. REv. 279, 280-92 (1998). Devins is wrong to say that "scholars who argued against the appropriateness of originalism at the Bork hearings made use of originalism (and little else) in arguing against the Clinton impeachment." Devins, supra note 2, at note 24. Professor Tribe's argument, for example, was largely textual, see Defining "High Crimes and Misdemeanors": Basic Principles (visited Oct. 24, 1999) <http://www.house.gov/judiciary/22398.htn> (advocating that defining impeachment properly "means taking seriously exactly what the Constitution says"), and while I did not argue against the appropriateness of originalism at the Bork hearings, my argument was typical in stressing a range of interpretive theories. SeeSunstein, supra. Many of those who signed or circulated these letters accepted (as I do) all or most of Devins's general views about the need to separate professional opinion from partisan politics. To say the least, most of those of us who were involved in all this really do not enjoy participat It is a considerable overstatement for Devins to say that "members of Congress were actively involved" in any academic anti-impeachment letter. Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 66. Certainly the remarks did not lead to the letters. But I agree with Devins about the general importance of a degree of independence on the part of academics involved in these matters. Those of us who agreed with the White House on the inappropriateness of impeachment made very clear-especially in several informal discussions with lawyers there involving the constitutional standard for impeachment-thatwe were not working "with" or "for" the White House in anyway. The undersigned professors and teachers of constitutional law* have diverse political convictions and disagree on many political and legal issues; but we agree that the possible grounds for impeachment recently identified by Kenneth Starr and David Schippers are not an appropriate basis for impeaching a President under Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution. 8 A confession: The one-sentence letter was the first such letter I have ever written and circulated, and because the process was so tedious, I hope never to have to do such a thing again. teach constitutional law probably believed that they knew enoughfrom training and from substantive conversations with colleagues-to have a reasonably informed opinion about the threshold question of whether the charges against President Clinton made out an impeachable offense. Law professors who do not teach constitutional law have informed views about many constitutional issues-for example, about whether racial segregation is generally unconstitutional, whether quotas can make for an acceptable affirmative action program, and 13 Judge Posner seems to me unfair in criticizing law professors for not publicly deploring President Clinton's conduct, which, plausibly, included perjury and obstruction ofjustice. See RICHARD POSNER, AN AFFAIR OF STATE 240-45 (1999) (lamenting that "leaders of the legal profession might have been expected to emphasize the importance of the rule of law in general and of telling the truth ... These expectations would have been disappointed"). I know that many of those who opposed impeachment on constitutional grounds believed that the relevant conduct was deplorable, and certainly many of us emphasized, publicly and privately, the seriousness of perjury and obstruction ofjustice. In any case, nearly everyone, including President Clinton's closest friends and allies, as well as members of both parties, publicly deplored his conduct, and an outpouring of statements to this effect by law professors would have been largely pointless. I A possible point in support of Devins: If a group of law professors despised a certain President, they might not go to the effort to circulate and sign a letter against impeachment, even if they believed that the grounds for impeachment were invalid. Perhaps some law professors did not sign the Clinton letters even though they agreed with them, simply because they did not like President Clinton; perhaps some law professors would not sign a similar letter on behalf of, for example, President Reagan, even if they agreed with it. I also doubt that "many legal academics see Ken Starr... as their nemesis." Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying notes 36-37. I do know that many of those (including me) who opposed Clinton's impeachment believe that Starr was a distinguished judge and a distinguished Solicitor General and have not the slightest doubt that he is an entirely honorable person. A number of us who strongly opposed im not usually characterized as "left-liberal," and while I cannot speak officially or on behalf of the faculty, it seemed to me that at least a solid majority of the faculty, including many strong critics of President Clinton's policies, were opposed to impeachment on the ground that it would be illegitimate or inappropriate from the constitutional point of view. Indeed, my former colleague Michael McConnell, hardly a left-liberal, went so far as to write a letter to Congressman Hyde, sharply critical of President Clinton and suggesting that impeachment would not be unconstitutional-but pleading with Hyde not to support impeachment of the President in the midst of such partisan divisions. 22 Was McConnell's letter inappropriate? Unacceptably partisan? Illegitimate because (unlike the two widely distributed letters) it did not directly address a purely legal question? The impeachment of President Clinton produced, on all sides, more than enough challenges to other people's motivations.23 I am not sure why Devins does not, with respect to law professors and historians on all sides, indulge a principle of charity-suggesting that in cases of doubt, we should assume that those with whom we disagree are acting in good faith and on the basis of evidence that they honestly believe to be sufficient.24 peachment, and who were quite critical of some of the decisions of the Office of Independent Counsel, knowJudge Starr, like and respect him personally, and believe that the 9ersonal attacks on him and his motivations were absurd and baseless. There are much broader questions in the background. Devins thinks that academic participation in the Clinton impeachment is part of a larger trend and a more general problem, one that threatens academic freedom itself. Thus he writes that "[t]oday, academics seek fame through talk show appearances, op-ed pieces, and trade press books."2 Devins also says that "the traditional image of the academic has given way to 'postmodernism, multiculturalism, and political correctness,'26 and hence that "there is good reason to doubt whether academics still think of themselves as truth seekers." 7 His suggestion appears to be that the involvement of law professors in the Clinton impeachment signals a larger trend toward highly partisan, mostly leftwing activity, in which law professors do not care about truth but instead push some kind of political agenda. Devins suggests that if professors are engaging in partisan politics, academic freedom is at risk. I share many of his concerns, and I agree that the principle of academic freedom is undermined if professors do not care about truth. But there seem to me to be three problems with his claims here. Id. at text accompanying note 55. so For example: In one interview on CNN, I was required to try to stand on a stack of extremely unsteady boxes, not as a scientific experiment or medical test or cruelty of some kind, but so as to ensure a view of the Capitol building on the television screen. Most of the time, it seemed likely that I would fall off. (This interview was live.) And apparently all law professors on television are, by some firmly enforced unwritten rule, required to try to hold a small piece of equipment in one ear, so as to be able to communicate with other people on the show, including the host. (It isn't easy to hold things in your ear.) Most of the time, the small piece of equipment does not fall out; but some of the time, it does. (This is especially troublesome when you are trying to balance yourself on a stack of extremely unsteady boxes.) See Burden of Proof (CNN television broadcast, Nov. 9, 1998), available in LEXIS transcript no. 98110900V12 (discussing the meaning of "other High Crimes and Misdemeanors," perjury, and Bills of Attainder). A small media notation: The producers who invite people to appear on their shows seem to have the same style and character as that of the on-air hosts of those shows (is this an antecedentjob qualification, or does it develop over time?). Thus the most hilarious invitation came from the producer of the show Hardbal whose invitation appeared in exactly the same staccato voice as that of Chris Matthews, the host of the show: We-want-you-on-Hardball-know-about-it? will or will not deter crime, and has reasons for the belief, it is important for the public to know about this. This is an ordinary part of civic discourse, and a nation is better off with it than without it. Indeed, this kind of academic engagement is one of the things that academic freedom is designed to allow. 32 Devins, supra note 2, at text accompanying note 109 (advocating this test as a means of ensuring that academics do the necessary work before registering opinions). 33 Id. at text accompanying note 75 (internal quotations omitted). demics, and here too, I am not sure how the complaint about political Instead of complaining correctness bears on the points at hand. about what he appears to see as left-wing domination of law schools, Devins might defend a substantive position that he believes is unjustly devalued and that deserves a better hearing. I agree with Devins's concerns about skepticism with respect to truth, as do many others; 5 but as a class, law professors are hardly skeptical of the idea of truth, and I do not see why Devins believes that there the law schools, much "discomfort with truthseeking."3 6 Law professors founded their overwhelming opposition to the Clinton impeachment on a commitment to truth, not on skepticism about truth. Nor is Devins entirely clear about the distinction between "truth" and "political motivation." Suppose that someone really believes that a proposed law is unconstitutional. Suppose someone believes that some proposition about the Constitution is true. Is there any problem with writing, or signing, a letter to that effect? What makes that action inconsistent with academic freedom? It is time to conclude. Academics have a duty to pursue truth, and for most academics, most of the time, participation in partisan causes can be destructive to that endeavor. But legal academics sometimes know things that are relevant to public life, and when this is so, they are entitled, and sometimes obligated, to say what they know. They may be wrong on the merits, but that is another matter.