* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago Law School and Department of Political Science. A.B. 1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard. Ed. I am grateful to Bruce Ackerman, E. Donald Elliot, Joseph Feller, Elizabeth Garrett, John Graham, Robert Hahn, Lisa Heinzerling, Jeffrey Knight, William Pederson, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, David Strauss, Jonathan Wiener, and participants in a work in progress lunch at the University of Chicago Law School for valuable comments on a previous draft. I am also grateful to Robert Hahn for organizing two panel discussions at the Brookings-American Enterprise Institute - Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies, where I learned a great deal from the comments of my co-panelists - at the first session, Boyden Gray, Carol Browner, and Edward Warren, and at the second, Christopher DeMuth, Lisa Heinzerling, and Jonathan Wiener. Brooke May provided superb research assistance. Thanks also to Robert Gasaway and attorneys at the Environmental Protection Agency for providing valuable information. 
B. The (Early)Life ofan Idea .................................................. 342 
D. Particulatesand Ozone in Court.......................................... 347 V. EVALUATING THE NEW NONDELEGATION DOCTRINE ........... 349 A. Is This a NondelegationDoctrineatAll? ............................ 349 
Safeguards........................................................................ 349 
AdministrativeLaw ............................................................... 356 
Means) .................................................................................... 359 VI. OPTIONS, FUTURES, AND CLEAN AIR ....................................... 361 A. A Twenty-first Century EPA: Ceilings,Floors, and "BenefitsAnalysis"........................................................ 362 
Protection......................................................................... 367 

Status Quo Revisited........................................................ 370 
Minimalism ...................................................................... 372 C. Congress: Safety andIts Cost............................................... 376 CONCLUSION............................................................................................. 379 The American people are suffering from what can be called "a syndrome of paranoia and neglect" about potential dangers to their health, safety, and the environment. This leads to a paradox that is becoming increasingly recognized. Large amounts of resources are devoted to slight or speculative dangers while substantial and well-documented dangers remain unaddressed. -John Graham' The last third of the twentieth century is not too late a time for turning the rule of law and the non-delegation doctrine into effective and useful legal tools for minimizing injustice from improper discretionary power. -Kenneth Culp Davis2 
This Article deals with two linked questions. The first involves the future of the Clean Air Act.' The particular concern is how the Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") might be .encouraged, with help from reviewing courts, to issue better ambient air quality standards, and in the process to shift from some of the anachronisms of 1970s environmentalism to a more fruitful approach to environmental protection. The second question involves the role of the nondelegation doctrine in American public law, a doctrine that shows unmistakable signs of revival. I will suggest that improved performance by EPA and agencies in general, operating in tandem with a new approach to judicial review, would make it altogether unnecessary to revive the nondelegation doctrine. Indeed, the nondelegation doctrine would emerge as a crude and unhelpful response to existing problems in modern regulation, even a form of judicial usurpation. Far better responses are available. 
In issuing and revising a national ambient air quality regulation under the Clean Air Act, EPA should provide a detailed "benefits analysis." To this end, it should undertake two tasks. First,it should AND LIVES SAVED: GETrING BETrER RESULTS FROM REGULATION 183,183 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996). 
(1969). 
specify the range of benefits that it believes are likely to result from the regulation, along with a specification of the range of benefits that it believes would result from at least two reasonable alternative approaches, one stricter and one more lenient. In the process EPA should identify the residualrisk left under the competing regulatory regimes; it should also acknowledge scientific uncertainty, to the extent that uncertainty exists and requires guesswork. This proposal is an effort to strengthen the role of sound science in environmental protection. 
Second, EPA should explain why it believes that the chosen rule is preferable to the less and more stringent alternatives - why the set of benefits to be received from the selected rule justify that rule, whereas the set of benefits to be received from the less and more stringent rules do not. In the process it should explain why the residual risk left by the selected rule is acceptable, while the residual risk left by the less stringent rule is not. This proposal is an effort to strengthen the role of democratic forces in environmental protection.4 
If necessary, reviewing courts should require EPA to perform these tasks. Taken together, the two proposals should increase the level of consistency across regulations, reduce the power of wellorganized private groups, and diminish the risks associated with both insufficient and excessive environmental regulation. If EPA has undertaken the two tasks, and carried them out in a reasonable way, judicial review is at an end; courts should uphold EPA's decision. 
Ideas of this kind have potentially broad implications, extending well beyond the Clean Air Act and even EPA, to the work of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ("OSHA"), the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and the National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration as well. They would mark a key moment in the movement toward a system of environmental protection that is at once more democratic and better informed. At the same time, they would accelerate the continuing shift from 1970s environmentalism and indeed 1970s regulation in general, away from recognizing the existence of problems of safety and health and toward assessing their magnitude, in such a way as to reduce both regulatory paranoia and regulatory neglect, and to put a premium on the acquisition of information 
understanding that benefits, but not costs, may be taken into account in issuing primary standards. The question of costs is taken up later. See infra Section VI.C. 
CIRCLE: ToWARD EFFECTIVE RISK REGULATION (1993), and NEIL GUNNINGHAM & PETER GRABOSKY, SMART REGULATION: DESIGNING ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY (1998). 
If agencies undertook tasks of this kind, there would be little point to the recent resurgence of interest in the nondelegation doctrine. The sensible impulses that underlie that interest - impulses that involve accountability, deliberation, and sound policymaking - can be handled through other means, a point that casts a more general light on the proper role of the nondelegation doctrine in American public law. I suggest that the proper role of that doctrine consists in statutory construction that imposes floors and ceilings on agency action, and in a set of "nondelegation canons" that prevent agencies from acting without clear congressional authorization. Taken together, judicial requirements of this kind would constitute a form of "democracypromoting minimalism"' in the distinctive context of administrative law - and a partial step toward a better and more sophisticated approach to environmental protection. These are the basic claims that I will attempt to defend in this Article. 
B. 
The Clean Air Act may well be the most important of all environmental statutes. Its effects include a wide range of beneficial consequences for human health and well-being and high costs on the private sector. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates overall compliance costs at $0.5 trillion.7 The Act's claim to success rests on enormous improvements in ambient air quality and corresponding health benefits. EPA estimates that the Act prevents at least 45,000 deaths annually and that it also prevents a minimum of 13,000 heart attacks and 7,000 annual strokes! On a standard (though not undisputed) view, the benefits of the Act, ranging between $5.6 trillion and $49.4 trillion, far exceed its costs.9 
SUPREmE COURT (1999), on the general topic ofjudicial minimalism. 
STATES: EVALUATING THE SYSTEM 130 (1998). 
sensitive to contentions assumptions, and hence the "bottom line" numbers should be taken with many grains of salt. See RANDALL LUrrER, AN ANALYSIS OF THE USE OF THE EPA'S BENEFIT ESTIMATES IN OMB's DRAFT REPORT ON THE COSTS AND BENEFITS OF REGULATION (1998) (urging the use of plausible alternative assumptions and asserting that EPA's benefit calculations are inflated); see also Lisa Heinzerling, Regulatory Costs of Mythic Proportions,107 YALE LJ.1981 (1998) (urging that costs per lives saved are inflated, also because of contentious assumptions). Though coming from different directions, Lutter and Heinzerling both argue, convincingly, that characterization of both benefits and costs can shift dramatically with small changes in assumptions, an argument that much bears on the central claims of this Article. See Randall Lutter & Christopher DeMuth, Ozone and the Constitutionatthe EPA, ON THE ISSUES, July 1999, at 3. 

The Act has nonetheless been subject to telling criticism. The foundation of clear air regulation consists of EPA's issuance of nationally uniform ambient air quality standards;" but in light of the extraordinary diversity of the fifty states, it is not clear that the idea of national standards can be rationally defended." In addition, both lower courts and EPA seem to think that the standard-setting process does not and cannot involve consideration of costs.12 But does it make sense, or is it even feasible, to say that national standards will be founded on an assessment of benefits alone, conducted in a cost vacuum? 3 If an improvement in ambient air quality would produce health benefits that are small but not trivial, isn't it clear that the improvement is justified if compliance costs are trivial, but not if the costs are extremely high? There is reason to think that at least in some cases, an understanding of costs has affected EPA's decision about appropriate standards - but that the cost-benefit balancing has been left implicit and free from public scrutiny and review. 4 
Perhaps the largest question involves the criteria by which EPA decides whether one or another level of regulation is (in the statutory phrase) "requisite to protect the public health."15 For most pollutants, air quality at various levels is not either "safe" or "not safe"; there are diminishing degrees of risk associated with diminishing degrees of exposure. On what basis is a particular level of residual risk said to be the appropriate one? What judgments do, or should, enter into that conclusion? EPA has been criticized for sometimes suggesting, in an unhelpful and conclusory fashion, that it chooses the "safe" level, as if this were solely a technocratic judgment and as if "safety" were an onoff switch, 6 when its decision about permissible levels rests instead on a series of political, scientific, and economic judgments and compromises. 
There are two problems with this state of affairs. The first involves democratic deliberation. 7 If EPA does not give a clear sense of the range of adverse effects, and if it does not say why one set of such effects calls for regulation and another does not, the public and its representatives are not informed of the nature of the underlying questions, and they are unable to evaluate the choices actually made. Under EPA's articulated position, a purely technical issue (would a certain level be safe?) is sometimes substituted, at least publicly, for the real and more complicated ones (what level of safety is appropriate in light of all the relevant factors? why should one level of regulation be preferred to another?). 
The second problem involves sound regulatory policy. Any proposed national standard could be loosened or tightened, and the question is whether the agency has chosen the optimal, or at least a reasonable, regulatory "point." Without a clear and (to the extent possible) quantified presentation of the expected environmental benefits of the various alternatives," there can be no assurance that the agency has chosen that point, rather than one that is too strict or too lenient. 
C. 
In its extraordinary decision in American Trucking Ass'ns v. EPA,9 the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit responded to this last concern in the strongest possible terms. It held that as interpreted by EPA, the key provisions of the Clean Air Act - those that give EPA authority to issue national air quality standards - represent an unconstitutional delegation of legislative power.10 The decision announces the birth of a new nondelegation doctrine, one with potentially large implications for regulatory policy. Under the new doctrine, open-ended statutory terms will be invalidated unless agencies are able to specify the governing legal criteria - to discipline their own authority through narrowing interpretations. 

EPA from considering costs, and my basic proposal does not challenge that prevailing view. I do, however, raise some doubts about it below. See infra Section VI.C. 
97-1441,1999 WL 979463 (D.C. Cir. Oct. 29,1999). 

The new nondelegation doctrine is remarkable for many reasons. First, the Supreme Court has not used the doctrine to invalidate a federal statute since (or for that matter before) 1935,1 and hence any such decision by a court of appeals is reasonably taken to mark a fresh departure. Second, the new doctrine does not require Congress to legislate with clarity. It says instead that if Congress has not been clear, agencies must act on their own, to set out limits on their own legal authority. Third, there now appears to be a genuine doctrine in place; American Trucking represents no isolated decision, but the culmination of a line of lower court cases, one of which was a similar decision about the Occupational Safety and Health Act.' The decision therefore signals a distinctive approach to judicial review of agency action. Fourth, the doctrine is conspicuously responsive to what the court of appeals saw (and often sees) as a general problem in federal regulation: the difficulty of knowing why an agency chooses one level of regulation rather than another that is somewhat higher or somewhat lower. 
The new doctrine raises a number of questions. The narrowest (though far from unimportant) issue has to do with the fate of EPA rulemaking with respect to national ambient air quality standards ("NAAQS"). What, if anything, can EPA do in the future? The question is significant both because of its consequences for implementation of the Clean Air Act and because of its implications for regulatory policy in general. On its face, the American Trucking decision would seem to draw into serious constitutional question not only EPA's ozone and particulates regulations, but also a wide range of other regulations by EPA, and indeed a wide range of decisions by many other agencies involved in the protection of health and welfare (and other areas as well; consider the Federal Communications Commission). And what, exactly, is the relationship between the new doctrine and ordinary judicial review to test whether agency action has been "arbitrary" or "capricious"? An especially large question, and the central focus here, has to do with how American Trucking exposes continuing problems with the design and implementation of environmental regulation as a whole and the Clean Air Act in particular, a statute whose key provisions seem to depend on implausible assumptions, and under which EPA has sometimes hidden crucial questions of value with uninformative platitudes. 
In this Article, my most general goal is to understand current difficulties with environmental policy, the Clean Air Act, and EPA promulgation of ambient air quality standards, and to see how EPA and courts might perform a constructive role in making things better rather than worse. My simplest claim is that EPA should undertake the two tasks identified above; it should specify the range of benefits that it believes will follow from the regulation it seeks to impose, including a discussion of the benefits from more lenient and more stringent alternatives and a treatment of the residual risks under the various regulatory regimes. It should also explain why it believes that the chosen regulation is preferable to the alternatives. 
Steps in these directions would satisfy the legitimate concerns of most critics of EPA's performance under the Clean Air Act and also of the court of appeals in American Trucking. Such steps also have broad applicability and would represent a new departure of their own in administrative law, covering the activities of EPA under a wide range of statutes and also the activities of (for example) the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Steps of this sort would not amount to a nondelegation doctrine, new or old. But they are designed to promote both rule-of-law values and sound regulatory policy, in a way that should respond to growing understandings about current problems in environmental policy and the administrative state. 
I have three more particular goals. The first is to reject the nondelegation doctrine, both old and new, as a way of ensuring better and more transparent policy analysis by EPA and other agencies. That issue raises large questions about democratic accountability and about the appropriate role of courts in reviewing agency action. I suggest that although the new doctrine has considerable appeal, this is not really a nondelegation doctrine at all, and the relevant goals would be better accomplished through a form of more conventional (but better informed) judicial review of agency action. The Clean Air Act is hardly unconstitutional, for it is possible to generate an interpretation of the Act that imposes both "floors" and "ceilings" on agency action. 
My second goal is to propose a contemporary role for the nondelegation doctrine in American public law. I claim that the doctrine is properly held in reserve for extreme cases - that it serves as a genuine, but judicially underenforced, constitutional norm - and that it operates as a legitimate tool of statutory construction. More importantly, I contend that the doctrine is not so much dead as relocated. Its current home can be found not in cases invalidating open-ended grants of authority, but in the many decisions using various "clear statement" principles to discipline legislative and administrative action.z3 When courts require Congress to speak clearly in order to authorize an agency to raise a serious constitutional problem, or to apply a statute extraterritorially or retroactively, they are applying a narrower and more targeted version of the nondelegation doctrine a version that requires Congress to focus, with particularity, on certain especially sensitive questions. By requiring congressional rather than merely executive deliberation on those questions, the various "clear statement" principles operate as a nondelegation doctrine in another guise. As such, the principles are easily defended, for they promote the key functions of the nondelegation doctrine without carrying the risks of the old and new versions. 
My third goal is to discuss possible improvements in the operation of the Clean Air Act, at the legislative, administrative, and judicial levels, improvements that might respond to various concerns about EPA performance, including the concerns expressed in American Trucking. I attempt to explain how the Act seems based on the (false) assumption that pollutants generally have "safe thresholds," and how this assumption has seriously impaired both regulatory policymaking and democratic deliberation. I also suggest that the Act should be interpreted, or if necessary amended, to allow and require EPA to engage in "health-health tradeoffs" - and also to take account of costs in setting national standards. In particular, I emphasize that EPA should engage in more specific and quantitative assessments of the hazardous effects of pollution at various levels, so as to increase the transparency of its decisions. It could even make sense for EPA to move in the direction of the "quality-adjusted life years" approach, designed to provide a concrete sense of the benefits of regulatory alternatives.2 4 Under such an approach, EPA would attempt to specify the range of "quality-adjusted life years" likely to be saved by a regulation, and it would also indicate the degree of savings that would justify a regulation. But because of the harmful side effects of aggressive judicial review, courts should play only a secondary and catalytic role - embodied in certain recent and quite innovative procedural developments in administrative law, above all the "remand without invalidation." As we will see, this procedural route is administrative law's newest species of minimalism, indeed a form of democracy-promoting minimalism.2 The central point is that EPA should undertake such inquiries on its own. 
for a catalogue. See also 'WilliamN. Eskridge, Jr. & Philip P. Frickey, Quasi-Constitutional Law: Clear Statement Rules as ConstitutionalLawmaking, 45 VAND. L. REv. 593 (1992) (discussing clear statement principles in general). 

This Article comes in six parts. Part II deals with the Clean Air Act and in particular with the artificiality of the inquiries that it appears to make central to EPA's task. Part III explores the old nondelegation doctrine, the development of the new nondelegation doctrine, and the use of the doctrine in American Trucking and related cases. Part IV evaluates the new doctrine, explains why the Clean Air Act is constitutionally unproblematic, and suggests an alternative approach. Part V discusses the proper approaches to the Act from Congress, EPA, and reviewing courts. Part VI is a brief conclusion. 
Overall, the benefits of the Clean Air Act since its enactment in 1970 clearly outweigh the costs. -J. Clarence Davies and Jan MazurekO Congress should not preclude decisionmakers from considering the economic costs and benefits of different policies in the development of regulations. 
Most environmental initiatives of the past seemed expensive and questionable at the time, and today every one of them appears a bargain in retrospect. Looking back on the present a few decades hence, society will consider every environmental program running now to have been a bargain, and wish more programs had been started sooner. 
-Gregg Easterbrook -Kenneth Arrow et al.V 
The Clean Air Act was enacted in 1970. Though many hundreds of pages in length, some of them mind-numbingly specific and detailed, 9 the Act offers two remarkably brief provisions designed to set the statutory program in motion. 

HEALTH, AND SAFETY REGULATION: A STATEMENT OF PRINCIPLES 6 (1996). 
ENVIRONMENTAL OPTIMISM 210 (1995). 
plant entitled to emit sulfur dioxide and its permitted emissions level (a flavor: 13,570 tons for the Colbert plant, generator number one, in Alabama; 15,430 tons for the Armstrong plant, generator number two, in Pennsylvania), see Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7651(c) (1994), alongside an exceptionally specific program for the granting and trading of emissions rights, see 42 U.S.C. § 7651(b). 
The first of these provisions, and the central focus here, involves national primary ambient air quality standards.' Here EPA is asked to set standards "the attainment and maintenance of which in the judgment of the Administrator," based on air quality criteria documents "and allowing an adequate margin of safety, are requisite to protect the public health."31 The second of these provisions involves national secondary ambient air quality standards, which EPA must set at levels "requisite to protect the public welfare from any known or anticipated adverse effects associated with the presence of such air pollutant in the ambient air."'32 "Welfare" is defined to include "effects on soils, water, crops, vegetation, manmade materials, animals, wildlife, weather, visibility, and climate, damage to and deterioration of property, and hazards to transportation, as well as effects on economic values and on personal comfort and well-being .... I For secondary standards, involving welfare rather than health, there is no provision for an "adequate margin of safety." But the secondary standards are anticipated to be more stringent than the primary ones; notice in particular the statutory emphasis on plant and animal life. 
These provisions have three especially noteworthy features. First, they seem at first glance not to contemplate any consideration of cost in the standard-setting process.' Primary standards are based on health, apparently to be assessed in a cost vacuum, while secondary standards are based on welfare, also apparently to be assessed without regard to cost. This is not at all an inevitable reading of the relevant provisions; perhaps the level "requisite to protect the public health" and "welfare" is a function of cost, not only benefit; but the prevailing interpretation is otherwise.35 Second, the standards are fully national - even though political judgments about air quality vary greatly from state to state, and even though the effects of improved air quality (on the cost and benefit sides) are highly variable from one state to another. Finally, both provisions appear to contemplate the existence of "safe thresholds." The basic idea is that EPA should ensure that air is "safe" and that public welfare is "protected." 
we could imagine pollutants for which the evidence indicated a point 
of "no risk" or "de minimis risk." At least in theory; it is possible to construct a dose-response curve for which risks effectively vanish at a certain defined point. But for most pollutants, there are diminishing degrees of risk, associated with diminishing degrees of pollution. 6 "Safety" is not an off-on switch; it is a matter of degree. When it is said that a certain level of pollution is "safe," what is really meant is that the residual risk is acceptable or tolerable - not that there is no risk at all. Consider, for example, this commendably direct testimony from the Chair of EPA's Scientific Advisory Committee's panel on ozone and particulates, unambiguously confessing the impossible nature of the task imposed on EPA by the Act: 
Based on information now available, it appears that ozone may elicit a continuum of biological responses down to background concentrations. It is critical to understand that a biological response does not necessarily imply an adverse health effect. Nevertheless, this means that the paradigm of selecting a standard at the lowest-observable-effects-level and then providing an "'adequate margin of safety"' is not possible. It further means that risk assessments must play a central role in identifying an appropriate level3 7 
How might we explain the enactment of provisions that seem at once so vague, rigid, and artificial? Much of the answer lies in the distinctive political dynamic of environmental debates in the late 1960s and early 1970s, in which citizens wanted air to be "safe" and politicians who failed to respond were at great risk." We might even describe the result as "1970s environmentalism," a form of thinking that accomplished a great deal of good, by producing rapid decreases in pollution levels, but that also seems increasingly anachronistic, even counterproductive. In the 1970s in particular, politicians would proceed at their peril if they asserted that "safety" could be compromised by other goals3 9 At the same time, politicians were affected by, and doubtless catered to, the pervasive psychological urge for certainty, as confirmed by evidence that people are willing to pay a great deal for "no risk" and much less for "substantially less risk."' Thus, for exam36. See, e.g., LANDY ETAL, supra note 13, at 55-56,78-79. ple, people are willing to pay more for a reduction of a risk from 0.1 to 0.0 than from 0.3 to 0.1.41 The idea that the Clean Air Act would produce "safety" rather than "reduced risk" made it far easier to support and far harder to challenge. 
Undoubtedly Congress believed that it was delegating to EPA the power to be reasonable rather than unreasonable, and in any case the Act allowed various safeguards in the event that compliance proved to be excessively costly.42 The most important safeguard has consisted in a form of (implicitly authorized) civil disobedience on the part of all relevant actors, including EPA. The result has been a complex program for nonattainment areas43 and a number of illuminating episodes; thus EPA was simply not prepared to shut down automobile traffic in Los Angeles, a step that would have been necessary to produce compliance with national air quality standards.' 
All of these points have created serious difficulties for EPA in practice. The first problem has to do with expense. For nonthreshold pollutants,45 it seems both natural and sensible to assess further reductions in terms of their cost. If, for example, the expense of reducing sulfur dioxide from 0.3 ppm to 0.2 ppm is trivial, then the reduction is almost certainly worthwhile (unless the dose-response curve has a most peculiar shape ). Even if there is little direct evidence of adverse human health effects at 0.2 ppm, this is likely to be because of the limited data, rather than because of an absence of such effects. But matters look very different if the cost would run into the tens of billions of dollars. When benefits are highly uncertain, it is peculiar to say that EPA cannot consider cost, especially since health gains are almost inevitable as permissible exposure levels decline.47 
ration gasoline in the Los Angeles area). 
exposure level above zero. 
to 0.2 ppm, notwithstanding health benefits from a reduction from 0.4 ppm to 0.3 ppm. 
not to reduce the particulates standard further than it did, since some data indicated possibly significant benefits from further reductions. See infra app. tbl.11. 
In light of this point, some critics have suggested that some kind of cost-benefit balancing inevitably occurs at EPA.' At least publicly, EPA denies this claim 9 Consider Administrator Browner's suggestion: 
Costs of meeting the standards and related factors have never been considered in setting the national ambient air quality standards themselves ....[T]he focus has been entirely on health, risk, exposure and damage to the environment .... And the American public deserves to know whether the air in its cities and counties is unsafe or not; that question should never be confused with the separate issues of how long it may take or how much it may cost to reduce pollution to safe levels. Indeed, to allow costs and related factors to influence the determination of what levels protect public health would be to mislead the American public in a very fundamental way5 
Only insiders know for certain whether EPA does in fact consider costs in issuing national ambient air quality standards 1 But consider, by way of contrast and as a possible clue, the Administrator's explanation of the 1979 revision of the ozone standard: 
The Clean Air Act, as the Administrator interprets it, does not permit him to take factors such as cost of attainment or attainability into account in setting the level of the standard; the standard is to be one that will adequately protect public health ....[He] recognizes... that controlling CO to very low levels is a task that can have significant impact on economic and social activity. This recognition causes [him] to reject as an option the setting of a zero-level standard ....However, it is public health, and not economic impact, that must be the compelling factor in the decision.52 Considerationof Cost in Setting NationalAmbientAir QualityStandards,in To BREATHE FREELY: RISK, CONSENT, AND AiR 223,227-29 (Mary Gibson ed., 1985). See also the suggestion in Farber, supranote 11, at 315-18, about the distinctive "slippage" between law and reality in the context of environmental law. 
some evidence of cost consideration. On EPA's own numbers, more stringent regulation might have provided $4 billion in increased benefits. See infra app. tbl.11. If these benefits were possible, why did EPA not require greater stringency, if not because of some cost consciousness? 
Standards and Announcement of Public Meetings, 45 Fed. Reg. at 55,072. 
This explanation, difficult to follow though it is, is most naturally taken as a suggestion that despite the nominal irrelevance of cost, costs do matter in the context of standard-setting for nonthreshold pollutants. 
The second problem has to do with federalism. The Act requires uniform national standards; but in practice, EPA authorizes a considerable amount of variation among states. For example, there is little question that the exceedingly high costs of attainment will, for many states, produce frequent violations of national requirements - and this has in fact turned out to be the case5 Several decades after the initial issuance of ambient air quality standards for ozone, for example, over 50 million people live in areas that are frequently in violation of national standards? 4 Smaller numbers - but still many millions of people live in nonattainment areas for other pollutants. 
The upshot is that national standards have mostly served not as real law, but as targets or aspirations6 - flexible goals to which the federal government can point without, however, insisting on compliance unless or until it is reasonable. This aspirational quality of national standards has led Congress to enact an increasingly complex set of provisions for nonattainment areas, provisions that anticipate compliance in certain areas over a period of many years and that, in practice, therefore recognize the existence of reasonable variations across states5. 7 Indeed it is contemplated, by the 1990 revision of the Act, that one of the nation's largest urban areas, Los Angeles, will not be in compliance until 2010 at the earliest5. 
This point leads to a more general one, bearing on cost-benefit balancing as well as on federalism. EPA's official position that standard-setting is cost-blind is complemented by explicit statements to the effect that cost, efficiency, and feasibility are relevant in making 
provisions at 42 U.S.C. §§ 7501-15, especially at § 7511. 
choices about compliance.5 9 In a way these statements are puzzling, for the Supreme Court has held that cost, and infeasibility, are irrelevant to EPA's decision whether to approve state implementation plans.' But EPA appears to acknowledge that state implementation plans will themselves consider costs, and also that cost will be relevant in setting schedules for compliance.61 
Finally, EPA must make hard choices about how safe is safe enough, an important question in light of the artificiality of the idea that air is either "safe" or "unsafe." EPA's choices involve not merely the facts, but also evaluative judgments about acceptable degrees of risk. A central question has to do with the ingredients of any judgment that a certain risk is too high. There are many important questions here, which include:6' *The size of the population at risk, that is, whether 100,000, a million, or tens of millions of people are at risk.63 *The nature of the population at risk - for example, whether it involves a large number of children, whether only elderly people are affected, whether those affected have a preexisting condition, such as asthma.' An important question is whether any "lives saved" number would involve young people or old people; there is less need for a policy that would (say) increase life expectancy by one year for those over 80 than for a policy that would increase life expectancy by sixty years for those under 10. This point suggests that EPA might reasonably concern itself not with lives saved, but with life-years saved, a point to which I will return.6 *The likelihood of harm for particular members of the affected population, that is, whether the likelihood of incurring harm is 1 in 1,000, 1 in 10,000, or 1 in a million.' Thus, for example, the plurality of the Supreme Court held in Industrial Union Depart59. See Clean Air Hearings,supra note 50, at 282-83 (statement of Carol M. Browner, Administrator, EPA). 

1998) (outlining EPA's "Common Sense Implementation Plan"). 
curiam). 
CLEAN AIR Acr 275-76 (1983) (discussing lead). The importance of considering population size is stressed in JAMES T. HAMILTON & W. KIP VISCUSI, CALCULATING RISKS? 91-108 (1999). 

Administrator, EPA). ment v. American Petroleum Institute ("Benzene Case")67 that OSHA may regulate only "significant risks," and that a risk of one in a billion could not count as significant.' OSHA now concludes that a lifetime annual risk of 1.64/1,000 would count as significant. 9 But undoubtedly the importance of addressing such a risk will depend on other factors, notably including the size of the affected population. oThe severity of the risk - for example, whether it involves cancer or mortality risks, or increased hospital admissions, bronchitis, respiratory symptoms, lost work days, or what EPA calls minor restricted activity days." 
Although EPA considers all of these questions in issuing national standards,71 it has developed no clear guidelines to discipline its judgment about when one or another level of regulation is appropriate. It has not said, for example, that if 100,000 people face a cancer risk of 1/1,000, regulation is presumptively desirable, but if 10,000 face a 1/1,000 chance of minor respiratory problems, regulation is presumptively not desirable.7 2 A reading of EPA's voluminous documents on the major air pollutants provides an enormous amount of data, but little information on the answers that would trigger a decision to increase or decrease regulation. As we will see, all of the various points noted above might reasonably be turned into a kind of global figure, for example "quality-adjusted life years," designed to quantify the various benefits from regulation.73 
One final note: An obvious and important question has to do with the distributional effects of national ambient air quality standards. Who bears the costs? Who receives the benefits? Full information is not available. But an early study finds that under the Act, poor people, and African Americans, are net gainers, whereas wealthy people, and whites, are net losers74 - perhaps not a shocking finding in light of the fact that many of the adverse effects of air pollution are concentrated in large cities. 
In sum: The Act has produced many improvements in air quality, but the questions about federalism, cost-benefit analysis, and the concept of "safety" raise serious concerns about the Act and about EPA performance. As we will see, these criticisms have implications for the constitutionality of the Act and the resurgence of the nondelegation doctrine, as well as for more general concerns of democracy and accountability. 
In 1971, EPA issued six national standards, governing ozone, particulates, sulfur oxides, nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and total suspended particulates IV' In 1978, EPA issued a seventh standard, involving lead; it did so as a result of a court order.76 These seven regulations amount to the centerpiece of EPA's regulatory system for the control of national ambient air quality. 
Of course it would be extremely surprising if the standards originally adopted in 1971 and 1978 turn out to survive new scientific evidence, and many people have urged that adjustments are desirable, in the direction of both tightening and loosening existing requirements. Congress has thus created an "agency-forcing" mechanism designed to require EPA reconsideration of primary and secondary standards. Under the Act, EPA is required to review the relevant criteria and standards at least once every five years, and to revise them "as appropriate" under the statutory guidelines.' EPA is specifically required to consider, and to explain any significant departures from, the recommendations of the Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee ("CASAC"), an independent committee established specifically in order to advise the Administrators on air quality criteria and standards.78 A great deal of time and expense is necessary to respond to new scien74. See Henry M. Peskin, EnvironmentalPolicy and the Distribution of Benefits and Costs, in CuRRENT IssuEs IN ENVIRONMENTAL POLIcY 144, 147-59 (Paul Portney ed., 1978). 
the agency can show that without such rules, people will face serious risks of one kind or another; the "remand without vacating" approach makes best sense when the agency may well be able to justify its action on remand. Both of these ideas are designed to ensure that rules that are highly likely to be reasonable are not struck from the books, in a way that could produce serious problems. Properly understood, they do not allow agencies to proceed with inadequately justified rules if it appears unlikely that those rules could be lawfully explained, or if it appears that little will be lost with invalidation. 
Hence we arrive at an appropriate approach to these cases, one with general application: The rules should be held unlawful, and remanded to the agency; but they should not be vacated, at least when the agency can show (a) that it may be able to generate a justification that will satisfy judicial review, and (b) that invalidation of the rule may generate significant risks (by, for example, allowing people to be exposed to nontrivial dangers, or by preventing the agency from initiating a program for reducing such risks)?'° After the agency attempts to justify its regulation on remand, its decision may be appealed to the court, which can evaluate the new justification and uphold or invalidate the regulation as appropriate. An approach of this kind seems especially sensible for the particulates regulation, which is designed to counteract what, on a reasonable reading of the evidence, count as quite serious risks to life and health. The problem with invalidation is that it would prevent the agency from beginning implementation and require the agency to start largely from scratch, a process that may require years or more of rulemaking activity. A remand without invalidation would allow the agency to proceed if (as appears quite possible) the regulation can be adequately defended by reference to the criteria I have outlined. Things are more difficult for ozone, because the risks are far lower, and because nonregulation may actually produce health benefits; 1' but here as well, a remand without invalidation would probably be the best way to proceed. 
It would be possible to object that the technique of "remand without invalidation" creates unfortunate incentives for administrators, above all because it permits the continued legality and even the enF.3d 1129,1135 (D.C. Cir. 1995); ChemicalMfrs. Ass'n, 28 F.3d at 1268; Checkosky, 23 F.3d at 462-65; Allied-Signal, Inc. v. NRC, 988 F.2d 146,150-51 (D.C. Cir. 1993) (announcing that court will not vacate rules because of inadequacy in agency reasoning if agency has a serious possibility of correcting the deficiency on remand and vacation may be disruptive); Mid-Tex Elec Coop., 822 F.2d at 1132-34. 
the fact that California made quite similar decisions not less than a decade ago. See James M. Lents, A Review of NationalOzone and ParticulateMatterAir Quality StandardsIn Light of Long-Standing CaliforniaAir QualityStandards,11 TUL. ENViL. L.J. 415,421-23 (1998). forcement of rules that have been found to be inadequately justified (and that may not ultimately survive review). The enforcement of these rules may cost millions and even billions of dollars. If so, isn't invalidation preferable? To be sure, a system in which inadequately justified rules are invalidated would create more pressure to produce adequate justifications in the first instance. But the proper response to this concern is not to invalidate all inadequately justified rules, but to restrict the "remand without invalidation" technique to special circumstances, above all (a) to rules that might well turn out to be valid (b) in conditions in which invalidation would produce serious problems for the legitimate policies that underlie the rules in question. The court of appeals for the D.C. Circuit has made considerable progress in drawing the necessary lines.' 
There is a broader point in the background here. The techniques of remand without invalidation, and of allowing interim rules, can be seen as a form of administrative law "minimalism," akin to judicial minimalism in constitutional law generally." 3 Such techniques do no more than is necessary to resolve a case. Indeed, these forms of minimalism are democracy-reinforcing insofar as they attempt to ensure that agency decisions are based on grounds that are both transparent to the public and sufficient to justify the regulation in light of statutory criteria. 
A difficult question, not addressed thus far, is raised by a particular claim with respect to EPA's ozone regulation: that ground-level ozone has health benefits, and that these benefits were not taken into account by the agency. There is evidence that ozone reduces the risk of both cataracts and cancers.3" If taken into account, the health benefits of ozone at current levels may well be roughly equivalent to the health costs. But EPA refused to consider those health benefits. In an interesting application of "health-health" analysis, the court of appeals held that the refusal was unlawful. 5 
In general, it is right to say that agencies should be required to take account of the health problems sometimes produced by regulation de302. See Davis County, 108 F.3d at 1457; AMA, 57 F.3d at 1135; Allied Signal, 988 F.2d at 150-51 (announcing that a court will not vacate rules because of inadequacy in agency reasoning if agency has a serious possibility of correcting the deficiency on remand and vacation may be disruptive). 

(per curiam). signed to reduce health problems. This kind of health-health tradeoff can take many different forms.' In typical cases, the regulation of one risk, like that associated with asbestos, may give rise to further risks as a result of the substituted products. The most adventurous claims for "health-health" comparisons arise when a costly regulation imposes health risks simply by virtue of its cost2l If a regulation produces less employment and more poverty, it may result in worse health as well. But these are adventurous claims, because they depend on contentious projections about the disemployment effects of particular regulations. 
For the ozone rule, the argument for taking health-health tradeoffs into account seemed especially insistent, for the claim was far from indirect, and there was nothing speculative or abstruse about the causal chain. If ozone protects against cancers and cataracts, it is possible that a regulation of ozone will cause serious health problems. The text of the Act is quite ambiguous on the point, and the court was wrong to say that it unambiguously required the agency to address the beneficial effects of air pollutants.RE But the court was right to hold that even if it was ambiguous, the agency interpretation was unreasonable. The rule was properly found inadequately justified on this ground, and it may well be that after remand, the agency will be unable to explain any failure to take account of the effects of ozone in combating cataracts and cancer. 
There is of course a commonality between the approach taken by the American Trucking court and the approach I am suggesting. Where the American Trucking court said that the ambient air quality standards provisions of the Clean Air Act are unconstitutional unless EPA imposes limits on its own discretion, I have argued that ambient air quality standards are valid if, and only if, EPA is able to generate a "benefits analysis" that operates to constrain EPA discretion and to promote interregulation consistency. The goals of the two approaches are quite close. The disadvantage of the American Trucking approach is that it involves unnecessary, even reckless, use of the Constitution - and does so in a way that threatens to raise too many questions about too many statutes. By contrast, the approach I have suggested has firm roots in the APA and in existing doctrine, and promises to CASS R. SUNsTEIN, Health-HealthTradeoffs, in FREE MARKETS AND SOCIAL JuSTICE 298, 298-317 (1997). 
improve regulatory practice without calling for an excessive judicial role. 
Should Congress amend the national ambient air quality provisions of the Clean Air Act? This is not the place for an extended discussion of that question; but the analysis thus far suggests three possibilities. 
As emphasized throughout, a crucial defect of the national ambient air quality provisions is that they seem to assume that whether air is "safe" can be assessed solely on the basis of the facts. The truth is that the facts might be able to show the degree of risk (at least within a range), but they cannot show whether any particular degree of safety is "safe enough." Whether or not pollutants lack safe thresholds, "the paradigm of selecting a standard at the lowest-observable-effects-level and then providing an 'adequate margin of safety' is not possible."3" 9 The result of the statutory framework is to misframe the key question and also to give EPA little guidance for answering and asking that question. As we have seen, EPA has greatly struggled with the resulting difficulties. 
Congress should amend the statute to identify the factors for EPA to consider in making the judgment about appropriate national standards. Congress might offer substantive guidance by saying, for example, that EPA must consider risk severity, size of affected population, and likelihood of adverse effects at various exposure levels. On the procedural side, it might require EPA to identify, to the extent possible, the nature of the risks that it is reducing, and at the same time to attempt to quantify the relevant risk reductions. The strongest argument against an amendment to this effect is that it is unnecessary; if EPA moved in the directions suggested above, it would essentially be interpreting the current statute as if it contained instructions of exactly this sort. But an amendment of this kind would at least provide a clear legislative signal, and move EPA judgments in the direction of greater transparency. 
Particulate Matterand Ozone: HearingsBefore the Subcomm. on CommercialandAdmin. Law of the House Comm. on theJudiciary,105th Cong. 89 (1997) (prepared statement of George T. Woolf, Former Chairman, EPA's Clean Air Scientific Advisory Committee). 
We now know that significant cost savings can be achieved by using more flexible, market-oriented instruments, such as tradable pollution permits rather than uniform national requirements?10 Sometimes, however, EPA does not choose such instruments even when it is legally authorized to do so.31 It would make sense to amend the statute to require EPA, wherever feasible, to use economic incentives rather than a "command-and-control" approach? 2 
It is clear that an approach of this kind could save substantial resources, and if the instruments are properly chosen, it should do so without at the same time compromising air quality goals."3 An effort to encourage EPA to select less burdensome alternatives could send a desirable signal to attempt the least-cost methods of obtaining regulatory goals, and might in addition spur creative experimentation. 
A possible lesson of EPA experience with national standards is that EPA should be required or at least permitted to consider costs when setting such standards. Indeed, it is not entirely clear that the statute should be construed to forbid cost-benefit analysis from EPA, 14 though lower courts have unanimously concluded otherwise.1 5 If the Supreme Court does not reject the lower courts' view, it is worth giving serious consideration to a statutory change. 
The basic reasoning here is straightforward. If a reduction from 0.08 to 0.07 would be a trivial expense, surely it should be required; if it would cost billions of dollars, there had better be good grounds to believe very substantial health benefits would follow. A possible argument to the contrary is that national standards operate as aspirations, not ordinary law, and aspirations, at least, should be set on a health-only basis - not because there is a magic place where air quality is "safe," but because it is valuable to obtain, and use, a technocratic judgment that people should have air quality of a certain specified sort 16 The problem is that it is impossible to assess "safety" in a cost vacuum. In general, cost-benefit analysis should be followed, acknowledging that it will raise some hard questions of value.317 
The best argument against an amendment to require cost-benefit analysis is that the statute, complex as it is, actually embodies a better accommodation of costs and benefits than would a statute that required cost-benefit analysis at the level of standard-setting.31 On this view, the optimal system is one in which EPA makes an initial, purely health-based judgment, and then the process of implementation allows costs to play a role at various stages, emphatically including an expectation that implementation will not be immediate and will in fact be a product of a continuing inquiry into whether compliance is worthwhile, P things considered.1 9 A possible virtue of this state of affairs is precisely the aspirational quality of the health-based standard, setting a target against which various state performances can be measured. The aspirational quality can also contribute to technology316. See the quotation from Administrator Browner, supra text accompanying note 50. Administrator Browner goes on to say: 
While cost-benefit analysis is a tool that can be helpful in developing strategies to implement our nation's air quality standards, we believe it is inappropriate for use to set the standards themselves. In many cases, cost-benefit analysis has overstated costs. In addition, many kinds of benefits are virtually impossible to quantify - how do I put a dollar value on reductions in a child's lung function or the premature aging of lungs or increased susceptibility to respiratory infection? CleanAir Hearings,supra note 50, at 282 (statement of Carol M. Browner, Administrator, EPA). Ironically, the Regulatory Impact Analysis required by President Clinton engages in monetization of just this kind. See generallyinfraapp. 
can be found in recent testimony of Richard Revesz. See Clean Air Act Authorizations: HearingsBefore the Subcomm. on CleanAir, Wetlands, PrivateProperty,and NuclearSafety, 106th Cong. (1999) (Testimony of Richard L. Revesz), availablein LEXIS.COM, Legislation & Politics Library, U.S. Congress Folder, Federal Document Clearing House Congressional Testimony File. 
A Case Study of the CleanAirAct, 16 PACE ENVT'L L. Rnv. 15 (1998). Pedersen argues that a purely health-based standard can force technological innovation, see id. at 23-24, and also stimulate and focus public debate, see id. at 22-23; he ends with the interesting suggestion that EPA should be required to set standards "tight enough to protect against all clearly demonstrated health or welfare effects," but that EPA should be allowed to consider costs and technical feasibility in choosing the "margin of safety," id. at 30. 
forcing, an important and often highly desirable phenomenon in environmental protection,3" and a phenomenon to which cost-benefit analysis is, at least in practice,321 unlikely to contribute. 
In the abstract, it is hard to know whether this pragmatic argument is valid.31 What is clear is that the statutory scheme, pragmatically defensible as it may be, is far from transparent, and provides a set of confusing signals to the American public. 
CONCLUSION 
Whenever an agency issues a regulation designed to diminish risks to health, safety, or the environment, it should attempt to identify the gains sought by the particular regulation it has chosen, and it should compare these gains to those under at least two reasonable alternative regimes, one stricter and one more lenient. In this light, the most serious problem with EPA's performance in issuing national air quality standards is that it usually fails to explain, in simple, concise terms, its decision to require a particular level of ambient air quality. Sometimes EPA acts as if it were pursuing "safety" and ensuring "safe levels," without sufficiently acknowledging that for most pollutants, the serious question is what degree of safety. To its credit, EPA invariably offers extensive discussions of the underlying data, demonstrating that there is a genuine health risk at current levels. But to the extent that it provides an explanation of its particular choices, the discussion often involves little more than evidence of nontrivial adverse effects at those current levels - evidence that may well argue for a reduction from current levels, but does not by itself call for any particular regulatory standard. 
In this Article, I have argued that EPA (and other agencies involved in similar tasks) should offer a detailed "benefits analysis." The central goal of this approach would be to create a kind of federal common law of environmental protection, generated in the first in320. Technology-forcing is not desirable if the costs of the forcing exceed the benefits if, for example, the new technology contributes little to air quality, but substantially increases prices and diminishes wages. 
benefits) of new technological developments, and indeed this issue is discussed in the particulates and ozone regulatory impact analysis. See RIA, supra note 70, ch. 11. The problem is that government is likely to have very little information about the cost of technological innovation, and industry is likely to overstate those costs by a significant amount. See W. Kip Viscusi, FATAL TRADEOFFS 161-80 (1993) (discussing substantial overstatement of compliance costs). 
in a FederalSystem -And Why It Matters,54 MD. L. REV. 1226 (1995), a staunch and longtime defender of cost-benefit analysis for the Clean Air Act, who acknowledges the pragmatic possibility. stance by administrative agencies, and designed to promote consistency and rationality in the protection of health and safety. I have also defended a form of democracy-promoting minimalism for administrative law - the particular form of minimalism that is embodied in the remand, often (and increasingly) unaccompanied by invalidation. 
The Clean Air Act should not be held unconstitutional, and EPA should not be required, on pain of constitutional invalidation, to come up with a "generic unit of harm" to encompass population affected, severity, and probability. The new nondelegation doctrine is a large mistake. On the other hand, ordinary judicial review should require any national ambient air quality standard to be accompanied by an adequate explanation of why that level, rather than one more or less stringent, has been selected. By itself, this requirement calls (to the extent feasible) for a high degree of quantification from EPA; it also bears on the performance of other regulatory agencies entrusted with the task of protecting health, safety, and the environment. It calls for invalidation, and not merely remand, where the agency is unable to offer an explanation of its choice of one level of regulation rather than another. A requirement of this kind would mark a key moment in the shift from the rigidity and simplicity of 1970s environmentalism toward a new and more promising approach - one that places a high premium on assessing the magnitude of problems, ensuring consistency across regulations, limiting interest-group power, acquiring better information, and authorizing democratic control of regulatory choices. 
My principal claim here is that both courts and EPA should construe the Act so as to prevent regulation of small risks and so as to require regulation of substantial risks - and EPA should explain, as quantitatively as possible, what must be shown in order for a risk to qualify, or not to qualify, as substantial. It is excessive, a form of rhetoric, to say that on EPA's view, it is entitled to choose any level between zero risk and a level slightly below "London's Killer Fog." But it is not a form of rhetoric to think that if EPA has not limited its own discretion by speaking in less conclusory terms, the Clean Air Act raises problems for both regulatory policy and democratic selfgovernment. The ultimate goal of the forms of the democracypromoting minimalism that I have endorsed here would be to ensure better policy analysis and greater transparency of decision, in a way that should simultaneously promote democratic, economic, and air quality goals. 
APPENDIX not to be exceeded more than once per year. 36 Fed. Reg. 8186, 8187 (1971). b. September 13, 1985: EPA retains the primary standard and revokes the secondary standard. 50 Fed. Reg. 37,484 (1985). c. August 1, 1994: EPA announces its decision to retain the current primary standard for carbon monoxide. There is no secondary standard for carbon monoxide. 59 Fed. Reg. 38,906,38909-11 (1994). a. October 5, 1978: EPA promulgates standards for lead at the level of 1.5 jig Pb/M3. 43 Fed. Reg. 46,246 (1978). b. November 5, 1997: EPA publishes final rule for lead, 62 Fed. Reg. 59,813, 59,813-14 (1997), but withdraws it on Dec. 23, 1997, due to adverse comments, 62 Fed. Reg. at 67,009. c. January 20, 1999: EPA issues final rule. 64 Fed. Reg. 3030, 3030-31 (1999). (Note: The following tables are taken verbatim from the EPA's 
Regulatory Impact Analysis, as noted in the text.) rounding. 
longterm exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. 
Estimates are incremental to the current ozone NAAQS (year = 2010) Ozone Health: 
*1.Mortality Hospital Admissions *2. all respiratory (all ages) all respiratory (ages 65+) pneumonia (ages 65+) COPD (ages 65+) 620 1 60 180 400 70 50 20 10 10 10 290 
Low- to Highend Est. 
0-80 300 -300 2,330 - 2,330 870 - 870 260 -260 130 - 130 29,840 - 29,840 60 -60 650-650 1-1 0-80 0-250 0 -530 0-90 0 -60 0-20 0 -20 0-20 0-20 0-400 
Max High-end 
Est. 120 420 1,570 600 200 180 42,070 90 920 2 110 340 690 120 80 30 20 20 20 530 rounding. 
long-term exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. 
ENDPOINTV327 *7. Lower Respiratory Symptoms *8. Upper Respiratory Symptoms shortness of breath asthma attacks *9. Work Loss Days *10. Minor Restricted Activity Days ("MIRADs") $2.50 per household per jig/m3 *See the Benefits TSD for citations (U.S. EPA, 1997a). 
Annual PM,, (pgm) Daily PM., (pgm) 
*L Mortaity332: short-term exposure rounding. 
longterm exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. TABLE 6: OZONE: NATIONAL ANNUAL MONETIZED HEALTH 
BENEFITS ESTIMATES333 Estimates are incremental to the current ozone NAAQS (0.12 ppm, 1-hour) (billions of 1990 $; year = 2010) 
ENDPOINT $0.370 $0.004 $0.029 $0.014 $0.004 $0.001 $0.001 $0 $0 $0.003 $0.300 $0.870 $0.110 $0.001 $0.001 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0.000 - $0.380 $0.004 - $0.004 $0.029 - $0.029 $0.014 - $0.014 $0.004 - $0.004 $0.001 - $0.001 $0.001 - $0.001 $0 - $0.400 $0- $1.210 $0- $0.140 $0- $0.001 $0 - $0.001 $0- $0 $0 -$0 $0 - $0 $0- $0 $0 - $0 $0-s $0.570 $0.006 
$0 $0.010 $0.003 $0.002 $0.001 $0 $0 $0.011 $0.520 $1.640 $0.180 $0.001 $0.001 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 $0 rounding. 
long-term exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. 
ENDP *8. Upper Respiratory Symptoms shortness of breath asthma attacks *9. Work Loss Days *10. Minor Restricted Activity Days ("MRADs") $0.790 $1.400 $0 - $0 $0 - $0 $0 - $0 $0- $0.004 $0-$0.016 $0.056 $1.785 $0.020 $1.300 $2.400 
Annual PM2 , (pg/m3) Daily PM. (pg/m) 
Partial Attainment Scenario 
16 65 $83 $7.5 $90 
Low- to HigEhs-te.nd 15 65 $15 to $96 $4.3 to $8.1 $19 to $104 igh-end 
Est. 50 $99 $9 $107 rounding. 99TH PERCENTILE) SUMMARY OF NATIONAL ANNUAL MONETIZED 
HEALTH AND WELFARE BENEFITS337 
Annual PM0 (pgm 3) 
rounding. 
rounding. 
Annual PM,. (pgm) 
*1. Mortality1: short-term exposure 150 360 340 6,800 rounding. 
longterm exposure but not both, due to double-counting issues. 
ALTERNATIVES IN 2010 (1990 $)342 (high-end estimate) Annual Benefits of Partial 
(billion$) (A) 
Annual Costs 
of Partial Attainment (billion $) (B) 
Net Benefits 
of Partial Attainment (billion $) (A - B) 
Number of Residual Nonattainment Counties 19-104 5.5 8.6 10-95 partial attainment of the current PM, standard (PM, 501150, 1 expected exceedance per year). The results for 16165 and 15/50 are only for the high-end assumptions ranges. The low-end estimates were not calculated for these alternatives. 
control cost analysis. 0.7- 1.0 12 17 27 partial attainment of the current ozone standard (0.12 ppm, 1 expected exceedance per year). The results for 0.08, 5th max., and 0.08, 3rd max., are only for the high-end assumptions. The low-end estimates were not calculated for these alternatives. 
control cost analysis. 
