University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1999 

Cass R. Sunstein 

From Consumer Sovereignty to Cost-Benefit Analysis: An 
From Consumer Sovereignty to Cost-Benefit Analysis: An 

Incompletely Theorized Agreement 
Incompletely Theorized Agreement 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "From Consumer Sovereignty to Cost-Benefit Analysis: An Incompletely Theorized 
Agreement," 23 Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy 203 (1999). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

FROM CONSUMER  SOVEREIGNTY  TO COST-
BENEFIT ANALYSIS:  AN INCOMPLETELY
THEORIZED AGREEMENT?

CASS R. SUNSTEIN*

For far  too  long,  American  debates  about  regulatory  policy
have been caught between two  unproductive  poles. On the one
side  are  the  defenders  of  regulatory  policies  characteristic  of
the  early  1970s-favoring  a kind of absolutism  with respect  to
safety, skeptical  about tradeoffs,  dismissive  of claims  made  by
"business."  On  the  other  side  are  the  "consumer  sovereignty"
voices  of  the  early  1980s,  claiming  that  consumers  generally
"know  best,"  and  that  market  arrangements  are  sufficient  for
purposes  of promoting  citizen welfare. The  debate between  the
two  sides often seems blocked,  not least in Congress,  which has
had  an extremely  difficult  time in directing  agencies  to  pursue
any particular  course  and  which  often  shuttles back  and  forth
between absolutism and an open-ended  plea for "balancing."'

The  problem with the  absolutist regulatory  approach  should
be  obvious:  it makes  no  sense  to spend  a  great  deal  of money
when  the  benefits  of  expenditures  are  very  low,  especially  in
light  of  the  fact  that  regulatory  expenditures  are  often  borne
not by "business,"  but by employees  and  consumers.  But there
are problems with the ideal of "consumer  sovereignty"  as well.
Frequently  consumers  lack  relevant  information,  and  even
they  may  display  bounded
when 
rationality. 2  In  any  case,  the  American  tradition  is  one  of

they  have  the  facts, 

"Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished  Service  Professor, University  of Chicago Law School.
This  essay  draws  on a  more detailed  discussion  found in Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Cognition
and Cost-Benefit Analysis,  29 J. LEGAL  STUD.  (forthcoming  2000).  This  essay  is  a revised
version of oral remarks presented  at the  Federalist  Society  Eighteenth  Annual  Student
Symposium  at The University of Chicago  Law School on April 9-10,1999.

1.  I explore  the evolution of this debate  in CASS R. SUNSTEIN,  Congress, Constitutional

Moments, and the Cost-Benefit State, in FREE  MARKETS AND  SOCIAL JUSTICE 348-83 (1997).

2. See Christine Jolls et al.,  A Behavioral Approach to  Law  and Economics, 50  STAN.  L.
REV.  1471,  1477  (1998) ("Bounded rationality  ... refers  to the  obvious  fact  that human
cognitive  abilities are  not infinite. We have  limited  computational  skills  and seriously

HeinOnline  -- 23 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 203 1999-2000

Harvard Journal ofLaw & Public Policy

[Vol.  23

popular  sovereignty,  not "consumer  sovereignty."  Despite  its
appeal in some contexts, the latter  ideal is  a distortion,  almost a
parody,  of  founding  ideals,  and  it  involves  deliberative  self-
government,  not consumer choices.3

In this essay I  suggest that the  debate  over regulatory  policy
is  most  sensibly  treated  as  a  debate  over  the  nature  of  cost-
benefit  analysis.  We  should  be  able  to  make  a  great  deal  of
progress  if we  shift from  the  contested  and  often  implausible
idea of consumer  sovereignty  and agree that some form of cost-
benefit  analysis  is  the appropriate  basis  for  regulatory  policy.
We  may  accept  this  proposition  without  necessarily  agreeing
with  the most  controversial  economic  claims  about  the nature
of  valuation  or  "willingness  to  pay."  The  best  argument  for
cost-benefit  analysis 
that
government  should  be  seen  as  a  kind  of  machine  for
aggregating  private  preferences,  but  with  the  thought  that
some  form  of  cost-benefit  balancing  is  both  inevitable  and
desirable. It is possible to debate how relevant values should be
quantified,  and  I  offer  some  brief  suggestions  on  that  topic
here. My basic  submission, for present purposes,  is  only that  a
great  deal  of  progress  can  come  from  a  shift  away  from  the
deep  theoretical waters to more  confined  debates  about how-
not whether-to undertake cost-benefit  balancing.

is  offered  not  on  the  ground 

I.  INCOMPLETE  THEORIZATION

Often  it  is  possible  to  resolve  hard  questions  of  law  and
policy without resolving  deeply contested  issues  about justice,
democracy,  or  the  appropriate  aims  of  the  state. 4  Often  it  is
possible  to  obtain  an  incompletely  theorized  agreement  on  a
social  practice  and  even  on  the social  or  legal  specification  of
the practice. In many areas of law and public  policy, people  can
reach  closure  about what  to  do  despite  their  disagreement  or

flawed  memories.").  This notion originates  in  Herbert A.  Simon, A  Behavioral Model of
Rational Choice, 69 Q. J.  ECON. 99, 99-101  (1955).

3.  See  THE FEDERALIST  No.  10  Games  Madison).  See generally JOSEPH  M.  BESSETIE,
THE  MILD  VOICE  OF REASON:  DELIBERATIVE  DEMOCRACY  AND  AMERICAN  NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT 
(1994)  (arguing  that  the  Framers  sought  to  produce  a  system  of
republican self-government  partly because of a judgment that political deliberation can
be best promoted through a representative  system).

4. See  generally CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  LEGAL  REASONING  AND  POLITICAL  CONFLICT

(1996); CASS  R. SUNSTEIN,  ONE CASE AT A TIME (1999).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 204 1999-2000

No. 1]  From Consumer Sovereignty to Cost-Benefit Analysis

205

uncertainty  about  why,  exactly,  they  ought  to  do  it.  Whether
they  are  utilitarians  or  retributivists,  people  who  disagree
about the purposes  of the criminal  law can agree  that rape  and
murder  should  be punished  and punished  more  severely  than
theft  and trespass.  People  can  support  an Endangered  Species
Act  amidst  disagreement  about  whether  the  protection  of
endangered  species  is  desirable  for  theological  reasons,  or
because  of the rights  of animals, plants, and species, or because
of the  value  of animals,  plants, and  species  for  human beings.
A great  advantage of incompletely  theorized agreements  is that
they allow people of diverse views  to live together  on mutually
advantageous  terms.  A  greater  advantage  is  that  they  allow
people  of  diverse views  to show  one another  a high  degree  of
both humility and mutual respect.

theorized  agreement 

I  believe  that  an  incompletely 

is
possible  here;  at  least  achieving  such an agreement  should  be
the  goal  of  those  attempting  to  improve  the  operation  of  the
system  of regulatory  protection and to  understand  the uses  of
cost-benefit  analysis in  regulatory  policy. To  be sure,  it would
be  difficult  to  obtain  agreement  on  the  view  (which  seems
implausible  to  me)  that  all  questions  of  regulatory  policy
should  be resolved by asking how  much people  are  willing to
pay  for  various  social  goods.  Often  people  lack  important
information;  sometimes they are quasi-rational.5  There  is also  a
difference  between  the  judgments  people  make  as  consumers
and those  that they  make  as citizens,  and  sometimes  the latter
deserve to prevail. 6

But  my  basic  claims  here  are  (1)  that  whatever  their
theoretical  disagreements,  it  should  be  possible  for  diverse,
reasonable  people to  agree  on presumptive  floors  and ceilings
for regulatory  expenditures  and  (2) that  the presumptions  can
do  a great  deal of useful work for policymaking  and for law. In
short, a great deal  can be done without confronting the hardest
theoretical  questions  raised  by  contentious  specifications  of
cost-benefit analysis.

5.  See generally RICHARD  H. THALER,  QUASI-RATIONAL  ECONOMICS  (1991).  The  term
"quasi-rational" refers  to the fact  that people's actual  behavior  departs from that  of the
"rational actor" posited by  many economic models.

6.  See SUNSTEIN,  supra note 1,  at 13-69.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 205 1999-2000

206

Harvard Journal ofLaw & Public Policy

[Vol.  23

join 

is:  Who  could 

An  obvious  question  here 

this
incompletely  theorized  agreement?  My  principal  claim  is  that
the agreement  can  be joined  by most  of those  who accept  and
those who doubt  the idea that private  willingness  to pay is the
appropriate  foundation  for  regulatory  policy.  Thus,  there  is
room here for  deliberative  democrats who  emphasize  the  need
for  government  to  reflect  on  private  preferences,  rather  than
simply  to  translate  them  into  law.7  A  prime  purpose  of  the
approach is to ensure more in the way  of reflection; cost-benefit
analysis,  as  understood  here,  is  a  guarantee  of  greater
deliberation,  not  an  obstacle  to  it.  Nor  is  the  approach  rigid.
Under  the proposed  approach,  agencies  have  the  authority  to
abandon  the floors and ceilings  if there is reason for them to do
so.  If,  for  example,  agencies  want  to  spend  a  great  deal  to
protect 
risk
disproportionately  faced  by them, they  are entitled  to do so, as
long as they explain that this is what they are doing.

African-American 

children 

from 

a 

II.  EIGHT PROPOSITIONS
Here,  then,  are  eight brief  propositions,  offered  in  the hope
that  they  might  attract  support  from  diverse 
theoretical
standpoints.  I  offer  these  as  a  tentative  starting  point  for  the
effort  to  anchor  cost-benefit  analysis  in  an  incompletely
theorized agreement about regulatory  policies. 8

1. Agencies should identify the advantages and disadvantages of
proposed courses of action and also attempt to quantify the relevant
effects  to the extent that this is possible. When quantification  is not
possible,  agencies  should  discuss  the  relevant  effects 
in
qualitative 
terms  and  also  specify  a  range  of  plausible
outcomes  (e.g.,  annual  savings  of between  150  and 300  lives or
savings  of  between  $100  million  and $300  million,  depending
on  the  rate  of  technological  change).  The  very  decision  to
specify effects  should improve the decisionmaking  process  and

7.  See ELIZABETH  ANDERSON,  VALUE  IN  ETHICS  AND  ECONOMICS  (1993);  Herman  B.
Leonard  & Richard J. Zeckhauser, Cost-Benefit Analysis Applied to Risks: Its Philosophy and
Legitimacy, in VALUES AT RISK 3145  (Douglas Maclean ed., 1986).

8.  More  detailed  discussion  can  be found  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Cognition and Cost-

Benefit Analysis, 29 J. LEGAL STUD.  (forthcoming 2000).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 206 1999-2000

No. 1]  From Consumer Sovereignty to Cost-Benefit Analysis

207

also  make  the  democratic  process  work  better  by  giving  the
public a sense  of the stakes.

2.  The quantitative description should supplement rather than

displace a qualitative description of relevant effects.  Both
qualitative  and  quantitative  analyses  should be provided.  The
qualitative  description  should  give a  concrete  sense  of  who  is
helped  and who  is  hurt-for  example, whether  the regulation
will lead to lost jobs, higher prices,  more  poverty, and so forth.
Where  the only possible  information  is speculative,  this should
be  noted,  along  with  the most  reasonable  speculations.  Here,
too,  the  goal  is  to  improve  the  democratic  process  by  giving
people, 
in  government  and  outside  of  it,  a  chance 
to
understand the likely effects  of regulation and nonregulation.

3.  Agencies should attempt to convert nonmonetary values
(including, for example, lives saved, health gains, and aesthetic
values) into dollar equivalents. This point does  not suggest that a
statistical  life and  $5  million,  for  example,  are  the same  thing,
but it aims to promote coherence  and uniformity  and to ensure
the  sensible  setting  of  priorities.  There  is  nothing  magical  or
rigid  about any particular  dollar  equivalents;  the conversion  is
simply  a  pragmatic  tool  to  guide  analysis  and  to  allow
informed comparisons.  Economists  have  attempted  to estimate
the amount  that people  are "willing to pay" to save  a statistical
life, with a range of between $3  million  and $10  million.9 These
studies  are  controversial,  but  at  least  they  provide  a  start.  In
addition,  the same  range  of  numbers  seems  to  be  the median
on the government's  cost-per-life-saved  charts.10

If $5  million seems  too high, or  too  low, the question  should
be the following:  on what basis might  an alternative  number be
chosen?  Note  here  that  any  monetary  values  are  intended  as
presumptive, not conclusive  (see proposition 5 below).

9.  See W.  KIP Viscusi,  FATAL TRADEOFFS:  PUBLIC AND  PRIVATE  RESPONSIBILITIES  FOR
RISK  34-74  (1992);  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Regulating the  Regulators, 63  U.  CHI.  L.  REV.  1423,
1430-36  (1996).

10.  See  STEPHEN  BREYER,  BREAKING  THE  Vicious  CIRcLE:  TOWARD  EFFECTIVE  RISK

REGULATION 24-27  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 207 1999-2000

208

Harvard Journal ofLaw & Public Policy

[Vol.  23

4.  Agencies entrusted with valuing life and health should be
controlled, by statute or Executive order, via presumptive floors and
ceilings.  For example,  a  statute might  say  that  a  statistical  life
will ordinarily be valued  at no less than $2 million and no more
than  $10  million.  Evidence  of  worker  and  consumer  behavior,
suggesting  a valuation of between $5  million and  $7 million per
statistical 
is  relevant  here.  The  Office  of
Management  and  Budget  should  move  in  the  direction  of
establishing  presumptive  floors  and  ceilings  for  various
regulatory benefits.  If an agency  is going to spend, for example,
no more  than $500,000  per life  saved, or more  than $20  million,
it should have  to explain its  decision.

saved, 

life 

5.  Agencies should be permitted to adjust the ceilings and floors,
or to choose a low or high end of the range, on the basis of a publicly
articulated and reasonable judgment that such an adjustment or such
a  choice  is  desirable.  To  avoid  unnecessary  controversy,  and
what would reasonably be  seen as injustice,  there  should  be no
adjustments  downwards  for  poor  people.  In  other  words,  the
fact  that  poor  people  are willing  to  spend  less  to  protect  their
own  lives  (because  they  are  poor)  should  not  call  for  a
correspondingly  lower expenditure by the government.

6.  Agencies should be permitted to make adjustments on the basis

of a reasonable assessment of various qualitative factors, such as
whether the  risk is faced voluntarily, is  controllable, is  dreaded, is
potentially catastrophic, and is equitably distributed."  For example,
they  might  add  a  pain  and  suffering  annual  premium  or
increase 
level  of  expenditure  because  children  are
disproportionately  affected or because the victims  are members
of a  disadvantaged  group. To  the  extent  possible,  they  should

the 

11.  To  understand  why  these  factors,  in  particular,  matter  to  consumers,  see
HOWARD  MARGOLIS,  DEALING  wITH  RISK  (1996); Paul  Slovic  et al.,  Regulation of Risk: A
Psychological Perspective, in REGULATORY  POLICY  AND ThE SOCIAL SCIENCES  241  (Roger
G. Noll, ed.,  1985).  See also Robin Gregory & Robert Mendelsohn, Perceived Risk,  Dread
and Benefits, 13  RISK  ANALYSIS  259  (1993)  (using regression  techniques  to identify  the
major explanatory variables  for lay people's risk perceptions and  finding, among other
things that people care about whether  the risk has immediate  or latent effects,  whether
it will affect future generations,  and whether its effects are catastrophic  or diffuse).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 208 1999-2000

No. 1]  From Consumer Sovereignty to  Cost-Benefit Analysis

209

be precise  about  the nature  of,  and  grounds  for,  the  relevant
adjustments.

7.  The appropriate response to  excessive socialfears not based on

evidence and to related ripple effects, is education and reassurance
rather  than  increased regulation.  Sometimes  public  concern
about  certain  risks  is  general  and  intense,  even  though  the
concern  is  not  merited  by  the  facts.12  The  best  response  is
educational,  but  if  education  and  reassurance  fail,  increased
regulation  may  be  defensible  as  a way  of providing  a kind  of
reassurance.

8.  Unless the statute requires otherwise, judicial review of risk

regulation should require a general showing that regulation has
produced more good than harm on a reasonable view about valuation
of both benefits and costs.  On this view, courts  should  generally
require  agencies  to  generate  and  to  adhere  to  ceilings  and
floors,  but  they  should  also  allow  agencies  to  depart  from
conventional  numbers  (by,  for  example,  valuing  a  life  at  less
than  $1  million  or  more  than  $10  million)  if  and  only  if  the
agency  has  given  a reasonable  explanation  of why it has  done
SO.

III.  CONCLUSION
For  the last thirty  years, debates  over  regulatory  policy,  and
protection  of  consumers,  have  been  blocked  unnecessarily  by
intransigence,  sloganeering,  and conflict.  "Absolutism"  makes
no  sense; the  question is always  what will be  gained  and what
will be lost (though of course  we might  disagree  about how  to
answer  that  question).  The  idea  of  "consumer  sovereignty"  is
too  contestable  and  too  vulnerable  to  be  challenged  by  those
who  stress  limited  information,  bounded  rationality,  and  the
difference  between  the  decisions  people  make  as  citizens  and
those they make as consumers.

1M  See Timur Kuran  & Cass  R. Sunstein, Availability  Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51
STAN.  L. REV.  683, 691-703  (1999)  (discussing examples  of widespread  and intense, but
ultimately  unwarranted, public  concern  over events  such as Love Canal and the use of
the pesticide  Alar on apples).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 209 1999-2000

210 

Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy 

[Vol. 23

I have suggested  that it should ultimately be possible,  first, to
obtain  an  incompletely  theorized  agreement  on  the  need  for
to  obtain  incompletely
cost-benefit  analysis  and,  second, 
theorized  agreements  on certain  understandings  of what  cost-
benefit  analysis  entails.  I  have  briefly  suggested  the  possible
nature  of  such  understandings.  Perhaps  some  of  the  eight
propositions  are  wrong  or  misdirected;  perhaps  some  of  them
ignore  relevant  arguments.  The  task  for  the  future  is  not  to
press  implausible  arguments  about  consumer  sovereignty  but
to  see  how  cost-benefit  analysis  might  be  refined  so  as  to
attract, and to deserve, broad support.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Harv. J. L. & Pub. Pol'y 210 1999-2000

