 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. Cass R. Sunstein* What is permitted, and what is prohibited, by the equality principle of a liberal democracy? Does affirmative action run afoul of that principle? And where should we look to answer these questions? Many critics of affirmative action take it as axiomatic that affirmative action violates the equality principle. But this is far from clear. Every law classifies. The current law of equality itself classifies by, for example, treating discrimination on the basis of race differently from discrimination on the basis of age. No one thinks that the law of equality is, for this reason, inconsistent with the Equal Protection Clause. No one thinks that constitutional doctrine gives a "special preference" to race discrimination. Whether affirmative action violates the equality principle depends on the content of that principle. * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chi Michigan Law Review example, that the principle forbids government from turning morally irrelevant and highly visible characteristics into a basis for systemic social disadvantage. Whether or not that particular specification is valid, and whether or not it counts as a sufficient specification, it seems clear that the anticaste principle would raise no serious questions about affirmative action policies. The basic reason is that it is implausible to say that such policies entrench second-class citizenship. No one urges, or could urge, that such policies would make whites, or for that matter African Americans, into second-class citizens. This is not to say that affirmative action policies are a good idea. To be sure, they may have stigmatizing effects on their intended beneficiaries, and they may also increase rather than decrease racial antagonism. But these are essentially political complaints, not constitutional ones. Some people, for example, object that affirmative action programs reflect pity and condescension toward African Americans3 an interesting objection to the meaning and consequences of such programs, not entirely disconnected from the problem of second-class citizenship. But this objection, partly empirical in nature, is best heard in legislatures rather than courtrooms. Affirmative Action & Caste view that past discrimination is sufficient justification for affirmative action. India has tackled with some sophistication the issue whether different, particular groups have different needs for affirmative action. For example, the Indian government looks to various factors indicating group status, placing importance on whether the relevant unit "practices extensive endogamy, restricting marriage to other group members." In India, social and economic factors help undergird the judgment about the kind of compensatory measure to which members of the relevant group are entitled. Cunningham and Menon deserve a great deal of credit for the simple feat of bringing new information to bear on the debate over affirmative action. Too often the American debate has operated in a factual vacuum - a vacuum about both international and domestic experience. Their new facts should spark fresh discussion. I would like to begin that discussion by offering three comments. The first involves the critical role of facts in constitutional law; the second involves the potential virtues of rule-free constitutional law; the third involves the uses and limits of comparative constitutionalism. The first two are inspired by what Cunningham and Menon have to say, but I do not directly engage their argument; in the third comment, I attempt to do this. Constitutional and political debates about equality and liberty often operate at a high level of abstraction. They raise questions, for example, about whether we are committed to equality of opportunity or instead equality of result, to individual rights or group rights, or to equality over liberty or vice-versa. Often the arguments work by choosing one concept over another, by assembling some particular practice that is said to tell, decisively, against a cer Michigan Law Review tain claim or alleged principle (for example, the generally accepted preferential treatment given to children of alumni), by suggesting that a certain concept necessarily means a certain thing (as in the view that equality necessarily forbids, or requires, affirmative action), or by specifying a concept with the suggestion that this, rather than that, is the best specification (perhaps because it fits better with the rest of what we believe). These questions are important because when progress cannot be made on conceptual matters or on issues in high-level theory, it might instead be made by investigating facts. This is the great promise of empirical work: to enable progress and even closure when conceptual debates produce uncertainty, holy wars, or blank stares. I hypothesize, for example, that many people would be skeptical of affirmative action programs to the extent that the record shows that they involve hiring people whose qualifications are not marginally lower, but actually much lower than those of their (majority group) competitors. It also seems likely that many critics of affirmative action would be less critical if it appeared that the Affirmative Action & Caste abolition of affirmative action would mean that only a handful of African Americans would be able to attend the major law schools. When people disagree on high principle, they can often be brought into agreement, or at least make progress, if they investigate the facts.5 In the context of affirmative action we need much more in the way of facts. A Supreme Court brief dealing with the consequences of a principle of colorblindness would be far more helpful than a brief quoting from past cases and pushing conceptual arguments one way rather than another. The discussion by Cunningham and Menon is very much in this spirit insofar as comparative work brings actual experience to bear on equality claims. 5. Thus facts are a great ally, and a potential part, of incompletely specified agreements. Michigan Law Review tention to underlying questions of policy and principle - which activates political debate - but that do not displace public discussion and that leave a great deal undecided. This may well be taken as a democratic approach to judicial review, one that falls in the basic category of representation-reinforcement. Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of the discussion by Cunningham and Menon involves its depiction of a path not taken by the United States. Recall that India maintains a list of 3,500 "backward classes" and that empirical factors, including social discrimination, educational deprivation, and economic status, are used to determine group status. Some groups - the most disadvantaged - have their own independent quotas, generally proportional to population. Other groups also receive a reserve, but one smaller than their population share. Individual entitlements may depend on whether the relevant individuals have been raised in privileged circumstances. Thus there is a careful, elaborate, and quite refined method for determining how government policies will counteract or even dismantle the system of caste. India appears, in short, to be engaged in a process of social engineering that goes well beyond anything in American practice. Affirmative Action & Caste create widespread consciousness of ascriptive (or other) differences, in a way that eventually causes segregation, resentment, hatred, and even violence.8 Is there any similar problem in India? Cunningham and Menon suggest the possibility of an affirmative answer. A great risk of race-conscious or ethnicity-conscious policies is that they can heighten attention to questions of race and ethnicity in a way that compromises social cohesion. (Of course social cohesion is not the only social goal, and may not be in good shape in the first instance.) Does the system create, or is it perceived to create, a kind of caste spoils system? Judgments about the degree of disadvantage are hardly a purely scientific enterprise, and controversial judgments are likely to enter into any decision about who counts as sufficiently disadvantaged. There is also a natural risk here of strategic and self-interested behavior, in which groups jockey with one another for position as "most disadvantaged," with harmful consequences for society as a whole. Nor is it an unambiguous good if members of one or another group play the game of "more victimized than thou." Does this happen in India? Does this system significantly weaken the Indian economy? Does it compromise performance-related goals, and if so to what extent? It is surely imaginable that such a system might compromise merit, rightly conceived (though of course this is a contestable ideal). From what Cunningham and Menon have said, however, there is no clear answer to this question. 8. See Timur Kuran, Ethnic Norms and Their Transformation Through Reputational Cas Michigan Law Review to justify affirmative action programs.9 I very much agree with this judgment: if the nation, or a state, would like to compensate for the continuing effects of past discrimination, there should be no constitutional problem so long as the program is reasonably well-tailored. The Court should have allowed the government room to maneuver in this way, and future courts should allow the democratic process to handle this sharply contested issue in any reasonable manner.10 But the further question remains: Should the political process in America attempt to do something like what India has done? The most obvious response is that this is a genuinely academic question. There is no possibility that the United States would attempt to identify the fifty groups, let alone the 3,500 groups, which ought to qualify as backward classes. But as in India, the existence of a political consensus or obstacle cannot be decisive; perhaps the consensus or obstacle is wrong. Our own anticaste principle, reflected in our history and our practices, seems to emphasize highly visible identifying characteristics (most notably race and gender), on the theory that such characteristics present the greatest opportunities for unjustified and pervasive subordination. The anticaste idea builds narrowly from the cases of African Americans to pick up women and the handicapped (with a partial, limited inclusion of homosexuals). This limitation is not entirely without appeal. A decent society does not humiliate its members,1l and humiliation is especially likely when the government discriminates against people whose characteristics are highly visible. (Of course it is not limited to those cases.) In addition, and perhaps most importantly, it is easiest to maintain a caste society, even when market forces are quite vigorous, when the characteristics that lead to lower-caste status are highly visible. It is in such circumstances that customers and coworkers can most easily entrench existing inequality.12 It is in such circumstances that rational discrimination may result in the use of sex and race as proxies. And it is in such circumstances that screening strat and Blackmun, JJ., concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part). Affirmative Action & Caste egies may perpetuate social subordination.13 Market forces are especially unpromising correctives to caste-like aspects of society when a highly visible characteristic is at work in the context of systemic social disadvantages. 13. See Bradford Cornell & Ivo Welch, Customs, Information, and Screening Discrimina Michigan Law Review cially so in their different conceptions of what it means to undo a system of caste. For constitutional purposes, the American equality principle has been an anticaste principle - one that forbids government from turning a morally irrelevant and highly visible characteristic into a systemic basis for second-class citizenship. This principle ought not to be taken to authorize federal judges to invalidate reasonable affirmative action programs. The appropriate content of such programs should be a democratic rather than a judicial responsibility; the most extreme judicial attacks on affirmative action programs are a form of hubris.