In late 1995, Montana became the first and only state to eliminate a numerical daytime speed limit on its interstate highways. Instead, the state adopted a "Basic Rule" of "reasonable and prudent" daytime driving. The law produced a heated debate about its consequences, the relationship between norms and law, and the choice between rules and standards in statutes J.D., Cum Laude, University of Chicago Law School, 1998. Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago Law School. the consequences of Montana's daytime driving rules. We examine the law itself, its effects on driving behavior and law enforcement, and recent attempts to overturn the law. Specifically, we evaluate the law's impact on the motoring public and Montana as a whole. We also consider the Basic Rule's effect on legal standards: Does the law's subjective nature promote arbitrary and ineffective enforcement? We explore the effect of the law on so-called "rule of law" values of both drivers and police officers. In late 1998, the Montana Supreme Court invalidated the Basic Rule on due process grounds, and the ultimate fate of the "reasonable and prudent" rule remains unclear. In Part VI, we offer a brief discussion of that issue. quences of decreasing safety on interstate highways may be to increase overall safety, if the decrease is a result of a change in policy that shifts drivers away from relatively more perilous rural roads and makes interstate driving more attractive. A. Some Relevant Facts To understand the Basic Rule, it is necessary to emphasize that Montana is a large and thinly populated area. With 147,047 square miles of territory, it stands as the fourth largest state.' Montana's population, however, totals approximately 870,000, making it the third most sparsely populated state 2 with an average of just six people per square mile. 3 Billings, with its 87,000 residents, is the state's largest city. 4 Yet Billings does not face the suburban sprawl of other metropolitan areas; the first traffic light outside of the city is 145 miles away in Miles City, population 8,400. 5 Traveling Montana's vast expanse via its interstate highways can be relatively hazardous. The state has 88,000 miles of highway. 6 There is no separate state police force and only 212 Highway Patrol officers monitor the Before the enactment of federally mandated speed limits, Montana governed its highways under its Basic Rule.' 0 This law, passed in 1955,"1 accorded motorists substantial freedom in conducting themselves on the road, requiring drivers to operate their vehicles in a careful and prudent manner and at a rate of speed no greater than is reasonable and proper under the conditions existing at the point of operation, taking into account the amount and character of traffic, condition of brakes, weight of vehicle, grade and width of highway, condition of surface, and freedom of obstruction to the view ahead.12 Citizens of Montana regarded the Basic Rule as practical and a necessary way of life, viewing fast driving in the words of one inhabitant, as a "Godgiven right."' 3 Congress altered the situation in 1974. federal government enacted the 7 See Brad Knickerbocker, Yes, America There Is a Speed Limit in the 'Montanabahn,' CHRISTIAN SCI. MONITOR, July 10, 1996, at 3. The 212 figure represents the maximum authorized number of Highway Patrol officers; however, Montana Highway Patrol Major Bert Obert noted that the Highway Patrol does not operate at this full contingent and usually fields slightly more than 200 officers. For example, in 1998 there were 206 Highway Patrol officers. See Telephone Interview with Bert Obert, Major, Montana Highway Patrol (Aug. 18, 1998). Its libertarian populace' 8 not content to bow to Washington's edict, Montana passed a "[fluel conservation speed limit" to achieve nominal compliance with the federal government's ultimatum.' 9 The law, explicitly designed to "insure conservation of a resource," 20 established violations of the speed limit as misdemeanors not reported against a driver's insurance record. 21 Infractions cost the driver $5, payable directly to the Highway Patrol officer issuing the ticket. 22 Simultaneously, Montana's legislature enacted another law stating that its fuel conservation speed limit would remain effective "only as long as the establishment of those speed limits by the state is required by federal law as a condition to the state's continuing eligibility to receive [federal highway] funds ... "23 Montana's motorists virtually ignored the newly imposed speed limits; driving behavior was largely a function of norms, not of law. 24 Partly be "5 See Palmaffy, supra note 14, at 1 (noting that the law remained in effect long after the fuel crisis ended because of presumed safety benefits). the national speed The lax compliance took a toll on law enforcement. Despite writing approximately 66,000 $5 tickets per year, the Highway Patrol described the law as "'a nondeterrent to speeding.'" 32 The law also had a corrosive effect 25 Kenworthy, supra note 13, at A3. 26 See Some in Montana Regret Easing of Speed Limits, CHATTANOOGA FREE PRESS, Dec. 10, 1995 ("[H]alf of all drivers exceeded the 65 mph limit on Montana's interstates. Two-thirds ignored the 55 mph signs on two lane highways."). One resident summarized the widespread violations, noting, "[niobody drove the speed limit anyway." Jim Robbins, With Speed Limits Untied by U.S., Montana Reverts to the Fast Lane, N.Y. TIMES, Dec. 9, 1995, at 6. on the public's perception of law enforcement. The head of the Highway Patrol noted that motorists' disregard for speed limits "'caused disrespect for us [the Highway Patrol] in particular because we were burdened with enforcing the law.''33 Furthermore, the law demoralized the officers themselves. One patrolman lamented, "'You wondered how much good you were doing out there. "'34 Montana received its reprieve from federal regulation of its interstate highways with the enactment of the National Highway System Designation Act (the "NHSDA") in 1995. 35 Spurred by the Republicans' desire to limit the role of the national government, Congress enacted the NHSDA by the overwhelming margin of 419 to 7 in the House and on a voice vote in the Senate, federal speed President Clinton "reluctantly" signed the legislation on November 28, 1995. 37 thus repealing the The NHSDA endured a storm of alarmist and often unfounded protests, many based on predictions about adverse effects on safety. 38  President Clinton admonished states to "exercise this authority responsibly," 39 while Transportation Secretary Federico Pefia sent letters to governors, "imploring them, for safety reasons, to consider not raising speed limits. "40 Insurance companies warned of premium increases to pay for the impending roadway higher fines. The Highway Patrol, however, rarely invoked such penalties, writing fewer than 3,000 reckless driving tickets per year before the Basic Rule. See id. (describing motorists' disregard for the prior law as "insulting" to law enforcement). legislation."' 42 carnage. 4I Ralph Nader Montana law enforcement echoed the national fears, predicting a potential 50% increase in fatalities with "phenomenal wrecks ... cars that roll 8, 9, and 10 times." 43 One trooper ominously warned, "'[m]y phone is going to ring more often in the middle of the night.'"44 Proponents of the NHSDA mounted their own public relations effort. They argued that the law would simply legalize existing behavior by drivers, and bring the law more in accordance with informal norms already producing sufficiently safe driving. 45 Supporters downplayed the safety fears, noting improvements in drunk-driving laws, seat belts, air bags, and anti-lock brakes.46 On December 9, 1995, Montana reverted to its Basic Rule of reasonable and prudent conduct to govern its roadways. 47 A. What Montanans Did and Did Not Do What was the consequence of this change? In the short term, the effects were minimal. Throughout 1996 drivers did not significantly alter their conduct under their new-found roadway freedom. 48 Although the percentage of that increased speed will lead to more fatalities). gerated. See infra Part lI.D. lowered injury and fatality rates). Three factors may explain the constancy of drivers' behavior. First, it may take a significant period of time for a change in the speed limit to produce changes in driving behavior. Second, as Montanans like to insist, the state's motorists appear to possess good judgment and honed ability in traversing its highways. 55 This accounts for the striking 72 mph speeds before the repeal of the law and the nominal initial increase thereafter. Republican Governor Marc Racicot contended that, "'[w]e tend to respect each other, instead of aiming for one another. I have great faith that Montanans will be '"56 One state resident maintained that concerned with safety and security.' Montanans are "'used to driving long distances, and they know which roads are safe at which speed.' The third and perhaps the most compelling explanation of drivers' constant speeds may be Montana's often treacherous road conditions. These conditions, more than formal law, may dictate much driving behavior. Interstate drivers in Montana face a litany of perils: brutal weather, icy pavement, '9 See James Brooke, Life Without Speed Limits: No Rush to the Fast Lane, N.Y. Tourists are the central exception to motorists' constant driving behavior. The repeal of the national speed limit turned Montana into a national speed magnet. The resulting behavior outraged state officials: "'I think [the planned Basic Rule violations] show a real lack of respect, not only for the law in Montana, but for the rights and safety of Montana drivers and tourists .... Even if these were professional drivers, not everyone else on the road was." '' 70 Highway Patrol officials were equally livid. One officer questioned a motorist who was stopped for driving 107 mph over a bridge deck, asking, "'What would happen to you in your home state?"' 71 When the man responded that at home he would have been charged with reckless driving, the officer questioned, "'Well, what makes you think it's all right to do that in this state?" 72 The influx of tourists altered both average speeds and highway fatalities. But before analyzing these statistics, it is important to note their limitations. Most importantly, the Highway Patrol's statistics lack appropriate detail in determining the full impact of Basic Rule driving patterns. For example, the statistics do not reveal how many of the out-of-staters' accidents occurred at times when the Basic Rule was not the governing law and a numerical speed limit was in effect. 73 Nor do the reports specify what percentage of the outof-state drivers' accidents involved factors other than speed, including alcohol or failure to wear seat belts, both significant contributors to highway fatalities. Lastly, fatality statistics tend to fluctuate considerably each year, even under conditions when the posted speed limit remained constant, again undercutting the impact of such annual comparisons. 74 Within the context of the preceding paragraph's disclaimer, noticeable driving patterns, especially those involving out-of-state motorists, began to emerge. 75 Although the average speed increased only 2 miles per hour during the Basic Rule's first few months, 76 by the close of the law's first year, average speeds climbed to 78 mph on the. interstate, 77 in significant part (it appears) because of tourists. 78 Moreover, a Highway Patrol study indicated that "60 percent of the cars traveling more than 85 mph were from out of state. The figure was 75 percent for those traveling more than 95 mph."79 Another investigation documented that out-of-staters, particularly Canadians, drive at higher speeds than residents on Montana's roads. 80 The Montana Highway Patrol's roadway safety statistics tend to support the perception of tourists as the more dangerous drivers. From 1996 to 1997, the number of out-of-state vehicles involved in fatal accidents increased by 38%,81 and the number of roadway deaths involving out-of-state vehicles increased by 69% during the same one-year span.82 These numbers should, of course, be put in perspective. For example, non-Montanans were involved in only 23% of fatal accidents in 199683 and only 26% in 199784 84 See id. (indicating that out-of-state vehicles accounted for 58 of 223 total fatal crashes in 1997); see also Henderson, supra note 58, at 3 (noting that as of August 10, 1997, "just 25 out-of-state cars were involved in the 122 fatal high-speed accidents"); Katy Witkowski & Bob Edwards, Deaths Up on Montana Roads (National Public Radio, Morning Edition, hardly an overwhelming proportion of roadway crashes. Similarly, nonMontanans were involved in only 24% of roadway deaths in 1996 and 30% in 1997.85 These statistics suggest a simple conclusion. Most fatal accidents do not include out-of-staters, but the Basic Rule attracted unsafe drivers from out of state, and this helped produce an increase in fatalities including nonresidents. The varying driving habits of Montanans and out-of-staters indicate a general coordination problem under the law; each motorist may interpret the Basic Rule differently, thereby causing significant divergences in traffic flow. Such speed disparities can be perilous, potentially increasing the "risk of crashes and other hazardous traffic situations, such as unsafe lane changes and following too closely."86 A Highway Patrol study estimated that the number of people traveling with the general traffic flow decreased to a record low of 41 %.87 This is important because accidents may be a function of flow rather than mere speed. Hence a numerical speed limit has an advantage to the extent that it provides a number around which drivers may coordinate their behavior. The significant increase in fatalities in 1997 may have resulted partly from this lack of coordination. Despite the slightly elevated speeds and potential traffic flow disparities, the statistics tallying the Basic Rule's effects, measured in terms of fatal accidents and total roadway deaths, remain inconclusive. During the first year under the Basic Rule, both fatal accidents and total roadway deaths declined by 4.8% and 7.9%, respectively. 88 Fatal accidents on interstate highways, Yet the pattern reversed, though not as markedly, in 1998. As of August 18, 1998, comparing the year-ago period, fatal accidents increased a meager .77%95 and total roadway deaths actually declined by 6.2%.96 Even the presumably virulent element of speed proved less troublesome in 1998. Again comparing year-ago periods, fatal crashes in which speed was a factor decreased by 12%97 and total roadway deaths involving speed as a factor decreased by 19%.98 89 See Montana Highway Patrol 1997 Annual Report, Accidents by Trafficway Statistics 98 See id. (indicating 93 total deaths in which speed was a factor in the relevant period This data is even less conclusive than the vacillating numbers indicate. For example, when comparing 1996 to 1997, excepting those accidents where a numerical speed limit was in effect (i.e., non-Basic Rule times or zones), the increases in fatal accidents and total roadway deaths amounted to 15 %99 and 28 %, 100 respectively-higher numbers from the previous year, but not as devastating as the original figures. Deleting those accidents where alcohol was a factor further ameliorates the situation. Calculating fatal accidents and total deaths without those incidents where alcohol was a factor, the numbers rise a modest 13%1o and 19%,102 respectively. Even the specter of unbridled Basic Rule speed, seemingly a leading factor in roadway deaths, may be less important than it seems in light of the complexity in tracing causation. The Highway Patrol suggested, "'[i]t's really difficult to pin down one factor and say this is the primary cause ... [or] factor that resulted in this crash and perhaps this death."10 3 In short, driving safety under the Basic Rule fluctuates, producing relatively less hazardous motoring in 1996 and year-to-date 1998, while exacerbating roadway fatalities in 1997. Equally important, the Basic Rule stands as only one factor in roadway safety analysis; conditions such as alcohol and unsafe driving during times or in zones with numerical speed limits also were significant elements in this multifaceted problem. Of course it is possible that some of these conditions are connected with the Basic Rule. Dangerous driving while drunk may be aggravated in the absence of a numerical speed limit, and reckless driving in zones without such limits may have a "spillover" effect on zones with numerical limits. Repeal of Fuel Conservation Speed Limit Measured in historical context, the 34% increase in roadway fatalities in 1997 appears to be a statistical anomaly within this fluctuating /range, while the aggregate of almost three years under the Basic Rule is not greatly out of line with historic patterns of overall roadway death variations. 106 Some state lawmakers have so urged, with one asserting, "'[a]s far as I can see, the sta[a numerical speed limit]. . . . One year's tistics aren't there to warrant' worth of statistics are not enough to make a determination." 10 7 The Director of Montana's Highway Traffic Safety Division captured the essence of the fatality-rate debate, noting, "[i]f you're looking for a compelling reason to have a maximum speed limit, you won't find it in the data." 0 8 In conclusion, the Basic Rule has done little to alter Montanans' driving behavior. Tourists, however, relish the lack of numerical limits, potentially contributing to divergent traffic flows and increased overall speeds. Overall, the nascent fatality figures, representing a decrease in deaths in 1996, a substantial increase in 1997, and a subsequent decline in 1998 year-to-date com sent (Yearly Totals). The Basic Rule carries with it both advantages and disadvantages. Although we cannot undertake a full cost-benefit analysis here, we can cast light on some of the important variables. Part of the analysis involves a form of "risk-risk tradeoffs,"109 which occur when the regulation of one risk affects another risk. Just as regulation of one source of environmental danger (such as nuclear power plants) may increase the danger from another source (such as coal-fired power plants), so too for speed limits. Increasing or decreasing speed limits may increase some risks while decreasing others. For example, a higher speed limit on an interstate highway may increase deaths on the interstates while reducing the use of, and deaths on, less traveled, more dangerous roads. Hence, an increased speed limit may save aggregate lives. This section seeks to identify and analyze some of the most important tradeoffs. The most heralded detriment of Montana's Basic Rule is the law's impact on roadway safety. As noted in Part II.B above, while the numbers are less than conclusive, it seems fair to characterize Montana's roads as somewhat more dangerous under the Basic Rule. Increased speeds, reckless tourists and traffic flow disparities appear particularly hazardous under the new law. Admittedly, the evidence is ambiguous, for it is possible to claim that many of the accidents and deaths occur at times or in zones not governed under the Basic Rule, that such numbers tend to fluctuate from year to year, and that increased seatbelt usage and decreased use of alcohol could have dramatically increased safety. These claims undercut the most alarmist reading of the data. More evidence is necessary for a final judgment; currently, it appears that the Basic Law has decreased safety by a modest but non-trivial amount. On the whole, safety, while the most significant concern, cannot yet be shown to be more than a slight detriment overall. Decreased fuel efficiency represents another adverse consequence of the Basic Rule' As vehicle speed increases, fuel efficiency decreases, thereby causing motorists to spend more on gasoline and consume more than necessary of a non-replenishing natural resource. The Popular Mechanics re Reasonable questions, however, can be raised about the fuel efficiency argument. Obviously, fuel efficiency alone is not the criterion upon which to establish speed limits; if it were, the law would limit vehicles to their most efficient and unrealistically low speeds of 35 to 40 mph. 112 It is also possible to increase fuel efficiency while maintaining a relatively high speed limit through, for example, higher miles per gallon or using light rather than heavy trucks. 1 3 Even accounting for such rebuttals, however, decreased fuel efficiency looms as another Basic Rule disadvantage. Increased air pollution is another adverse effect of the Basic Rule. Preliminary data from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) suggests that "rural states such as Montana, which have sharply raised their speed limits [although the increase in actual speed itself is slight], face a higher increase speed of 113 mph, the air conditioner ceased functioning, "turning the vehicle into the fastest greenhouse on the face of the Earth." Id.; see also Whitely, supra note 21, at Al ("Speed doesn't come without cost. Even dropping to 85 mph on the 293-mile drive from Ritzville, Wash. to Missoula [MT], the Explorer got 24.01 miles a gallon. For the 194mile high-speed trip from Missoula to Butte and then north into Helena, it got 10.43 miles a gallon."). The fact that Montana operates as a "speed magnet" is not only a negative; perhaps the Basic Rule actually helps generate more tourism, thereby creating various positive welfare effects. This is certainly a reasonable judgment. Nevertheless, there is a debate about whether the "reasonable and prudent" standard might decrease tourism, another potential drawback." 8 Initially, as with many other aspects of the new law, Basic Rule opponents made alarmist predictions, forecasting a steep drop in tourism,11 9 Montana's second largest industry. 20 But these predictions were based on anecdotes, not evidence. For example, the Highway Patrol reported that "one out-ofstate woman had called to say she was canceling her vacation for safety reasons."' 2' A Maine newspaper, after observing only one month under the Basic Rule, exhorted: A lot of people from other states will avoid driving through Montana now that they know some of the barriers are down against extravagant speeds on those highways .... Montana is right to be worried about 1'i Higher Speeds Mean Higher Pollution, GANNETT NEWS SERV., Oct. 27, 1996. 11 See id. (showing that this is a larger increase than in any other state). 116 Telephone Interview with Jim Carlin, Air Quality Specialist, Montana Department of Environmental Quality (Aug. 20, 1998) (attributing the slight impact on the environment to the small increase in actual speed). A final concern to Montana under the Basic Rule, the detriment to the state's reputation, is less tangible. Montana has endured national ridicule and derision from the public since instituting the Basic Rule. Comedians poked fun at Montana and its free-wheeling spirit.128 Others have been less charitable. National Public Radio's "Car Talk" program labeled Montanans 122 Hall, supra note 53, at 10A. 123 See McLaughlin, supra note 120, at BI (investigating whether Montana's recent publicity regarding the Basic Rule, the Freemen, and the Unabomber is hurting state tourism). 'reasonable and proper' "a bunch of morons." 129 Syndicated columnist Tony Kornheiser was equally condescending in his description of Montanans, quipping, "[h]ave you seen the kind of people who live in Montana? Montanans make West Virginians look like it's opening night at Lincoln Center. This is the end of Montana as a state and the beginning of Montana as a test track." 30 A Highway Patrol officer lamented that the Basic Rule "'[m]ade us the joke of the nation.'"'13 Montanans viewed outsiders' criticism as an attack on their state's values and vehemently defended their libertarian ways. Governor Racicot's Communication Director bristled, "'[tihe tone of much of the coverage has been patronizing at best .... And I understand it. Urban Americans can be uncomfortable if they don't have someone else telling them what to do." 1 32 One resident replying to Kornheiser's arrogant missive did not mince words: The whole thing shakes down to a simple truth about how we do things here. Our legislature made a law reflecting reality instead of prescribing it. We're doing just fine with that, thank you, we're used to being If you can't come to terms with that, don't responsible for ourselves. drive here. 133 Despite these impassioned rebuttals, Montana's image emerged a bit battered from the national press pounding. On the whole, however, since tourism remains unaffected and Montanans themselves shrug off outsiders' opinions, the eccentric reputation may prove a source of pride for the state's independent residents. The benefits under the Basic Rule, although more difficult to quantify than Increased efficiency represents the most the detriments, appear substantial. important advantage under the new law. The state's vast distances, isolated commercial centers and dearth of traffic 34 argue for the value of higher since December of 1995 when Montana suspended its daytime speed limit for highway drivers, it's been the butt of national jokes."). the Spokesman of the Montana Department of Transportation, Dennis Unsworth, admits, It can be pretty lonely."' "'[Y]ou can drive for several hours and not see another car. speeds.1 35 There may well be significant productivity gains from time saved. Highway Patrol Sergeant Robert Koch highlighted the economic importance of saving time on the roadways, noting, "'[w]e have a lot of people making a living driving, . . . and they are appreciative of the fact they can drive 70 or even 80 miles per hour on the interstate."" 136 Residents also favor the increased speeds to facilitate weekly errands or enhance social life. 137 The increased speeds can result in substantial time savings. "A car going 65 mph takes more than 10 hours to cross Montana. Go 80 mph, and you shave off two hours." 138 Overall, a U.S. News & World Report article aptly summarized the productivity argument, stating, "[fluel efficiency has doubled since 1974, and saving a few bucks on a long trip by doing 65 vs. 75 is hardly compelling. But many drivers will find savings of an hour or two in travel time quite appealing." 1 39 It would be highly desirable to quantify the various savings from these efforts, though we have not been able to do so here. highway study showing that "half of all drivers exceeded the 65 mph limit on Montana's interstates. Two-thirds ignored the 55 mph signs on two-land highways."). prior law extended driving times over long, tiring distances, decreasing roadway safety.' 42 One Montanan emphasized the weariness and peril of such protracted travel: "'The big killer out here is falling asleep on a straightaway .... If you drive slower, you just spend more time on the road getting fatigued." "143 All in all, proponents' safety arguments, contradicting speed limit advocates' safety claims, require empirical evaluation. We have not found much direct evidence in their favor. like I'm a hazard, since accidents often come from speed differentials."'); Manning, supra note 60, at 16 (quoting its reporter who drove at the prior posted speed limits, "I am the most dangerous driver on the road."). 42 See Hardy, supra note 112, at 5. 143 Id. 144 See Hallgren, supra note 59, at A23 (reporting on a resident's view of "the law's assumption that we will be responsible for our own driving"); Letts, supra note 64, at 9 ("The lack of limit matches Montana's libertarian instincts. Since the days of the 19th . . the state has had its century outlaws 'Rattlesnake Jack' and 'Liver Eating Johnson' . share of wild folk."); Richardson, supra note 57, at Al ("'Montanans seem to think they can handle it [driving under the Basic Rule]-unlike in Washington [D.C.], they don't need a lot of signs telling them when they can stand here or park there."'); Simon, supra note 58, at I ("'Our people, [Montanans] they have a philosophy .... [t]hey like the freedom to be prudent."'). For law enforcement officials, the Basic Rule is both a blessing and a burden. The highway patrol is writing considerably more speeding tickets. 149 In 1995, the Highway Patrol issued 4,197 citations. 150 That number soared to 6,825 in 1996, but declined to 5,262 in 1997 as people became accustomed to the law.' 5' Since fines under the conservation speed limit cost a predicted decrease in speeding infractions. See id. at 9. Law enforcement contended that such traffic stops enabled officers to detain suspicious drivers, often resulting in the motorists' arrests for other, more serious crimes. See id. ("Mr. Wakefield [a Montana Highway Patrol officer] added that speed offenses used to allow the police to pull over shifty-looking motorists. He once apprehended a gang of armed robbers that way."). The argument implied that under the Basic Rule, officers would have fewer opportunities to stop motorists for speeding, thereby depriving police of the opportunities to discover and arrest dangerous offenders. See id. Despite the dubious constitutionality of such a tactic, the predictions now seem inapposite: the Highway Patrol actually issues more citations, perhaps increasing the chance encounters. See Ann Treneman, Speed Is in the Eye of the Cop, INDEPENDENT, Sept. 27, 1996, at 17. same month in April tickets than the in Another benefit to law enforcement under the Basic Rule is the wellspring of public support for "reasonable and prudent" driving. For example, the Montana office of the American Legion reinstituted its custom of commemorating fatal crash scenes with miniature steel crosses, a practice which it had not undertaken in 40 years. 155 In addition to the American Legion's efforts, Montana embarked upon a major advertising campaign to inform motorists about the Basic Rule and encourage safe driving. 156 Described as a "public information blitz," 57 the $20,000 campaign 158 intones, "Whoa, Dude, there is a Speed Limit in Montana." 159 The state uses a variety of mass media in targeting its message primarily to non-Montanans.160 Despite the increased revenues and enhanced civic support, law enforcement faces significant burdens in administering the Basic Rule. First, officers have encountered more roadside confrontations with motorists. 16 1 The law's subjective nature results in a growing number of "official-violator relationships," where drivers argue with officers over appropriate speeds. 162 155 See Brooke, supra note 49, at 16. A reporter recounted observing the crosses and Occasionally, you will find a single cross here and there, some with smallpatches of flowers planted beneath them. More often, though, you will find two or three welded together. The most I saw in one spot on a recent trip through Montana was five. Several times. They weren't limited to the wide-open spaces or the interstates. You will find them on the approaches to small towns and larger cities, in the mountains and on the prairies, on curves and straight roads and places where there is nothing for miles and miles but miles and miles. It goes without saying, the crosses are a sobering experience, one that reminds you that speed limits are not a bad idea. posters, fliers, bumper stickers, and television ads). Second, the Basic Rule's mutable standards encourage motorists to challenge citations in court, resulting in more numerous and protracted trials. 163 Consequently, law enforcement and Montana's legal system must endure a deluge of Basic Rule cases. The Highway Patrol described the increasing workload: More offenders are taking basic rule violations to court. Thus officers must prepare for the case and appear in court for these challenges. Because of the law's subjectivity, trials involving basic rule violations tend to take more time. Case preparation and court appearance time have increased by 614 hours over the previous year [1995].164 Montana's Attorney General, Joseph Mazurek, derided the increase in court time and costs, emphasizing the detriment to public safety by decreasing officers' time patrolling the highways. 65 Third, the increase in accidents under the Basic Rule resulted in a further drain on officials' time. Comparing 1995 to 1996, officers spent an additional 4,000 hours in 1996 investigating crash sites, a 9.6% increase from 1995.166 Fourth, local courts appear doubly affected, as they deal with both the rising case load as well as recording the Basic Rule infractions. 67 Finally, uncertainty about the meaning of the rule means that drivers do not know, in advance, when they will be violating the law, and hence there is a risk of lack of fair notice-a point we take up below. & Edwards, supra note 86 (quoting Montana Attorney General Joseph Mazurek stating, "[t]he time in court defending basic-rule citations because of the subjective nature of those violations is going up dramatically"). from all the citations for basic-rule violations."). B. Administering Standards as The most difficult challenge under the Basic Rule is establishing workable criteria for arrest and prosecution. The essential problem is that there is no quantitative basis for deciding whether a motorist has violated the law. "squishy," 17 1 Variously described "vaguely defined,"1 72 "arbitrary and inconsistent," 173 and "an enforcement nightmare," 1 74 administering the Basic Rule is an onerous task because it is so unclear. Law enforcement officials and motorists find the law too subjective, hindering both drivers' ability to comply with the Basic Rule and the Highway Patrol's ability to deter violators. 175 A reporter analogized the dilemma to asking every law enforcement official "to decide how many drinks each driver may have, based on body weight and type, before becoming too drunk to drive."' 76 A survey of what speed would constitute a Basic Rule violation revealed the considerable disparity in estimates on the subject. 177 168 However, law enforcement's economic and temporal strains appear less a function of the Basic Rule and more a result of the state's budgetary allocation. See supra Part IV.A. From the Basic Rule's expanding revenue figures, it seems plausible that the fines could ameliorate the law's increased costs as well as provide for the hiring of new Highway Patrol officers, judges or court personnel to meet law enforcement's needs. controversy involves the speed constituting a Basic Rule violation, there is uncertainty relating to the hours of the day in which the law is in effect. See Oldham, supra note 69, at 46 (articulating the imprecise guidelines the Highway Patrol follows, stating, "Officially, one-half hour after sunset is night. But the rule of thumb, according to [Highway Patrol Major Bert] Obert, is that if you can read your analog wristwatch without the help of artificial light, or without putting it up to your face, it's technically still daytime."). Speeds of more than 100 mph are particularly vexing for law enforcement. Many officers state the refrain that "'[a]nything in triple digits is probably a ticket," '" 8 1 defining 100 mph as "the real Montana speed limit." 82 But others are not as certain that the 100 mph threshold triggers a violation. When queried whether a motorist legally could drive more than 100 mph, Major Steve Barry, Deputy Chief of Montana's Highway Patrol, admitted, "'I can't really answer that."" 83 Another officer acknowledged that he would be disinclined to stop a professional driver on a desolate highway at speeds in excess of 100 mph. 184 Montana's judiciary also is reluctant to assign a fixed numerical speed limit. Some judges impose a de facto 85 mph limit, asserting, "'[b]ring that speed into my court and that person is guilty." 1 85 Other judges disagree, contending "there's no speed that would necessarily result in a conviction. . . . 'Ninety-five on the interstate between here [Helena] and Billings might be perfectly OK." 1 86 This disparity in judicial attitudes has caused many officers to complain that "dangerous" drivers are often "let off by judges." 187 different answers." Oldham, supra note 69, at 48 (commenting "there's more gray in this law than in all the hair in Florida"). "officers routinely stop drivers traveling over 100 mph"). Barry admitting that there is "'no theoretical upper speed limit"'). Ferrari on a flat stretch of interstate, I probably wouldn't pull him over."). The dearth of consistent standards resulted in arbitrary and ineffective enforcement. The discretion of scores of officers, prosecutors and judges combined with the numerous Basic Rule conditions concerning weather, roads, and vehicle maintenance fosters inconsistency.' 9' Additionally, the Highway Patrol asserts that the Basic Rule's subjective nature hinders enforcement by creating longer vehicle stops and increased court appearances. 92 Consequently, law officers spend less time on the road, 193 and the roadside stops become more confrontational, detracting from overall safety and enforcement efficiency. 94 A recent Park County case involving a motorist traveling at 101 mph illustrates the debate over establishing workable standards.'95 A district court jury acquitted the driver of any Basic Rule violations.1 96 The decision incensed law enforcement officials. 197 Highway Patrol Chief Craig Reap stated "'[i]f someone hits your car at 101 mph, wouldn't you be outraged to hear there's no violation?""' 98 The Attorney General was equally indignant, proclaiming "if being caught driving 101 mph isn't violating the basic rule, ... [I don't] know what [is]."1 9 The defendant's attorney countered that the driver's background as a mechanic, the car's exemplary maintenance, and cers spend time explaining the basic rule to offenders and preparing cases for court). The Basic Rule has had a detrimental effect on the consistency and potentially the overall effectiveness of Montana's law enforcement. Admittedly, the Basic Rule affords ample and possibly excessive discretion. However, the cause of the "standards" problem emanates not only from the law's vagueness, but also from patrolmen' and judges' variable interpretations of the Basic Rule's expressed "reasonable and prudent" standards. Those officers and judges who establish their own, perhaps idiosyncratic, numerical limits and uniformly stop or convict defendants under fixed guidelines might be thought to endanger both the spirit and the letter of the Basic Rule, in turn creating an uncertain patchwork of rule-free and rule-bound law enforcement. A more uniform enforcement process might have reduced this problem. Consequently, the Basic Rule's enforcement problems stem partly from the vagaries of individual assessments and multiple conditions. These points lead naturally to the question of whether the Basic Rule compromises values associated with the rule of law. Drivers face numerous opportunities to either comply with or disobey the rule of law. As discussed previously, Montanans routinely ignored prior speed limits, causing disrespect for the law and demoralizing the officers charged with enforcing the state's statutes. 20 2 Furthermore, some officers speculated that violation of speed limit laws lead to infractions of other vehicular offenses and a general deterioration of rule of law values. 20 3 Speed 200 Id. The Highway Patrol disagreed with the defense attorney's argument that the driver's background as a mechanic ameliorated the Basic Rule violation: "[O]ther drivers cannot possibly be expected to factor another driver's occupation into their decision making." Montana Highway Patrol Legislative Handout, supra note 86. Rule of law values also suffer under the Basic Rule. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the Basic Rule also gives rise to additional traffic violations, although the infractions differ from those arising under prior speed limits. 20 5 For example, officers report that drivers frequently do not decelerate when leaving the interstates and entering commercial centers. 2°6 Law enforcement officials from neighboring states also report externalities. In Idaho, a state policeman assigned to patrol the Montana-Idaho border regularly stops drivers exceeding 90 mph. 20 7 The Idaho officer notes that many motorists are unaware of Idaho's laws or are simply inattentive to their vehicle's speed, despite three signs denoting the change in state speed limits. 20 8 As with most effects of the Basic Rule, the law's effects on motorists' rule of law values appears inconclusive. While evidence suggests that traffic violations that are not related to speed have decreased, other speed-related violations are on the rise. 2°9 Likewise, the theory that motorists are no longer being turned into "scofflaws" is countered by the significant increase in citations issued under the Basic Rule 210 and by the externalities reported in border states. 211 V. RECENT LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS AND POLITICAL POLARIZATION One year after Montana reinstituted the Basic Rule on its highways, the state's Republican Governor, Marc Racicot, Democrat Attorney General, Joseph Mazurek, and the Highway Patrol led a campaign to reestablish numerical speed limits. 212 Citing the rising number of accidents and interstate lature made a law reflecting reality instead of prescribing it."). speeds and do not realize when they are violating a numerical speed limit). but they say they were being 'reasonable and prudent"'). State Senator Bill Crippen presented the coalition's proposal in a bill introduced in January 1997.215 The legislation faced an uphill battle from the outset. Proposed in a "legislature [that] has a long history of turning down proposals to increase speeding penalties," 216 the bill encountered significant opposition and was defeated on a procedural vote of 35 to 15.217 Although Senator Crippen managed to revive the legislation on a 26 to 24 committee vote to debate the issue before the full Senate, 218 the bill's prospects seemed bleak. In September of 1997, several state legislators renewed calls for numerical speed limits. Since the Montana legislature meets every other year and had concluded its 1997 session, several legislators petitioned the Secretary of mph speed limit for most two lane roads). Crippen's bill with the daytime speed limit raised to 80 mph. Id. the fact that Montana is the only state without limits"). Opponents rejected the link between the Basic Rule and fatalities. One lawmaker observed that "many of the deaths have involved alcohol or the failure to use seat belts, and that many have occurred at night, when a speed limit is in effect. "228 Given the legislature's historic dislike of speed limits, S.B. 64's resounding defeat, and the overall lack of public support, it appeared unlikely lawmakers would vote to convene the legislature. 229 These predictions came true as speed limit proponents lost their bid to reconvene the legislature by a lopsided vote of 110 to 38.230 The political polarization the speed limit issue engenders is the most interesting aspect of recent legislative actions. Although polls show that Montanans are roughly evenly split on the speed limits question, significant differences of opinion exist by geographic region, gender and age. For example, residents of Montana's more rural eastern and central regions favor the Basic Rule to shorten the time required to travel the long distances between the areas' isolated communities. 231 City residents tend to favor numerical limits. 232 224 See Taking a Brake on Speed Law/Montana's Death Toll Rises on No-Limit Roads, NEWSDAY (New York, N.Y.), Sept. 8, 1997, at A21 (explaining that some Montanans call for a numerical speed limit as a "matter of life and death"). Gender and age are even more indicative of individuals' preferences in the speed limits debate. When residents were asked whether they "would favor or oppose having the Legislature enact a specific, daytime speed limit," respondents split almost evenly on the question, with 48% in favor and 45% opposed. 233 However, women favored the limits by a substantial 68% to 28% margin, while men opposed the limits 62% to 30%.234 Questioned on the specific proposal from Governor Racicot and Attorney General Mazurek, women favored the legislation by an even wider 69% to 25% margin. 235 Men still opposed the limits plan, although by the smaller margin of 50% to In similar 43%.236 Age appears to reinforce gender speed limit preferences. surveys, men between the ages of 18 and 30 were the strongest Basic Rule advocates, while women over 63 were the leading supporters of numerical limits. 237 The recent legislative actions exemplify Montana's factionalized opinion on the speed limits issue. Yet despite the clamor over increased highway fatalities and the role of excess speed in such accidents, until Montanans develop a consensus bridging geography, gender, and age, a legislative alteration of the Basic Rule seems unlikely. In late 1998, a sharply divided Montana Supreme Court invalidated the daytime speed limit as unconstitutionally vague. 238 The case involved a defendant who had been doing a steady 85 miles per hour. 239 In a brief opinion, the Court concluded that the Basic Rule did not give the defendant "reasonable notice of the speed at which his conduct would violate the law." 240 Neither the arresting officer nor the Attorney General was able to specify a speed that would have been reasonable for the defendant. 24 1 The where you might not pass another car for miles."); Brooke, supra note 49, at 16 ("Driving speeds tend to be higher in the plains of eastern Montana, where long stretches of straight, flat road connect farflung communities."); Daytime Speed Limit Not Supported, STATE NEWS BRIEFS, Dec. 19, 1996 ("Lawmakers say they do not believe polls showing an equal split on the issue of posted daytime speed limits. Three legislators from central Montana say they've found little or no support for the proposal."). that The purpose of this paper is principally empirical, and thus we do not venture a detailed discussion of the Court's ruling under the due process clause. But what we have said here offers some lessons about the need for empirically-informed constitutional law. It is difficult for a court to venture a judgment about vagueness without knowing how a law operates in practice. A law that seems vague may be far less so when taken in the context of public and private practices. Note. for example, that on the day after it invalidated the Basic Rule, the Montana Supreme Court upheld the prohibition on "reckless driving," notwithstanding the apparently unclear definition of "reckless driving" as operating "any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property." 246 The constitutional question is what legal terms are taken to mean, by public and private actors, and a seemingly open-ended term may be proved far less open-ended by practice. Montana's Basic Rule appears to be a simple proposition: During daytime hours on the state's highways and interstates, motorists must drive in a "reasonable and prudent" manner. Yet the Rule's impact on America's its residents, has fourth largest state, proven to be anything but simple. its roadways, Enacted in accordance with Montana's libertarian principles, the Basic Rule drew national attention but caused no substantial difference in Montanans' driving habits in the short term. Although the average speed increased by a non-trivial amount from 72 mph to 78 mph, most Montanans continued driving at approximately the same speed. While remaining within historical fluctuation ranges, the state's total fatalities decreased during 1996, soared in 1997, and declined again in 1998; it remains unclear if this variation is attributable to the change in law or to some other factor or set of factors. The underlying lesson appears to be that driving habits are only partly a function of law. Probably the most discernible effect of the Rule is that Montana has become a "speed magnet," attracting tourists who view Montana's interstates It is also clear that the Basic Rule created several complex as race tracks. tradeoffs. Highway safety, fuel efficiency, air quality, and Montana's repuintation suffered under the Basic Rule. creased social ties, shorter driving times, and personal satisfaction stand as benefits. Enforcement is perhaps the biggest problem with the Basic Rule. Although ticket revenues have increased, roadside confrontations, accident investigations and court appearances also have increased, depleting the already scant resources of the Highway Patrol and judiciary. Furthermore, the subjective standard has proven an onerous task to administer. Arbitrary and inconsistent enforcement by the police, prosecutors, and judges impedes citithe law's effectiveness. zens' compliance and to reinstate a numerical speed limit have failed amidst geographic, age and gender factionalization. However, in late 1998, a sharply divided Montana Supreme Court invalidated the daytime speed limit as unconstitutionally vague, a move we have criticized in light of the insufficient factual record of the case. A more consistent application of the law might have reduced some of these problems and may have prevented, or at least forestalled, the recent Montana Supreme Court's action. Recent evidence of declining roadway fatalities and Basic Rule citations may indicate that drivers were adapting to the flexible standard. Furthermore, as Montanans, tourists, the Highway Patrol, prosecutors and judges became more accustomed to "reasonable and prudent" travel, a consensus might have emerged, reducing the difficulty of establishing workable standards for law enforcement and the judiciary. Administrative Editor Topic and Book Review Editor Editor-in-Chief Managing Editor Article Editors Executive Editors Note Editors