 In the Nazi period, German judges rejected formalism.' They did not rely on the ordinary or original meaning of legal texts. On the contrary, they thought that statutes should be construed in accordance with the spirit of the age, defined by reference to the Nazi regime. They thought that courts could carry out their task "only if they do not remain glued to the letter of the law, but rather penetrate its inner core in their interpretations and do their part to see that the aims of the lawmaker are realized."2 Thus, for example, the German Supreme Court concluded that a law forbidding "sexual intercourse" between Germans and Jews is not limited to coition .... A broad interpretation is ... appropriate in view of the fact that the provisions of the law are meant to protect not only German blood but also German honor. This requires that in addition to coition, all such sexual manipulations-whether actively performed or passively tolerated-that have as their aim the satisfaction of one partner's sex drive in a manner other than the completion of t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago. I am grateful to Jack Goldsmith, Saul Levmore, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, and David Strauss for valuable comments on an earlier draft. Participants in the Symposium at the University of Chicago Law School offered a great deal of help; I am especially grateful to Frank Easterbrook and Frank Michelman. Brian Lehman provided superb research assistance and excellent comments as well. coition, must cease between Jews and citizens of German or related kinds of blood.' A lower court went so far as to conclude that kissing could take "the place of normal sexual intercourse" and therefore violate the statute, in such a way as to justify a two year jail sentence.4 After the war, the Allied forces faced a range of choices about how to reform the German legal system. One of their first steps was to insist on a formalistic, "plain meaning" approach to law. "[S]uch laws enacted in the Hitler period as had not been voided were to be interpreted in accordance with 'the plain meaning of the text and without regard to objectives or meanings ascribed in preambles or other pronouncements."'5 Now consider the following cases: 1. The Delaney Clause provides that a color additive may not be used if, after appropriate tests, it is "found by the Secretary to induce cancer when ingested by man or animal."6 The Secretary seeks to allow use of a color additive, even if it is carcinogenic, if the lifetime risk of cancer is equal to or less than one in nine million. This is nine times less than the risk of getting cancer from eating, once every two hundred fifty days, a single peanut with the lawfully permitted level of aflatoxins, and also nine times less than the risk of getting cancer from increased air pollution as a result of spending seventeen hours every year in Denver rather than the District of Columbia. Has the Secretary violated the Delaney Clause?7 2. The Occupational Safety and Health Act provides that the Secretary of Labor, in issuing standards dealing with toxic materials, "shall set the standard which most adequately assures, to the extent feasible, on the basis of the best available evidence, that no employee will suffer material impairment of health or functional capacity even if such employee has regular exposure to the hazard dealt with by 70 Entscheidungen des Reichsgerichts in Strafsachen 375 (1937), translated in such standard for the period of his working life."8 The Secretary issues a regulation controlling benzene at a level of one part benzene per million parts of air, claiming that there is no safe threshold for benzene. Is the regulation lawful? 3. The Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act defines "drug" to include an article that is "intended to affect the structure or any function of the body.""0 It is clear that the Congress that enacted the Act did not believe that tobacco counted as a "drug." Can the FDA regulate tobacco products as such?" B. Definitions and Distinctions It is not easy to define the term 'Tormalism," 2 partly because there is no canonical kind of formalism. My principal concern here is with formalism as an approach to statutory construction, though I will also touch on formalism in the law of contract and constitutional law. The focus throughout will be on formalism as an interpretive strategy. All rules involve recognizing or classifying particular cases as instances of general terms, and in the case of everything which we are prepared to call a rule it is possible to distinguish clear central cases, where it certainly applies and others where there are reasons for both asserting and denying that it applies. ... This imparts to all rules a fringe of vagueness of "open texture" .... This aspect of law is often held to show that any elucidation of the concept of law in terms of rules must be misleading. To insist on it in the face of the realities of the situation is often stigmatized as "conceptualism" or "formalism." Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? cretion in individual cases. Formalism therefore entails an interpretive method that relies on the text of the relevant law and that excludes or minimizes extratextual sources of law. It tends as well to favor judicial holdings that take the form of wide rules rather than narrow settlements of particular disputes. There is certainly no canonical form of antiformalism, and those who reject formalism can offer many different competing approaches. But the antiformalist tends to insist that interpretation requires or permits resort to sources other than the text, and the antiformalist tends as well to support judgments that take the form of narrow rather than wide holdings.' The antiformalist is less worried about the exercise of discretion in individual cases and is more concerned about avoiding the kinds of rigidity that can lead to injustices and mistakes. Thus the antiformalist might contend that courts legitimately invoke purposes, or background principles of various kinds, to push statutes (or contracts) in what seem to be sensible directions. There is obviously a relationship between the debate over formalism and the debate over rules and standards, a relationship that will inform the analysis through "No one denies that terms take their meaning from context. It is possible to favor the ordinary meaning of the text over the law's apparent purposes without denying the dependence of meaning on context, though of course this view raises complexities. for example, Frederick Schauer, Playing By the Rules (Claredon 1991). The University of Chicago Law Review out. Ronald Dworkin is a prominent antiformalist; i5 on the current Court, Justice Breyer is an outspoken critic of formalism. 9 The real question is "what degree of formalism?" rather than "formalist or not?"'° It is hard to find anyone who believes that canons of construction have no legitimate place in interpretation, or who thinks that literal language should always be followed no matter how absurd and palpably unintended the outcome. No antiformalist thinks that judges interpreting statutes should engage in ad hoc balancing of all relevant considerations. The real division is along a continuum. One pole is represented by those who aspire to textually driven, rule-bound, rule-announcing judgments; the other is represented by those who are quite willing to reject the text when it would produce an unreasonable outcome, or when it is inconsistent with the legislative history, or when it conflicts with policy judgments of certain kinds or substantive canons of construction. Dworkin, Law's Empire 20-23 (Harvard 1985). See also James Traub, Talk of the Town, New Yorker 35 (June 2, 1997) (reporting Dworkin's discussion of the rule involving basketball players going onto the floor during a fight). Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? C. Tasks and Claims In this Article I ask whether a good defense of formalism must be empirical-whether it must depend on factual assumptions and claims. With some qualifications, my answer is "Yes." Formalism should be defended pragmatically, with close reference to the likely performance of various institutions, and in terms of its consequences; it is not easily defended by reference to quasi-theological claims about the nature of law, legitimacy, or democracy. In this sense a good defender of formalism can and (in my view) had better be a legal realist too.' This is not because notions like legitimacy are unimportant--on the contrary, they are extremely important-but because they cannot, without a great deal of empirical supplementation, tell us whether to be formalists or not. And it may indeed be possible to defend formalism in realist terms, as, for example, Lisa Bernstein has done in certain contexts in commercial law.24 More specifically, I claim that formalism, as an approach to statutory interpretation, must be defended by empirical claims about the likely performance and activities of courts, legislatures, administrative agencies, and private parties. To know whether formalism is good, we need to know three principal things: * whether a formalist or nonformalist judiciary will produce more mistakes and injustices; " whether the legislature will anticipate possible mistakes or injustices in advance, and whether it will correct them after they occur, and do so at relatively low cost; and " whether a nonformalist judiciary will greatly increase the costs of decision, for courts, litigants, and those seeking legal advice, in the process increasing the costs associated with unpredictability. poses I am discussing theories of interpretation and not judges who emphasize precedent as formalists. costs of error (the reference to "costs" should not imply economic reductionism; the term is a placeholder for the real-world difficulties-in terms of unpredictability of outcomes-that might follow from one or another interpretive strategy). In a legal system in which the legislature is extremely careful before the fact, and highly responsive to judicial interpretations after the fact, formalism might well make sense, especially if a nonformalist judiciary would create confusion and make blunders of its own. By contrast, a nonformalist approach would make sense in a legal system with an excellent judiciary and a legislature that is both careless and inattentive. derlying empirical issues-not over large concepts of any kindthat principally separates formalists and nonformalists. Of course, decisive empirical evidence is not easy to find on such questions, partly because of the difficulty of controlling for confounding variables. But by recognizing the empirical issues as such, we would have a better sense of what we are disagreeing about, itself a large gain. And with more research, we could learn There is an analogy here with debates over cost-benefit analysis. Many people can agree that cost-benefit analysis makes sense, but they may disagree, sharply, over what should count as a cost or a benefit, and how much various things that count should be allowed to count. By itself, the idea of cost-benefit analysis is empty; the question is whether it can be specified in such a way as to command, and deserve, widespread support. a great deal more about the underlying questions. Of course empirical evidence cannot by itself yield any normative conclusion; the question is whether the normative background is sufficiently shared, so that certain findings would lead apparent antagonists in the same general direction. I believe that this is the case here, and that with imaginable empirical findings, both formalists and antiformalists should be flexible enough to move in the direction of their apparent adversariesY This is the great hope of empirical research: to soften legal and political debate by showing that disputes about values are often disputes about facts, at least in the sense that certain answers to factual questions can make it unnecessary to resolve disputes about values. Let us distinguish between two phenomena that go under the term "formalism." The first is captured in the pretense that all or most legal terms can resolve hard cases. This pretense is illustrated by (for example) the view that the term "liberty" necessarily includes freedom of contract, or that a requirement of "equal protection" necessarily prohibits (or for that matter requires) affirmative action. The problem with this species of formalism is In this way I suggest that the debate over legal interpretation is not so different from the debate over (for example) the minimum wage: If the minimum wage really does substantially increase unemployment, those who endorse it should be prepared to rethink; if the minimum wage has no adverse effect on employment, those who condemn it should be prepared to rethink. that it is dishonorable, a kind of fraud. The relevant legal terms have many possible meanings, and a language lesson is insufficient to justify the choice. But a second possible species of formalism is entirely honorable. On this view, statutory terms should be understood in accordance with their ordinary meaning in the relevant community. When there is such an ordinary meaning, nothing is fraudulent about this approach to legal interpretation. The question is whether it is good, not whether it is fraudulent. I think that this is a genuinely new formalism,"' sharply distinguished from the old, which was, at least in its selfpresentation, not at all empirical and pragmatic in character. At least in public law, the principal defenses of formalism-and the principal challenges to formalism-have been abstract and conceptual, and have not depended on empirical claims at all. These are the arguments that I wish to reject. I believe that the conceptual arguments are best taken as pragmatic arguments in disguise; that claims about "legitimacy" are really consequentialist claims about what system of interpretation is likely to have good effects. Those who wish to defend formalism should move from (unhelpful and question-begging) abstract conceptual arguments to (more promising and tractable) concrete empirical claims. This is the tendency in, for example, Bernstein, 144 U Pa L Rev 1765 (cited in note 24); Adrian Vermeule, Legislative History and the Limits of Judicial Competence: The Untold Story of Holy Trinity Church, 50 Stan L Rev 1833, 1885-96 (1998) (arguing that problems in judicial competence make legislative history an unhelpful source for statutory interpretation). See also Richard Epstein, Simple Rules for A Complex World (Harvard 1995), which, when stripped of its libertarian foundations, seems to me a policy-oriented, insistently instrumental argument for rules as the best way of minimizing the sum of decision costs and error costs. malists and antiformalists might be disagreeing. The law of contract is the place to start. A major task of contract law is to develop default rules, even in cases in which the contract seems clear. Consider, for example, a case in which an employee complains that he has been fired without any showing of cause. If the contract says nothing about whether employment is "for cause" or "at will," the court will have to write an implied term, applying a default rule that governs such situations. Indeed, the need for default rules is even more pervasive than it seems. No term, contractual or otherwise, has meaning in isolation; meaning is always a function of both culture and context. When a contractual term seems clear and selfsufficient, and to require no resort to default rules, it is only because there is general agreement on the relevant culture and the relevant context. The same is true for statutory interpretation. See text accompanying notes 6-11. cisely that. The notion of "imaginative reconstruction" in statutory construction embodies this understanding of the interpreter's task.' Other default rules are information-eliciting. The point of such rules is to put on the person most likely to speak the obligation to obtain a clear statement one way or the other. Hence information-eliciting default rules are sometimes described as "penalties.' Such rules attempt to ensure that both parties (and also the courts) will have information at the time the contract is made; they counteract the risk of strategic nondisclosure. Suppose, for example, that a court does not know if the parties would have made an employment contract at will or for cause. The court might want to impose before-the-fact incentives that would encourage the parties to speak unambiguously, both to one another and to the court. It is reasonable to think that if the court wants to do this, it should hold against the employer-that is, it should say that contracts are presumed to be for cause, on the theory that the employer is most likely to make suitable corrections if this provision does not fit the needs of the parties. The key questions here as well are empirical in nature: Who is most likely to make an explicit provision on the subject? At what cost will they do so? It is also possible to imagine information-eliciting default rules in the area of statutory interpretation. For example, a court might conclude that statutes should be presumed not to apply outside the territorial boundaries of the United States-if it believes that this approach is most likely to elicit a clear statement from Congress-so that all parties (and the courts) are informed, in advance, of the relevant outcomes.' It should be clear that an information-eliciting default rule can serve formalist goals by decreasing uncertainty and judicial guessing games. The empirical See, for example, Richard A. Posner, Statutory Interpretation-in the Classroom and the Courtroom, 50 U Chi L Rev 800, 817 (1983) ("[Tlhe task for the judge called upon to interpret a statute is best described as one of imaginative reconstruction. The judge should try to think his way as best he can into the minds of the enacting legislators and imagine how they would have wanted the statute applied to the case at bar."). See also Richard A. Posner, The Problems of Jurisprudence 273 (Harvard 1990) ("When confronting unclear statutes, judges ... have to summon all their powers of imagination and empathy in an effort... to place themselves in the position of the legislators who enacted the statute that they are being asked to interpret. They cannot only study plain meanings; they must try to understand the problem that that the legislature faced."). ploying such a rule). questions for statutory default rules are: Which party is in the best position to obtain an explicit provision? What is the cost of doing so? These points raise the question how a court should choose between a market-mimicking and an information-eliciting default rule. One possibility is to ask whether the court is confident that it can generate a good rule of either kind. If a court knows that the parties to a contract would have agreed on some term X, it seems plain that the court should simply adopt that term; there is no need to try to elicit the relevant information. But if a court has no idea what the parties would have done, and if it has a good idea how to allocate the burden so as to elicit a clear statement, an information-eliciting default rule seems better. Thus, for example, an at will background rule would make a good deal of sense if a court was clear that this is the rule that these parties, or most parties, would accept. But if a court is unsure what the parties would do, and f it has confidence about which party would be in a good position to obtain a clear statement, it should adopt an information-eliciting default rule. If the court has no idea what term employers and employees would choose, it might adopt a waivable for cause rule, on the theory that this rule will force employers to come up with a different result if that seems desirable. But ff the party in the best position to obtain an explicit provision can do so only at very high cost, perhaps a marketmimicking default rule would be better. These ideas can help guide the selection of default rules. If a court deciding a contract case knows that a certain background rule is what the parties would have chosen, it has (by hypothesis) discovered the right rule and perhaps at low cost. If a court is unaware of the market-mimicking rule, but if it knows what rule will elicit clear statements from the parties, it can impose (at low cost) a rule that will produce the right outcome. When the court lacks confidence in either kind of default rule, it might ask in which rule it has comparatively greater confidence, and choose that one. In the law of contract, an error can be defined as an outcome different from what the parties would have chosen if they had made explicit provision on the point; this simple definition can work for the vast bulk of cases. 7 Courts that do not care about what the parties would have done, and that look instead to the objective meaning of contractual terms, should be taken to be saying that this method of interpretation is most likely to minimize decision costs and error costs. some cases, an error may be defined differently, as when some public policy concern suggests that party autonomy is not the foundation for the outcome. This would require a different analysis. dictated by Congress, which is therefore in the better position to get the terms that it wants. It is also possible to doubt the analogy between the contract law question ("what the parties would have done") and the statutory question ("what Congress would have done"). In the law of contract, there may be agreement on what counts as a mistake: doing something different from what the parties would have done.4' This is much less clear in the context of construing statutes; many people think that ambiguous terms should not be understood by asking what Congress would have done.42 Perhaps the question is irrelevant or only part of the picture. And perhaps any judgment about what counts as an "error" is an artifact of the theory, and hence it may be impossible to know whether we have an error at all unless we have first selected the appropriate theory. I will return to this question below. 3 For now let me suggest that where statutes are genuinely ambiguous, an understanding of what Congress would have done is at least a reasonable place to start the analysis. Those who reject this view ("imaginative reconstruction") even as a starting point might ask why they do so, and whether empirical questions are relevant to their judgment; I take up this question below. " See the excellent discussion in Jane S. Schacter, The Confounding Common-Law Originalism in Recent Supreme Court Statutory Interpretation: Implications for the Legislative History Debate and Beyond, 51 Stan L Rev 1 (1998) (discussing the large role judicially crafted policy norms play in Supreme Court statutory interpretation). demand a high "price" to give up their presumptive right, whereas if the background rule is against application, those who favor the statute may demand a much lower "price." Thus background rules can affect the judgments, beliefs, and preferences of the parties to contracts and the parties to law, a phenomenon that much complicates the idea of "market-mimicking." Thus far the discussion has involved genuine default rules. But some interpretive rules are based on public policy and inalienable; they are, in that sense, far more than mere default rules. Constitutional law amounts to the equivalent of inalienable default rules for statutory interpretation; of course Congress is not permitted to contract around constitutional requirements. These points are pretty obvious, but a less obvious point is in the background: There is a continuum from "other things being equal" default rules to "superstrong" default rules, which require an especially clear statement from the parties or from Congress, to genuinely inalienable default rules. An understanding of default rules helps to reveal the empirical dimensions of any dispute over formalism. As noted, a central formalist goal is to reduce the burdens of on-the-spot decisions, above all by eliminating the need for the exercise of discretion in particular cases, and by making sure that law is as rule-like as possible, in a way that promotes predictability for parties and lawmakers alike.4 4 Thus we can find formalism in the set of ideas most closely associated with Justice Antonin Scalia. But consider Scalia's vivid response to the charge of formalism: "[O1f course it's formalist! The rule of law is about form."4" This is an emphatically formal response to the charge of formalism; it amounts to a defense of a formal approach not by reference to considerations of democracy, policy, or anything else, but by reference to an "is," which is taken as an unanalyzed given-here, what the law "is about." Plainly this way of defending formalism is unsatisfactory. Formalism cannot be justified by an "is"; it must be justified by reference to something outside itself (as Justice Scalia is obvi "See Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions, 110 Ethics (forthcoming 1999) (evaluating ex ante and ex post burdens). "Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation at 25 (cited in note 16). ously aware).46 The trick is to identify what the justification might be. See id at 31-34. This is denied in Ernest J. Weinrib, Legal Formalism: On the Immanent Rationality of Law, 97 Yale L J 949, 951 (1988) ("Formalism postulates that law is intelligible as an internally coherent phenomenon.'). I believe that Joseph Ra's response is convincing. See Joseph Raz, Formalism and the Rule of Law, in Robert George, ed, Natural Law Theory 309 (Clarendon 1992). The University of Chicago Law Review have corrected any problems emerging from a formal approach, and would have done so costlessly, the argument for formalism, in cases of that kind, seems greatly strengthened. (A legislative correction does not of course mean that the court was wrong.) B. Disputes About What? To get hold of the resulting debates, and to understand more concretely what formalists and nonformalists are disputing, it is necessary to make some further distinctions. First consider the problem of statutory ambiguity, a problem that arises when Congress uses a term that is reasonably understood in several different ways. Every sensible formalist is aware that when a statute is ambiguous, it is necessary to consult something other than the text. Here there is no dispute between formalists and nonformalists. A consistent formalist might appeal to background principles of various kinds, like the rule of lenity (counseling courts to construe criminal statutes narrowly) or the nature of the federal system (often said to require courts not to allow national law to preempt state law). An analogy can be found in Justice Scalia's suggestion that substantive due process should be understood by reference to tradition, understood at the lowest level of generality.49 The advantage of an approach of this kind is that it promises to contain judicial discretion on the spot, by requiring courts to use rules where text is unclear. Nonformalists are likely to be skeptical of the overall value of these second-best efforts to constrain decisional discretion. that formalism is indeterminate in Holy Trinity because the statutory terms are ambiguous). of excessive generality-problems in which the text appears to run in one direction, but in which the collective speaker is not likely to have had the particular application in mind, and would likely have been aghast at that application. " insistence on using the text as the exclusive or principal source of interpretation; " a belief that the original or ordinary understanding of the text is what governs (acknowledging that in some cases the text will be ambiguous); " a refusal to make exceptions to the ordinary meaning of terms, even where the outcomes were probably not intended and indeed seem far afield from the concerns of the enacting legislature; * where text is unclear, a search for second-best approaches to constraining judicial discretion; " an insistence that when the text is ambiguous, courts should follow the understanding of the agency entrusted with its administration; " a refusal to consult legislative history; " caution about the ideas of legislative "purpose" and legis lative "intention"; " unwillingness to invoke policy arguments of various kinds, involving, for example, the consequences of one or another approach; 2 and • attention to canons of construction that help in limiting judicial discretion and in uncovering meaning, and also to canons that reflect a distinct constitutional commitment or otherwise give clear signals to Congress, but not to canons of interpretation that are not time-honored or that embody controversial judgments about public policy. One way to approach the resulting debate is to ask whether formalism can be justified in the same terms as any of the various kinds of default rules. Perhaps formalism, as an approach to statutes or contracts, can be understood as a kind of global market-mimicking approach, one that accurately divines Congress's instructions in particular cases (understood, controversially, as the use of policy arguments by the Supreme Court). "what Congress would have done if it had decided the question"), or that does this at least as well as any alternative, while at the same time minimizing decision costs. This would be a strong argument for formalism. the problems of textual coherence by reference to Holy Trinity). But these issues are hard to resolve in the abstract. An important empirical question involves the relative competence of formalist and nonformalist judges and likely legislative reactions. Excellent nonformalist judges would be best of all. On the other hand, moderately competent formalist judges would be better than incompetent nonformalist judges, and may even be better than moderately competent nonformalist judges. At least we are now in a position to see the empirical questions that might separate those who accept and those who reject formalism as a market-mimicking default rule. More Information? It seems most straightforward to defend formalism as a massive or global information-eliciting default rule. Perhaps formalism is likely to produce greater clarity from Congress, precisely because it ensures that statutory language will be understood by reference to its terms. Thus the notion that statutes will be taken in their "plain meaning" might be understood as a way of encouraging Congress to speak unambiguously. Knowing that courts will not correct mistaken applications, Congress (and interested groups hoping to win in court) should take greater care before the fact. Indeed, formalism might even be seen as a close cousin of the nondelegation doctrine, a doctrine grounded explicitly on the notion that courts will require Congress to speak with some degree of clarity."6 (The nondelegation doctrine is in turn related to the idea that some statutes and some contracts are void for vagueness; this is also an information-eliciting idea.) If legislators know in advance that courts will not ask "what Congress would have done," and will instead take legislation at its word, then Congress will be penalized by careless language, with the result that Congress will speak more clearly, and no one will have to guess what it "would have done." On this view, formalism is an information-eliciting default rule, in a way that has two salutary consequences. First, it requires the most knowledgeable parties to disclose relevant information to all participants in the political debate, thus making judgments informed rather than ignorant. Second, it discloses information to courts, which might otherwise be forced to guess about what Congress would have done if it had decided the is sue-a guess that might be wrong, and a guess whose very nature requires an increase in the costs of decision. From the discussion thus far, the question whether it is right to approach statutes in formalist fashion seems to depend on three principal questions: if any, additional L How much, inaccuracy (however defined) would be introduced by a nonformal approach? If courts would blunder a great deal, or introduce irrelevant considerations of policy or principle, the case for formalism is fortified. 2. What kind of ex ante incentives are created by formal and nonformal approaches, and how, if at all, would Congress respond to those incentives? Would judicial formalism encourage Congress legislate more clearly? Would Congress correct the problems of excessive generality, at least after the fact? to 3. How much additional uncertainty would be introduced by a nonformal approach, taking uncertainty to include the need for litigation and the difficulty of planning? How bad would such uncertainty be? What would be its cost? Here the inquiry is into the size of decision costs associated with formal and nonformal approaches. From these questions, we have a research agenda that could keep a lot of people busy. It is possible, for example, to imagine state-by-state comparisons (what has happened with more, or less, formalist state courts?), area-by-area comparisons (do some areas of law, for example tax, see a high or low degree of formalism, and with what consequences?), and general national studies across time (how often does Congress overrule formalist, or nonformalist decisions? Is Congress responsive to formalist signals?). We can now obtain a better understanding of debates over formalism in constitutional law. Here, too, decision costs and error costs are highly relevant. Justice Scalia, for example, thinks that use of the original understanding of the text will simplify constitutional inquiry (a point about reducing decision costs); he also believes that the fabric of rights enjoyed by Americans is more, not less, likely to be at risk from nonformalist approaches (a point about error costs).' In his view, serious "gaps" in rights protection will be filled by democratic arenas. A very different constitutional formalist, Akhil Amar, believes that the constitutional text, rightly understood, will protect an ample category of rights, and hence that those who believe in these rights have nothing to fear from his species of formalism (a point about error costs).59 Antiformalists suggest, by contrast, that the constitutional text leaves many indeterminacies (a point about decision costs), and also that constitutional formalism would result in an unacceptably narrow category of constitutional rights (a point about error costs).' Now it is unlikely that empirical inquiry will resolve all of the relevant debates in the constitutional domain, partly because there is so much disagreement in that domain about what counts as an error, and partly because any judgment to that effect may well be theory-dependent. (Does it count against an interpretive method that it leads to a rejection of Roe v Wade?6' Griswold v Connecticut?2 Craig v Boren?") But there are important empirical issues here too. For example, the argument for formalism in constitutional law would be strengthened if it could be shown that if courts using that method would not protect certain rights, the democratic process would do so instead. The argument against formalism would be strengthened if the opposite could be shown. Many debates over Roe v Wade, in fact, turn on that question.' C. England, America, and the Regulatory State From the discussion thus far, I speculate that other things being equal, formalism is likely to hold sway in democracies that have a competent, highly responsive legislature, and that less formal approaches will be found in democracies in which the legislature is incompetent, inattentive, or both. 5 The speculation is no more than that, but it is supported by some evidence from the corporate field, where formalism is more likely when legislatures are attentive, and also by comparing statutory interpretation in England with that in the United States." English law is far more rule-bound and formalistic than American law. The British Parliament is less likely to delegate discretionary authority to judges. For their part, English judges tend to treat statutes as rules, generally refusing to investigate whether the particular application of the rule makes sense as a matter of policy or principle. In England, lawmaking and law interpretation are far more rigid than in the United States, where judges tend to avoid formalism, and to allow themselves to depart from general language in the process of confronting particular cases. The situation in the United States is very different. There is less centralized drafting and hence less uniformity in terminology. Although in America the Office of Legislative Counsel does help with much drafting, there is less professionalization in the production of statutes. In America, the drafters of legislation are multiple and irregularly coordinated. Except in rare cases, the party system no longer provides a great deal of coherence, and the executive and legislature are hardly aligned. Congress appears only intermittently aware of the judges' interpretive practices, which are themselves not easy to describe in light of the sheer size of the federal judiciary and the existence of sharp splits, on just this point, within the Supreme Court. It would be wrong to say that Congress is entirely oblivious to judicial decisions interpreting statutes.' But Congress is not in the business of responding rapidly and regularly to particular cases in which interpretations, literal or otherwise, tend to misfire. Hence both ' There have been interesting recent changes in English practice, with legislative his lawmaking and law-interpreting practice are very different from what they are in England. None of this suggests that England or America has the optimal system of interpretation in light of its own institutional characteristics. But it does suggest that the two legal systems are highly responsive to their distinctive institutional features. portant point here involves the agency's hierarchical and centralized character. The hierarchical structure eliminates much of the unpredictability and variability that could come from nontextual courts. D. Defending Formalism Unempirically? Of Concepts and Legitimacy It would be possible for some formalists (and some antiformalists) to respond to the arguments I have made thus far in the following way: The analysis has not addressed the most fundamental concerns. No good formalist should be persuaded by it. The real case for formalism depends on constitutional considerations, or legitimacy, or democracy. Contingent institutional judgments, with an empirical cast, are entirely beside the point. In a metaphor: Bentham could not persuade Kant of the correctness of some course of action by showing that utilitarian arguments favor it. That is not what Kant is concerned about." So too for the suggestion that empirical arguments can settle the choice among interpretive methods. " I am grateful to Frank Easterbrook for pressing this question at the Symposium. looking at the objective meaning of the words, rather than anything within the minds of the legislators, this is not because the Constitution says so-it does not-but because that approach leads to the most sensible system of interpretation, for reasons akin to those I have discussed.76 " It would be possible to argue that the constitutional text, read in light of its history, argues in favor of one or another approach to statutory interpretation. For the formalist, this view raises two problems. First, the history seems to argue against formalism; the framing generation did not embrace formalism. See Eskridge, 96 Mich L Rev at 1523-26, 1529-31 (cited in note 23). Second, resort to the history, as an authoritative guide to the text, requires an argument of some kind, and that argument must be, roughly, the sort of empirical argument I have discussed here. All I mean to suggest is that the Constitution by itself does not support, or undermine, formalism; the real issues lie elsewhere. law's ontology. 8 But the disputes I am discussing have a different character. But these arguments fail to show that the idea of legitimacy supports textualism. Those who seek to invoke intentions, or equitable considerations, or canons of construction, or evolving, widely held social understandings can also claim the mantle of political legitimacy;82 we cannot know if they are wrong without 8 Actually I do not believe that this is the case. I think that the empirical and institu tional issues I have discussed are crucial here too-that these issues precede ontology all the way down. This is a pragmatic claim, suggesting that what makes something qualify as law turns on the consequences, or the cash-value, of allowing it to qualify as law. Thus, for example, the Constitution is binding for a set of (loosely speaking) pragmatic reasons, not because of anything about the nature of law. The Constitution is binding because it is a good constitution and because we are much better off if we take it to be binding. But for present purposes it is not necessary to accept these more controversial claims. Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? knowing a great deal more about institutional performance. Nor does judicial review become "legitimate" by virtue of the fact that it is based on the text of a document two centuries old. The "legitimacy" of judicial review, like the legitimacy of the Constitution itself, is a complicated question, one for which the bare fact of the "text" is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition. Nor is it clear how the notion of a social contract can show that formalism is a uniquely legitimate approach to interpretation. The signatories to the relevant text are all long dead, and to say that nonformalist judges are reneging on some "deal" seems to me no more than a metaphor. In what sense did any of us agree to that particular "deal"? If we are to be held to "it"-and the real issue is how we establish its terms-this is because it is good for us to be held to it, not because we agreed. ments in this vein); Jfirgen Habermas, Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Discourse Theory of Law and Democracy (IfflT 1996) (William Rehg, trans). formalism would be more legitimate than nonformalism; with contrary findings, the opposite would be true. A possible response would underline a serious problem mentioned but not resolved to this point: How do we know if there has been an interpretive error at all? It seems reasonable to say that any identification of an "error" depends on an interpretive account of some kind, and thus that any assessment of whether there are errors, and error costs, is fatally circular. Perhaps errors cannot be identified before the theory of interpretation is already in place. If this is so, then we cannot choose among alterna Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? tive approaches by examining errors and their "costs"; whether there is an error depends on what theory has been chosen. Textualism offers a theory by which to tell whether there have been errors; so too do certain nonformalist accounts. We cannot decide which account is right by asking which account produces more errors. By suggesting that we assess errors by asking "what Congress would have done," I have loaded the dice from the start. The University of Chicago Law Review make a great deal of progress in choosing between formalist and nonformalist approaches. If formalists (or nonformalists) do not wish to claim support on this kind of ground, on what ground do they wish to defend their position? And recall that we are dealing here with a continuum of approaches, not with any rigid dichotomy. Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? siderations. The question that remains to be answered is this: If this claim is wrong, on what basis might formalism be defended? I have argued in this Article that any defense of formalism must have a large empirical dimension. Formalism, as an approach to statutory interpretation, is best defended on the view that * under a formalist regime, legislatures will be responsive to the incentives, created by formalism, to do pretty well before the fact, and to correct mistakes after the fact; " legislatures will respond to a nonformalist regime by legislating sloppily and by delegating power to the judiciary; " a nonformalist judiciary will create blunders and injus tices; and " a nonformalist judiciary will create considerable uncertainty, with high costs within the legal system (as cases increase in complexity) and in ordinary practice (as people do not know how to conduct their affairs). The University of Chicago Law Review and exactly why, and in the process it may well lower the volume of legal and even political disputes, in a way that should produce more light and less heat. Antiformalists should agree that they would change their view if it were clear that nonformalist courts would blunder, or that legislatures, when confronted with a formalist judiciary, would make ex post corrections or respond to formalism by legislating with greater clarity before the fact. For their part, formalists ought to be shaken if nonformalist judges would proceed wisely and without imposing high costs of decision, or if legislatures would be entirely unresponsive to formalist interpretation and if palpable errors would go uncorrected. Mutual acknowledgement of these points should make one of the great, quasi-theological debates in legal theory at once more tractable, less theological, and less puzzling. If formalism must be defended empirically, future progress will depend on isolating the factual disagreements and attempting to make an investigation of what, in fact, is true.