Affirmative Action, Caste, and Cultural Comparisons
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein
Source: Michigan Law Review, Vol. 97, No. 5 (Mar., 1999), pp. 1311-1320
Published by: The Michigan Law Review Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1290286 .
Accessed: 17/06/2014 09:40

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

The Michigan Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Michigan Law Review.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION, CASTE, AND 
CULTURAL COMPARISONS 

Cass R.  Sunstein* 

What is permitted, and what is prohibited, by the equality prin- 
ciple of a liberal democracy? Does  affirmative action run afoul of 
that  principle?  And  where  should  we  look  to  answer these 
questions? 

Many critics of  affirmative action take it as axiomatic that af- 
firmative action violates the equality principle. But this is far from 
clear. Every law classifies. The current law of equality itself classi- 
fies by, for example, treating discrimination on the basis of race dif- 
ferently from discrimination on the basis of age.  No one thinks that 
the law of equality is, for this reason, inconsistent with the Equal 
Protection Clause. No one thinks that constitutional doctrine gives 
a "special preference" to race discrimination. Whether affirmative 
action violates the equality principle depends on the content of that 
principle. 

There is good reason to think that the best understanding of the 
equality principle of the United States Constitution has a great deal 
to  do  with a prohibition on  second-class citizenship, or  "caste."1 
An anticaste principle can claim considerable support from the the- 
ory and the practice of those who defend the Fourteenth Amend- 
ment.  Such a principle also fits well - 
far from perfectly, but well 
-  with the general fabric and thrust of constitutional doctrine. As 
a matter of political theory, the anticaste principle also has consid- 
erable appeal, connected as it is with some of the defining ideals of 
liberal democracy, which is designed to ensure that morally irrele- 
vant characteristics are not turned into a systematic basis for social 
disadvantage.2 The anticaste principle seems to serve as a promis- 
ing basis for both organizing and reformulating many aspects of the 
law of equal protection. 

Of  course the  implications of  the  anticaste principle must be 
specified, and here reasonable people can differ. I have urged, for 

*  Karl N. Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University  of Chi- 

cago.  A.B.  1975, J.D.  1978, Harvard. -  Ed. 

1.  The  point  is  argued  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  The Anticaste  Principle,  92  MICH. L.  REV. 

2410  (1994). 

2.  See JOHN RAWLS, A  THEORY OF JUSTICE 108-10 (1971). 

1311 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1312 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 97:1311 

example,  that  the  principle forbids  government  from  turning mor- 
ally irrelevant and highly visible  characteristics into  a basis for sys- 
temic  social  disadvantage.  Whether  or  not 
that  particular 
specification  is  valid,  and  whether  or  not  it  counts  as  a  sufficient 
specification, it seems  clear that the  anticaste principle would  raise 
no  serious  questions  about  affirmative  action  policies.  The  basic 
reason  is  that  it  is  implausible  to  say  that  such  policies  entrench 
second-class citizenship.  No  one urges, or could urge, that such pol- 
icies would make whites, or for that matter African Americans, into 
second-class  citizens.  This is not to  say that affirmative action poli- 
cies are a good  idea.  To be sure, they may have stigmatizing effects 
on  their  intended  beneficiaries,  and they  may  also  increase  rather 
than decrease  racial antagonism.  But  these  are essentially  political 
complaints, not constitutional  ones.  Some  people,  for example,  ob- 
ject that affirmative action programs reflect pity and condescension 
toward  African  Americans3  - 
an  interesting  objection  to  the 
meaning  and consequences  of  such  programs, not  entirely  discon- 
nected  from  the  problem  of  second-class  citizenship.  But  this  ob- 
jection,  partly  empirical  in  nature,  is  best  heard  in  legislatures 
rather than courtrooms. 

Clark Cunningham and N.R.  Madhava Menon  have contributed 
a great deal to the debate  over racial equality through their intrigu- 
ing discussion  of  caste,  and anticaste, in India.  American  legal  de- 
bates  are  often  remarkably  parochial,  and  the  American  debate 
over  the  anticaste  principle  has  given  strikingly little  attention  to 
comparative  questions.  This  is  an  especially  serious  omission  in 
light of the fact that the caste system in India seems  to be  a primary 
inspiration  for  those  complaining  about  caste-like  features  of 
American  life.  Let  me  emphasize  a few  of  the valuable points  that 
Cunningham and Menon  offer.  First, they  suggest  that  the  Indian 
caste  system  operates  without  "highly  visible"  characteristics. 
High-caste  Indians  might  look  much  like  low-caste  Indians.  Sec- 
ond, they suggest that in India, systemic social  disadvantages began 
first, and only  later created  stigmatic differences  to  "mark the  dis- 
advantage."  In America,  the sequence  was, or seems  to have been, 
just the  opposite.  Thus, in India caste  is  "clearly a social  construc- 
tion," unlike in the United  States, where it is believed  that "race" is 
an immutable  and obvious  physical condition. 

Third, and perhaps most  interestingly,  India has gone  down the 
route  not  traveled  by  the  United  States,  which  has  adhered  to  the 

3.  See SHELBY STEELE, A  DREAM DEFERRED (1998). 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

March  1999] 

Affirmative Action  &  Caste 

1313 

view  that  past  discrimination is  sufficient justification for  affir- 
mative action. India has tackled with some sophistication the issue 
whether different, particular groups have different needs for affirm- 
ative action. For example, the Indian government looks to various 
factors indicating group status, placing importance on whether the 
relevant unit "practices extensive endogamy, restricting marriage to 
other group members." In India, social and economic factors help 
undergird the judgment about the kind of compensatory measure to 
which members of the relevant group are entitled. 

Several features of this discussion are particularly striking. Per- 
haps the most striking is the very different nature of Indian debates 
over affirmative action. While India has not avoided the high level 
of contentiousness that has characterized American debates, it has 
self-consciously gone  in  the  direction of  a  highly programmatic 
method for redressing past social discrimination -  an experiment 
in social engineering far beyond anything in American law.  From 
the  authors' description, moreover, it  is  unclear to  what extent 
there is  a widespread perception of  a pervasive conflict between 
merit and affirmative action, or between liberty and equality, or of 
affirmative action as an insidious way of providing protection to a 
"special interest." 

Cunningham and Menon deserve a great deal of credit for the 
simple feat of bringing new information to bear on the debate over 
affirmative action. Too often the American debate has operated in 
a factual vacuum -  a vacuum about both international and domes- 
tic  experience.  Their new facts should spark fresh discussion. I 
would like  to  begin that discussion by  offering three comments. 
The first involves the critical role of facts in constitutional law; the 
second involves the potential virtues of rule-free constitutional law; 
the third involves the uses and limits of comparative constitutional- 
ism.  The first two are inspired by what Cunningham and Menon 
have to say, but I do not directly engage their argument; in the third 
comment, I attempt to do this. 

I.  FACTS  RATHER  THAN  CONCEPTS 

Constitutional and political debates about equality and liberty 
often operate at a high level of abstraction. They raise questions, 
for example, about whether we are committed to equality of oppor- 
tunity or instead equality of  result, to  individual rights or group 
rights, or to  equality over liberty or vice-versa.  Often the  argu- 
ments work by choosing one concept over another, by assembling 
some particular practice that is said to tell, decisively, against a cer- 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1314 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 97:1311 

tain claim or alleged principle (for example, the generally accepted 
preferential treatment given to children of  alumni), by suggesting 
that a certain concept necessarily means a certain thing (as in the 
view that equality necessarily forbids, or requires, affirmative ac- 
tion), or by specifying a concept with the suggestion that this, rather 
than that, is  the best specification (perhaps because it  fits better 
with the rest of what we believe). 

These  debates, though common and frequently illuminating, 
often seem hopelessly conceptual and interminable, stylized, a form 
of Kabuki theater; often no one is convinced at all, and, even worse, 
often no one learns anything. I think that a great deal of further 
progress might be made by learning more about the facts. It is very 
hard to know where to stand on affirmative action programs with- 
out investigating some empirical questions. What do such programs 
look like?  How do they differ? The term "affirmative action" is 
extremely broad, and it covers a wide range of activities in the pri- 
vate and public sectors and at the national, state, and local levels. 
Do  such programs actually stigmatize people,  and if  so  in  what 
sense?  These are empirical questions, not (only) conceptual ones. 
And what are the  actual differences in qualification between the 
programs' beneficiaries and their victims, and how much difference 
do these differences make?  What would happen if affirmative ac- 
tion programs were abolished? What would happen if some alter- 
native short of  affirmative action were adopted, such as wealth- 
based admissions judgments? What are the effects of  affirmative 
action programs for their intended beneficiaries in, for example, 
college, medical school, and law school?  Do  such programs make 
people better off, and if so in what sense?4 

These questions are important because when progress cannot be 
made on  conceptual matters or on  issues in  high-level theory, it 
might instead be  made by  investigating facts.  This is  the  great 
promise of  empirical work:  to  enable progress and even  closure 
when conceptual debates produce uncertainty, holy wars, or blank 
stares.  I  hypothesize, for  example, that many people  would be 
skeptical of affirmative action programs to the extent that the rec- 
ord shows that they involve hiring people whose qualifications are 
not marginally lower, but actually much lower than those of their 
(majority group) competitors. It also seems likely that many critics 
of  affirmative action would be less critical if it  appeared that the 

4.  See  WILLIAM G.  BOWEN & DEREK BOK, THE SHAPE OF THE RIVER (1998),  for what 
seems  to  me to be  the most valuable contribution to  the  affirmative action debate  in the last 
decade. 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

March 1999] 

Affirmative Action  &  Caste 

1315 

abolition of affirmative action would mean that only a handful of 
African Americans would be able to attend the major law schools. 
When people  disagree on  high principle, they  can  often  be 
brought into agreement, or at least make progress, if they investi- 
gate the facts.5 In the context of affirmative action we need much 
more in the way of facts. A  Supreme Court brief dealing with the 
consequences of  a principle of  colorblindness would be  far more 
helpful than a brief quoting from past cases and pushing conceptual 
arguments one  way  rather  than  another.  The  discussion by 
Cunningham and Menon is very much in this spirit insofar as com- 
parative work brings actual experience to bear on equality claims. 

II.  AGAINST  RULES,  AGAINST  JUDICIAL  RESOLUTIONS6 
It  is  tempting to  think that the  Supreme Court has erred in 
maintaining its casuistical, rule-free,  fact-specific course in the  con- 
text of affirmative action. This course might well seem to represent 
a  failure of  the rule of  law.  But there are good reasons for the 
Court to  have  followed  this path.  No  clear  constitutional  commit- 
ment forbids affirmative action programs; as a matter of text and 
history, the attack on such programs is remarkably weak.7 It is im- 
perative that constitutional law not be used to strike down political 
judgments about which reasonable people differ and to which the 
Constitution  does  not  clearly speak -  especially  in light of  the  ab- 
sence  of  much  factual  knowledge  by  the  judiciary  of  domestic  or 
international experiences with affirmative action. My emphasis on 
the centrality of facts to the legal question is thus a reason for cau- 
tion from the judiciary, which ought not to invoke a controversial 
reading of the Constitution when it is at least possible that a good 
understanding of  the  facts would  lead  in  another  direction. 

At  the same time, it would be wrong to celebrate  the democratic 
character  of  the  institutions  that  have  adopted  affirmative  action 
programs.  On  the  contrary, the  nation  has not,  until recently,  had 
much of a debate  about affirmative action, and some  of the relevant 
programs have been  adopted  with far too  little  deliberation  and far 
too 
little  democracy.  In  these  circumstances,  the  Court  has 
adopted,  perhaps  by  inadvertence,  an  intriguing alternative  to  the 
three conventional  options  of validation, invalidation,  and denial of 
certiorari.  That  alternative  consists  of  rulings that  draw sharp  at- 

5.  Thus facts are a great ally, and a potential  part, of  incompletely  specified  agreements. 

See  CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  LEGAL  REASONING  AND  POLITICAL  CONFLICT 

(1996). 

6.  I borrow  here  from  CASS R.  SUNSTEIN, ONE CASE AT A  TIME 117-36 (1999). 
7.  See  id.  at  125-29. 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1316 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 97:1311 

tention to underlying questions of policy and principle -  which ac- 
tivates political debate -  but that do not displace public discussion 
and that leave a great deal undecided. This may well be taken as a 
democratic approach to judicial review, one that falls in the basic 
category of representation-reinforcement. 

I  think that Cunningham and Menon fortify this basic point. 
They show that any simple solution to the problem may overlook 
the wide range of  possible approaches, and their investigation of 
India reveals that a  nation in  some  ways like  our own  has  ap- 
proached the issue quite differently. We need much more work of 
this kind in constitutional law. A judicial foreclosure of experimen- 
tation informed by international experience may well be hopelessly 
parochial. The point applies not only to  the law of  equality, but 
also to other areas of constitutional law; the approach to libel law, 
for example, may well be improved by seeing how other nations do 
things. 

III.  NOTES  ON  COMPARATIVE  CONSTITUTIONALISM 

Perhaps  the  most  intriguing aspect  of  the  discussion  by 
Cunningham and Menon involves its depiction of a path not taken 
by the United States.  Recall that India maintains a list of  3,500 
"backward classes" and that empirical factors, including social dis- 
crimination, educational deprivation, and economic status, are used 
to determine group status. Some groups -  the most disadvantaged 
-  have their own independent quotas, generally proportional to 
population. Other groups also receive a reserve, but one smaller 
than their population share.  Individual entitlements may depend 
on whether the relevant individuals have been raised in privileged 
circumstances. Thus there is a careful, elaborate, and quite refined 
method for determining how government policies will counteract or 
even dismantle the system of caste.  India appears, in short, to be 
engaged in a process of  social engineering that goes well beyond 
anything in American practice. 

A  full assessment of India's program would require answers to 
two questions: (1) Does the Indian approach make sense for India? 
(2) Would that approach, or some variation on that approach, make 
sense for the United States?  I  cannot attempt a full assessment 
here, but let me venture a few puzzles and thoughts. The first ques- 
tion itself raises several questions. 

Does  this kind of close attention to caste background increase 
or decrease social antagonism? Timur Kuran has written of  the 
dangers of  "ethnification," in which small shocks to  a system can 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

March  1999] 

Affirmative Action  &  Caste 

1317 

create widespread consciousness of  ascriptive (or  other)  differ- 
ences, in a way that eventually causes segregation, resentment, ha- 
tred, and even violence.8 Is there any similar problem in  India? 
Cunningham and Menon suggest the possibility of  an affirmative 
answer. A  great risk of race-conscious or ethnicity-conscious poli- 
cies is  that they can heighten attention to  questions of  race and 
ethnicity in  a way that compromises social cohesion.  (Of  course 
social cohesion is not the only social goal, and may not be in good 
shape in the first instance.) 

Does  the system create, or is it perceived to create, a kind of 
caste spoils system? Judgments about the degree of disadvantage 
are hardly a  purely scientific enterprise, and controversial judg- 
ments are likely to enter into any decision about who counts as suf- 
ficiently disadvantaged. There is also a natural risk here of strategic 
and self-interested behavior, in which groups jockey with one an- 
other for position as  "most disadvantaged," with harmful conse- 
quences for society as a whole.  Nor is it an unambiguous good if 
members of one or another group play the game of "more victim- 
ized than thou." Does  this happen in India? 

Does  this  system significantly weaken  the  Indian economy? 
Does  it compromise performance-related goals, and if so to what 
extent?  It is surely imaginable that such a system might compro- 
mise merit, rightly conceived (though of course this is a contestable 
ideal).  From what Cunningham and Menon have said, however, 
there is no clear answer to this question. 

The  fact  that  India  seems  to  have  arrived at  its  approach 
through something close to agreement (if that is a fact) is extremely 
illuminating, but it is not by itself a sufficient reason to think that 
the  approach is justified. It would be helpful if Cunningham and 
Menon would, in the future, say a bit more about the above ques- 
tions.  Their current discussion focuses more on describing the In- 
dian  practice  than  on  demonstrating its  success,  or  even  on 
identifying the  criteria by  which  success  or  failure  might  be 
measured. 

What about America? Cunningham and Menon appear to be- 
lieve that America should have taken the road suggested by some 
Justices in Bakke: that is, the Court should have allowed the polit- 
ical branches to conclude that past social discrimination is sufficient 

8.  See Timur Kuran, Ethnic Norms  and  Their Transformation Through Reputational Cas- 

cades,  27 J. LEGAL STUD. 623  (1998). 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1318 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 97:1311 

to justify affirmative action programs.9 I very much agree with this 
judgment:  if the nation, or a state, would like to compensate  for the 
continuing effects  of past discrimination, there  should be no  consti- 
tutional problem so long as the program is reasonably well-tailored. 
The  Court should have  allowed  the  government  room  to  maneuver 
in  this way,  and future courts should  allow  the  democratic  process 
to  handle  this sharply contested  issue  in  any reasonable  manner.10 
But  the  further  question  remains:  Should  the  political  process  in 
America  attempt  to  do  something  like  what  India has  done? 

The  most  obvious  response  is  that this is  a genuinely  academic 
question.  There  is  no  possibility  that  the  United  States  would  at- 
tempt  to  identify  the  fifty groups, let  alone  the  3,500 groups, which 
ought to  qualify as backward classes.  But  as in India, the  existence 
of  a political  consensus  or obstacle  cannot  be  decisive; perhaps the 
consensus  or  obstacle  is  wrong.  Our  own  anticaste  principle,  re- 
flected  in our history and our practices, seems  to  emphasize  highly 
visible  identifying  characteristics  (most  notably  race  and  gender), 
on the theory that such characteristics present the greatest opportu- 
nities  for  unjustified  and  pervasive  subordination.  The  anticaste 
idea  builds  narrowly from  the  cases  of  African  Americans  to  pick 
up women  and the handicapped  (with a partial, limited inclusion  of 
homosexuals).  This limitation is not entirely without appeal.  A  de- 
cent  society  does  not  humiliate  its  members,1l  and  humiliation  is 
especially  likely when  the  government  discriminates against people 
whose  characteristics are highly visible.  (Of  course it is not  limited 
to  those  cases.) 

In addition, and perhaps most importantly, it is easiest  to  main- 
tain  a  caste  society,  even  when  market  forces  are  quite  vigorous, 
when  the  characteristics that  lead  to  lower-caste  status  are  highly 
visible.  It  is  in  such  circumstances  that  customers  and  coworkers 
can most  easily  entrench  existing inequality.12 It is in such circum- 
stances that rational discrimination may result in the use of sex and 
race as proxies.  And  it is in such circumstances that screening strat- 

9.  Regents  of Univ.  of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S.  265, 344 (1978) (Brennan, White, Marshall, 

and Blackmun,  JJ., concurring in  the judgment  in part and dissenting  in part). 

10.  It follows  that the  decision  of  the  court of  appeals  in Hopwood  v.  State of  Texas, 78 
F.3d  932  (5th  Cir. 1996),  was  a mistake,  indeed  a  form  of  hubris; a  lower  court  should  not 
forbid  educational  institutions  from  proceeding  in  this  way  without  a  much  clearer  signal 
from the  Supreme  Court. 

11.  See  the  excellent  discussion  in  AVISHAI MARGALIT, THE DECENT SOCIETY (Naomi 

Goldblum  trans., 1996). 

12.  See GEORGE A.  AKERLOF, AN ECONOMIC THEORIST'S BOOK OF TALES 23-44 (1984); 
Harry J. Holzer  & Keith R. Ihlanfeldt,  Customer Discrimination and Employment Outcomes 
for  Minority Workers, 113 Q.J. ECON. 835  (1998). 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

March 1999] 

Affirmative Action  &  Caste 

1319 

egies may perpetuate social subordination.13 Market forces are es- 
pecially unpromising correctives to  caste-like aspects of  society 
when a highly visible characteristic is at work in the context of sys- 
temic social disadvantages. 

None of these points suggests that this limited anticaste princi- 
ple, understood by reference to American understandings and ex- 
periences, is ideal, even for America. Surely the anticaste principle 
does not exhaust the content of the notion of equality. At a mini- 
mum, there is also a place for an antidiscrimination principle, for 
fair equality of opportunity (an idea that cuts very broadly), and for 
programs of redistribution designed to ensure that everyone lives in 
minimally decent conditions. These ideas overlap with the anticaste 
principle but are independent of it.  It is even possible to think that 
the three ideas would do most of the good work done by the anti- 
caste efforts in India, perhaps more successfully. Thus, for example, 
I might speculate that an effort to ensure fair equality of opportu- 
nity, and minimally decent conditions for all, bears something of the 
same relation to  the  Indian experience as a negative income tax 
bears to minimum wage legislation. A negative income tax is a far 
more effective and direct way of assisting the poor than a minimum 
wage increase.14 So too, an insistence on fair equality of opportu- 
nity and minimally decent conditions might well be a far more ef- 
fective and direct way of dealing with systemic disadvantages than 
India's extremely complex affirmative action program. 

For America, with its very different history, a large question is 
whether a limited anticaste principle, suitably supplemented with 
these other ideals, is not a better approach to the problem of in- 
equality than an approach that would attempt compensatory mea- 
sures for a wide range of socially disadvantaged groups. It is even 
possible to  wonder whether India might not have done better to 
adopt a  narrower anticaste principle for the  most disadvantaged 
groups, and to attempt to promote other equality goals with other 
policies, including better education and job training, and minimal 
economic and social guarantees for all, ensuring against desperate 
conditions.15 But it is very hard to disentangle this normative judg- 
ment from an awareness of  political and cultural understandings, 
which obviously diverge between India and America, perhaps espe- 

13.  See Bradford Cornell & Ivo Welch, Customs, Information, and Screening Discrimina- 

tion,  104 J. POL. ECON. 542  (1996). 

14.  See Daniel  Shaviro,  The Minimum Wage, the Earned Income  Tax Credit, and Optimal 

Subsidy  Policy,  64  U.  CHI. L. REV. 405  (1997). 

15.  Cf  INDIAN DEVELOPMENT (Jean Dreze  & Amartya  Sen  eds.,  1997). 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1320 

Michigan  Law  Review 

[Vol. 97:1311 

cially so in their different conceptions of what it means to undo a 
system of caste. 

CONCLUSION 

For constitutional purposes, the American equality principle has 
been an anticaste principle -  one that forbids government from 
turning a morally irrelevant and highly visible characteristic into a 
systemic basis for second-class citizenship. This principle ought not 
to be taken to authorize federal judges to invalidate reasonable af- 
firmative action programs. The appropriate content of  such pro- 
grams should be a democratic rather than a judicial responsibility; 
the most extreme judicial attacks on  affirmative action programs 
are a form of hubris. 

On the other hand, we know far too  little to  declare that our 
current programs are working well.  There are two promising paths 
for the future, both of them involving facts. The first is to learn a 
great deal more about the operations, achievements, and failures of 
multiple approaches, race-conscious and  otherwise, and  to  see 
which of them provides a good model for the future.16 The second 
is to see what might be learned from the experience of other na- 
tions.  The analysis provided by Cunningham and Menon offers no 
unambiguous lessons for the United States, but it offers a great deal 
of illumination about our possibilities and prospects. 

16.  For an excellent  model  in  this regard, see  BOWEN & BOK, supra note  4. 

This content downloaded from 185.44.77.110 on Tue, 17 Jun 2014 09:40:54 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

