Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons
University of Chicago Law School
Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics
Cass R. Sunstein David Schkade Daniel Kahneman
Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 81
(2D SERIES)
This paper can be downloaded without charge at:
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Publications/Working/index.html
The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection:
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=177368
David Schkade,* Cass R. Sunstein,** and Daniel Kahneman***
I. Introduction How does group deliberation affect individual judgments? How does the outcome of jury deliberations differ from some aggregation of individual decisions pre-deliberation? Speculation is not difficult. Perhaps juries converge toward the mean of individual judgments perhaps juries move away from, or toward, the high or low of individual extremes. Perhaps juries approach an outcome that is more just or more accurate perhaps juries produce more predictable and less erratic judgments, so that unpredictability at the individual level, or at the level of the mean or median of (six or twelve) individual judgments, does not exist at the jury level. A pervasive question is whether a deliberating jury has the effect of producing outcomes that treat the similarly situated similarly?perhaps in terms of civil or criminal liability (do people who have engaged in the same conduct receive the same verdict?), perhaps in the determination of appropriate damage awards, either compensatory or punitive (do similarly situated people receive the same awards?).1
We attempt to make some progress on these questions. We do so principally by reporting the results of an extensive study of mock
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 2 juries (over 500 juries in total). In the study, these juries were asked to deliberate about punitive damage awards individual judgments were collected before the jury deliberated. To compress a long story, our principal finding is that deliberation increased both unpredictability and variance, by making large awards much larger and small awards smaller still. Thus the principal effect of deliberation is often to polarize individual judgments, a pattern that has been found in many other group decision making contexts.2 This finding?the first of its kind in the particular context of punitive damage awards?has important implications for jury awards involving both punitive and compensatory damages. It bears on group deliberation in other contexts as well. The same phenomenon of polarization that occurs in our punitive damage juries can be used to explain why a group of people moderately predisposed in favor of gun control will, after discussion, tend to be more than moderately predisposed in that direction, and why a group of individuals cautiously opposed to affirmative action is likely, after discussion, to oppose affirmative action with considerable fervor.
The study reported here has the advantage of being extremely close to?in fact part of the design is based on?an earlier one involving not deliberating juries but responses of 899 individuals to punitive damage cases.3 Our earlier study showed a remarkable consensus in individual judgments, made along a bounded numerical scale, about a series of personal injury cases. That study therefore found that with respect to the underlying moral evaluation, different (synthetic, non-deliberating4) juries are likely to reach similar
3 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? conclusions about the relative severity of different cases.5 Thus allwhite, all-poor, all-rich, all-educated, all poorly educated, all-male, all-female, all-young, and all-old juries would probably come to very similar rankings of a set of cases, at least in personal injury cases and very possibly elsewhere.6 It follows that averaging the judgments of any random group of twelve people is likely to produce a moral judgment that predicts, with a reasonably high degree of accuracy, the judgment of any other group of twelve people. At the same time, the study found that when asked to assess cases in terms of dollars, (synthetic, non-deliberating) juries become extremely unpredictable.7 They become unpredictable in the specific sense that the judgment of any particular group of twelve is a poor predictor of the judgment of other groups of twelve.8 We speculated that it is the dollar scale that accounts for evidently erratic monetary judgments in many areas of the law, including not only punitive damages but compensatory awards in areas involving libel, sexual harassment, pain and suffering,9 and intentional infliction of emotional distress.10 When juries use the dollar scale, their verdicts probably do not treat the similarly situated similarly, with some awards that are arbitrarily high and others that are arbitrarily low. This unpredictability is also likely to produce overdeterrence in risk-averse defendants or in any case muffled and confusing (and to that extent costly) signals.11
A natural question is, however, raised by these conclusions. This question is one of concern to those interested in damages, juries, and
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 4 deliberative processes in general12: whether a deliberating jury might reduce or even eliminate the unpredictability of dollar awards. How does the process of jury deliberation affect the remarkable moral consensus? Will different juries converge toward the same dollar amount? The answers should have implications not only for punitive awards, but also for other damage judgments, certainly when these are hard to monetize, and possibly for questions of civil and criminal liability as well and even for deliberation generally. An additional question, also important, is what happens to dollar awards when juries deliberate: As compared with individual conclusions predeliberation, do such awards tend to go up, go down, or remain the same?
On the basis of a study of 3048 jury-eligible citizens in Phoenix, Arizona, participating in 509 mock juries, we offer two principal conclusions here, which we now state in somewhat less compressed form. The first is that juries do not produce less erratic and more predictable awards than individuals. On the contrary, deliberating juries tend to generate, with respect to dollar awards, even greater variance and unpredictability than is present in the judgments of the jurors who compose them. This is no mere technical conclusion it suggests that the problem of erratic awards is intensified, not reduced, by deliberating juries.
The second conclusion, a corollary of the first, is that deliberating juries significantly, and systematically, increase large punitive damage awards and also decrease small punitive damage awards. In our study, jury judgments were more lenient than individual juror judgments for cases of less serious misconduct by the defendant for cases of moderately serious and very serious misconduct, however, jury judgments were harsher, in many cases dramatically so. In 21% of the cases, the jury verdict was as high as or higher than that of the highest individual judgment predeliberation. As we discuss below, this result is part of the general phenomenon of group polarization, in accordance with which a deliberating group tends to shift toward a more extreme version of
5 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? the views its members brought with them. The phenomenon of group polarization?with discussion amplifying initial individual tendencies, whatever they may be13?operates in accordance with identifiable mechanisms (thus far unexamined within the legal culture), which, unfortunately, do not suggest that the shifts are necessarily desirable, or that they implement any legitimate concerns of the legal system.
What follows at the normative level? The safest and most cautious conclusion is that to the extent that unpredictable punitive damage awards raise a serious concern, the problem is magnified rather than diminished by the process of deliberation. But is the increase in awards a tribute to the benefits of collective discussion? Without an independent theory of what awards should be, the evidence found here does not rule out that hopeful conclusion. But it certainly provides no affirmative support for it, or for the suggestion that group deliberation will, in this context, increase the rationality and soundness of outcomes. On the contrary, the substantial increases of high awards and the (smaller) decreases in low awards are predictable consequences of the effects of deliberation on a scale having a lower bound but lacking an upper bound.
In these circumstances, there are two implications for reform. The first involves the possibility, now shown to be feasible, of asking jurors to generate not a dollar figure, but a normative judgment on a bounded numerical scale. As we will explain, the deliberating juries in this study were able to use a punishment scale quite effectively such a scale might be used as the foundation of dollar awards, in a way that could dramatically decrease unpredictability. The second implication follows from the fact that deliberation increases high awards and decreases low ones, in a way that increases variance and unpredictability. To the extent that unpredictability is a problem, our findings provide additional support for the view that punitive awards should be made not by juries, but by judges or some kind of administrative institution.14
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 6 This Article comes in six parts. Part II sets the stage, with brief discussions of the problem of calculating punitive damage awards, the legal background, the existing literature on unpredictable awards, and the effects of deliberation. Part III, the heart of the Article, discusses the methodology and results of the current study. Part IV investigates group polarization and associated causal mechanisms, involving social influences and persuasive arguments. Part V discusses the implications of the study for punitive damage reform. Part VI is the conclusion.
II. Theoretical Preliminaries: Outrage and Scales
Jury awards of punitive damages have become one of the most controversial topics in modern public law.15 To take just one example, an award of $4.9 billion against General Motors attracted a great deal of national attention in July, 1999.16 It is now clear that the due process clause imposes constraints on permissible awards.17 A number of statutes, enacted and proposed, create punitive damage ?caps,?18 and high awards have become a primary impetus for tort reform in general.19 There are also controversial issues about punitive damage awards in civil rights cases, most notably sexual harassment.20 At the same time, the problems created by punitive awards bear on related questions in other areas of the law, involving,
7 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? for example, compensatory damages for pain and suffering, libel, and intentional infliction of emotional distress.21 Similar problems arise whenever an administrative agency is asked to impose civil fines and also in the area of criminal sentencing.22
Participants in the legal system are often requested to come up with some kind of judgment, factual or normative, and then to ?translate? that judgment into a dollar award. In the area of punitive damages, it is necessary to make some assessment of the character of the defendant?s behavior, and then to ascertain the appropriate dollar amount to be paid to the plaintiff by way of punishment. In many domains, compensatory judgments raise similar puzzles. While juries are nominally expected to find a ?fact??what amount of money would restore the plaintiff to the status quo ante??it is often extremely difficult to monetize the relevant harm, and normative judgments undoubtedly play a significant role.23 In the case of punitive damages, it is extremely difficult for even experts to agree on what dollar amount constitutes adequate ?punishment? or produces an appropriate deterrrent signal.
In all of these areas, the legal system is pervaded by a degree of unpredictability and variance, resulting in apparent arbitrariness, as similarly situated people are treated differently.24 An extensive study of pain and suffering cases found that as much as 40% of the awards consists of ?noise,? unexplained by objective factors.25 A study of all reported sexual harassment cases was unable to connect either compensatory or punitive awards to any case characteristics that
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 8 might be thought to explain jury judgments.26 The punitive damage area is more complicated?a point to which we will return shortly?but there is evidence of significant variability here as well.27 The most ambitious claims to the contrary attempt to show that once the compensatory award has been made, the punitive award becomes predictable to a certain degree28 but the same data show that at the time a case is filed, it is very hard to know the expected punitive award, and that there is a generally a great deal of ?noise? in outcomes.29
To understand the current study, it is necessary to understand its predecessor by the way of background. Our earlier study involved a demographically diverse set of jury-eligible citizens from Austin, Texas.30 The relevant experiment involved 28 personal injury cases, which respondents were asked to assess in one of three ways: outrageousness, on a bounded numerical scale (0 to 6) intent to punish, on a bounded numerical scale (also 0 to 6) and actual
9 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? awards, on the unbounded scale of dollars. As noted, our principal findings were twofold. People?s moral judgments are widely shared and predictable, in fact strikingly so, at least in the personal injury cases studied in the experiment.31 But in spite of this point, and in the presence of shared moral judgments, people?s judgments on a dollar scale?the scale, or ?response mode,? favored by the legal system?are highly unpredictable in the sense that the median judgment of any group of twelve people is an extremely poor predictor of the median judgment of any other group of twelve people.32 Lacking a reliable understanding of how deliberation would affect individual judgments, we used the median of groups of twelve individuals, randomly selected from our pool of 899 and combined into a large number of ?synthetic juries.?33 At least in the experimental setting, the primary identifiable source of the noise is the difficulty jurors have in translating their punitive intent into dollars. Dollar awards are highly variable despite the existence of shared moral judgments.
To explain why the use of the dollar scale would produce variability, we explored a link between the dollar scale and psychological research on the problem of ?magnitude scaling,? which occurs when people are asked to assess stimuli?the brightness of lights, the loudness of noise?along an unbounded numerical scale.34 This research shows a great deal of variability in assessments. The underlying problem is that people are being asked to scale without a ?modulus,? that is, without a standard that would help give meaning to various numbers on the scale.35 Consider the words of one of the subjects in the relevant experiments: ?I felt freer to use numbers over a wide range. I liked the idea that I could just relax and contemplate the tones. When there was a fixed standard I felt more constrained
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 10 to try to multiply and divide loudnesses, which is hard to do but with no standard I could just place the tone where it seemed to belong.?36
The key point is that when a modulus is supplied, the variability greatly decreases. Juries asked to assess punitive damage awards are in effect asked to scale without a modulus. Unpredictable judgments are a natural result even when people do not disagree about the significant issues37?even when, that is, there is a kind of ?bedrock? moral judgment in place. If this point is correct, it helps explain the observed variability in dollar awards in many areas of the law. It also helps explain the disparities that led to the enactment of the Sentencing Guidelines38 before the guidelines, judges were being asked, in effect, to scale without a modulus, since the relevant scale (years) has a great deal in common with the dollar scale (i.e., bounded below at zero, but with great discretion at the high end).
Our earlier study did not, however, involve deliberating juries, and a natural question is whether deliberating juries would produce similar or quite different results. Perhaps deliberation would reduce variability.39 In any case a test of deliberating juries would help to
11 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? confirm or deny the wisdom of the decision, for purposes of creating synthetic juries, to treat the median judgment of a group of twelve as the likely judgment of any deliberating group. An alternative possibility, referred to in the introduction, was to assume that there would be group polarization?that the process of collective deliberation would move the group further in the direction of the initial tendency suggested by the median of individual judgments. Hence our main purpose in this study was to examine the effects of jury deliberation on dollar awards and in particular to see whether deliberation would increase or decrease predictability. In the process we also hoped, as a secondary goal, to find out whether the original findings?strikingly shared moral judgments but erratic awards?would be replicated with a new sample of citizens from a different state, and with new and richer case materials.
III. Deliberating Juries: An Experimental Inquiry A. Method
Jury-eligible citizens from Phoenix, Arizona were recruited and paid by a survey firm. Participants were randomly assigned to a sixperson jury, and to a response mode order some juries judged dollar awards first and punishment ratings second, and others completed the tasks in the opposite order. Six juries (out of a total of 480) had only five members because an insufficient number of participants showed up at a given appointment time. A pilot test of 29 juries was conducted in Phoenix to test the materials and procedure. Because adjustments were very minor, these juries were added to the main sample and the combined sample was analyzed together. Therefore, a total of 3048 citizens participated in 509 juries.
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 12 The procedure consisted of four parts. In Part 1, all participants in a given session viewed a videotape for the case they would consider, read the corresponding written materials, and recorded their personal judgment of the appropriate punitive damage award or punishment rating (Table 1). In Part 2, participants were randomly assigned to a jury of six members, and given 30 minutes to deliberate on and reach a unanimous verdict on a punitive damage amount or a severity of punishment rating.
Table 1
Response Mode Manipulation
Punishment
How much should the defendant be punished
because of their actions, and to deter the defendant and
others from similar actions in the future? Note that the
compensatory damages that the defendant must pay do
not count as part of the punishment. Please circle the
number that best expresses the jury?s judgment of the
appropriate level of punishment.
None Mild Substantial Severe Severe
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
$ Damages
What amount of punitive damages (if any) should
the defendant be required to pay as punishment and to
deter the defendant and others from similar actions in
the future? Note that the compensatory damages that
the defendant must pay do not count as part of the
punishment. Please write the amount of punitive
damages that the jury agreed on in the blank below.
$ _____________________
In Part 3, a new individual response form was distributed, which asked them to record a second personal judgment for the
13 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? same case, using the complementary type of verdict (punishment rating or dollar damages) from the one they had already used. In Part 4, the jury again deliberated to reach a unanimous verdict on this second type of judgment for the same case. Thus, for each individual, and for each jury, we have both a dollar award and a punishment rating for the case they considered.
The stimuli consisted of fifteen personal injury scenarios.40 An example is provided in the Appendix. A videotape was prepared for each case, in which a professional actor read the text of the case and all instructions aloud. To maximize comprehension, participants were required both to view the videotape and to read the written version. Firm size (annual profits of $100-200 million) and compensatory damages ($200,000) were held constant for all cases. Thus, the variability we observe cannot be accounted for by a model that depends on variability in compensatory damage awards. B. Results
1. Basics
Despite the half hour time limit for deliberation, 91% of juries reached a unanimous verdict on the punishment scale (a total of 461 verdicts) and 82% of juries reached a unanimous verdict on a dollar amount (a total of 416 verdicts). The remainder had not reached a verdict when the time limit expired these were treated as hung. All further analyses were conducted on the 401 juries that reached both a punishment verdict and a dollar verdict.41 Because there were no significant differences between response mode orders (i.e., dollarspunishment or punishment-dollars), we pooled verdicts made by dollar-first juries and dollar-second juries in our analyses (punishment verdicts were treated similarly).
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics
Table 2 Summary of Personal Injury Scenarios
In the aggregate, jury punishment and dollar verdicts produced very similar rankings of the cases: there is a rank correlation of .88 between the jury dollar and punishment verdicts in Table 3.42
Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Table 3 Aggregate Responses by Case and Condition
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 16 2. High awards way up, low awards slightly down A view of the overall results for individuals and juries in Table 3 appears to show a striking and simple picture: juries produce higher dollar awards than the individuals who compose them. This pattern is also reflected, to a lesser degree, in punishment ratings. Higher jury awards are not confined to the middle of the award distribution, and also show up clearly in the extreme low (10th percentile) and high (90th percentile) ranges of the distribution as well (Table 4).
Table 4
Dollar Punitive Damage Distributions
by Case for Individuals and Juries (10/90)
17 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? This dramatic upward shift is indeed an important part of the picture, but it does not tell the whole story. A closer look at Table 3 reveals a systematic difference among cases in the degree to which juries are harsher than individuals: the more egregious the case, the greater is the margin by which jury awards exceed individual awards. For the five cases with the lowest awards, individual and jury awards are approximately equal, but for the middle five cases jury awards are twice as large, and for the top five cases five times as large. Indeed, on the punishment scale, deliberation actually causes cases the bottom five cases (those below the midpoint of the scale) to drop, and those at or above the midpoint to rise.
As we will see, this is a characteristic response pattern when group polarization is present. Thus it appears that polarization occurs in the underlying moral judgments, as indicated by the punishment ratings, and that the effect of this shift is amplified when expressions must be made on the unbounded dollar scale. The fact that dollar awards for the least severe cases did not decline is probably a consequence of the absolute minimum award of zero, below which awards could not go, rather than of a lack of a shift in underlying judgments.
A more direct measure of polarization can be computed by comparing jury verdicts to the judgments of the specific jurors that compose them, regardless of which case they considered. If group polarization is indeed occurring, we would expect that juries whose individuals initially judge a case to be more severe would more frequently produce high jury verdicts, compared to the predeliberation judgments of individuals. The reverse would be true of juries whose individuals initially judged a case to be less severe. Note that this contrast can happen for the same legal case, depending on the individual judgments jurors bring to deliberation.
To summarize the pre-deliberation judgments of jurors, we use three logical benchmarks as points of comparison: the median, the maximum, and the minimum judgments of the individuals in a jury. A clear pattern emerges on all three of these measures, as depicted in Figure 1. As a jury?s individuals judge a defendant?s behavior to deserve more severe punishment, the tendency of the jury to exceed the median dollar award of its members rises rapidly, reaching 100% at an average rating of 7 or more.
19 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? The tendency toward extremely high verdicts shows a similar pattern: the percentage of jury awards at or above the maximum individual award rises steadily with the intended severity of punishment, and indeed leaps to 100% when the average juror is at or above 7 on the punishment scale. In contrast, the tendency toward extremely low verdicts shows the opposite pattern: the percentage of jury awards at or below the minimum individual award declines with the intended severity of punishment, and leaps to 100% when the average juror is below 1 on the punishment scale.
As a result of the increased extremity produced by polarization, juries produce more unpredictable judgments than individuals, in the sense that the width of a confidence interval for a prospective award is much greater.43 Jury awards also have a higher standard deviation (? = $14,118,179) than do the median awards of their jurors (? = $2,715,098). Contrary to the possibility that this increased variance results from juries distinguishing more consistently between cases than individuals, this relationship holds separately for each of the 15 cases. The problem is less severe but still present with jury punishment ratings (? = 2.37) compared to individuals (? = 2.00).44
A important final question about the increased unpredictability is the extent to which it results from additional random noise introduced by the uncontrolled vagaries of group deliberation, or instead from the systematically higher level of awards due to polarization. Because dollars are a magnitude scale, which is bounded at zero, a higher average award necessarily means a higher variance as well. Indeed, a well understood characteristic of magnitude scales is a high correlation between the mean and standard deviation of responses. To investigate the source of the higher variance, we borrow a classic analysis from psychophysics research, which (for those who wish the skip the technical details) establishes that the increased variance is indeed due primarily to a higher mean and relatively little to random deliberation noise. If the shift in the level of awards causes most of the increased variance, then the
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 20 relationship between the mean and the standard deviation of awards for different cases should be the same for juries and their individuals. As is expected of a magnitude scale, the relationship is strong for both individuals (R2 = .66) and juries (R2 = .79) and, remarkably, both sets of points fall on essentially the same regression line.45 This strongly suggests that the mechanism by which jury awards are less predictable is a product not of irrational or erratic deliberations, but rather of higher average awards, resulting from the more orderly and predictable process of polarization.
3. Predictability
How predictable are our jury judgments? One sense in which jury judgments can be considered predictable is if there is high agreement between juries randomly selected from the population. To examine this question, we reprise an analysis from our earlier study, which simulated the convening of a separate jury for each case on a given day. By comparing the verdicts of different sets of randomly selected juries for our 15 cases we can assess the predictability of awards.46 The correlations in Table 5 show that there is strong agreement between sets of juries when judging punishment (r = .69), but far less agreement when they judge dollar awards (r = .24).47 This correlation provides a striking conclusion: only 6% of the variance48 in dollar awards is due to differences between cases, and the remaining 94% is random noise. In contrast,
21 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? almost 50% of jury punishment ratings is accounted for by differences between cases which, while less than perfect, offers a dramatic improvement over dollar awards.
Table 5 Correlations Between Judgments of Sets of Mock Juries
Punishment .69
.33
Table 6
Distribution of Jury $ Awards for
a Given Jury Punishment Rating
Another sense of predictability, one of great practical importance, concerns the relationship between a jury?s underlying moral judgment and its dollar award. If juries who agree perfectly on
Figure 2 The Greater the Intent to Punish, the Greater the Range of Possible Awards
punitive intent disagree on a dollar award, the similarly situated are plainly treated differently. To examine this form of unpredictability, we analyze the distribution of dollar awards for juries who agreed on exactly the same punishment rating (Table 6). It is clear from Table
23 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? 6 that even juries who agree precisely on punitive intent vary widely in the dollar awards they judge to be appropriate. For example, at the most common punishment rating of 4 (?Substantial? punishment), awards range from $200,000 at the low end (the 10th percentile) to $5,000,000 at the high end (the 90th percentile), and the maximum award (not listed) is dramatically higher at $100,000,000. Note that the range between the 10th and 90th percentiles for particular punishment ratings in Table 6 are quite comparable to those for individual cases in Table 4. As we found for those different cases, the greater the intent to punish, the more extensive is the range of possible awards, as depicted in Figure 2. The mapping of punitive intent onto the magnitude scale of dollars is clearly implicated as the source of this aspect of unpredictability, since the moral judgment, as well as the compensatory damages and firm size, are all held constant.
4. Do People From Arizona Agree With People From Texas? The
Effects of Geography, Race, Gender, Education, Age, and Wealth
A subsidiary but nonetheless important question is whether the findings of the earlier study are replicated under the current study?s changes in stimuli, procedure, and sample. The answer is that the previous results are replicated in every essential respect. The findings in the Texas study were replicated in Arizona, despite evident differences between the two regions, and people from the two areas evaluated cases in the same way. As before, dollars and ratings produce very similar rankings of the cases (a rank correlation of .90 compared to .91 in the previous study). Different demographic groups again produced very similar average evaluations, as indicated by the extremely high correlations in Table 7. Punishment ratings also decisively outperformed untransformed dollar awards in distinguishing between cases (Table 8), in the sense that differences between cases accounted for only 1% of the variance in individual dollar awards (vs 34% for punishment ratings) and only 10% of jury dollar awards (vs 53%).
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics
Table 7 Correlation Between Demographic Groups
on Intended Severity of Punishmenta
White .92
.88
30K .98
.99
30 .97
.96
.96
30-39 40-49
50
Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Table 8 Proportion of Variance Explained by Cases: Comparison to Kahneman, Schkade & Sunstein (1998)
In addition, the ordering of case evaluations closely matches that in our previous study. There are ten cases that are common to both studies, and evaluations made by Texans in the previous study are highly predictive of those made by Arizonans in the current study?the rank correlation between the two samples is .90 for punishment ratings and .98 for dollar awards. Finally, the absence of an effect of response mode order suggest that prior deliberation about a case, and even agreeing on a punishment rating, does little to reduce unpredictability in dollar awards. Thus, the current larger study, with several nontrivial changes, confirms the conclusion of our previous study that individual moral judgments are predictable and shared, but that expressing them in dollars produces unpredictability and confusion, and especially so in juries.
IV. What Happened?
Deliberation and Group Polarization
Plainly many of the 509 deliberating juries were subject to group polarization. Indeed, we believe that this is the first experimental evidence of group polarization in punitive damage awards.49 It is highly likely that the same pattern would be found
KSS98* .40
.03
.46
Punishment ratings Raw $ awards Log $ awards
Individuals .34
.01
.31
Juries .53
.10
.54
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 26 with compensatory awards involving hard-to-monetize injuries, such as libel, civil rights violations, pain and suffering, and emotional distress. In this section, we provide a general discussion of group polarization, both to explain our results here and because the phenomenon, which has received no sustained attention in the legal literature, is of general interest. A. The Basic Phenomenon
Group polarization is one of the most common patterns of difference between individual decisions and deliberating groups,50 and it has been found in many diverse tasks. Polarization ?is said to occur when an initial tendency of individual group members toward a given direction is enhanced [by] group discussion.?51 The result is
27 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? that groups often make more extreme decisions?both higher or lower?than would the typical or average individual in the group.
Consider some examples. (a) A group of moderately profeminist women will be more strongly profeminist after discussion.52 (b) Citizens of France become more critical of the United States and its intentions with respect to economic aid.53 (c) After discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice offer more negative responses to the question whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced by African-Americans in American cities.54 (d) After discussion, whites predisposed not to show racial prejudice offer more positive responses to the same question.55 It should follow, for example, that a group moderately predisposed in favor of affirmative action should strongly favor it after discussion that those moderately critical of an ongoing war effort would, after discussion, sharply oppose the war that a group moderately predisposed to hire a certain job candidate will, after discussion, support the application with considerable enthusiasm. The phenomenon has conspicuous importance to the operation of deliberating bodies, including juries but it has been barely noticed in the legal culture. Obviously the pattern described above is exactly what would be predicted if group polarization were at work.56
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 28 B. Risky Shifts, Cautious Shifts
Group polarization was first found in a series of experiments involving risk-taking decisions.57 Before 1961, conventional wisdom had been that as compared with the individuals who compose it, a group of decision-makers?for example a committee or board?would be likely to favor a compromise and thus to avoid risks. But the relevant experiments found otherwise they identified what has become known as the ?risky shift.?58 A group of deliberating people was more likely to take risks than are the individual members.
In these experiments, people were asked to assess the probability that a new company, for which some person A is considering employment, will prove ?financially sound.? Group decisions showed a repeated pattern toward greater risk-taking?that is, after discussion, participants tended to assess the likelihood of financial soundness as consistently higher than the median judgment of the group predeliberation. But later studies showed that under certain conditions, it was possible to induce a ?cautious shift? as well. Where the judgments of individual group members were relatively cautious, deliberation would produce a strong tendency toward greater caution. Thus ?a group discussion moves decisions to more extreme points in the direction of the original inclination . . . , which means shift to ether risk or caution in the direction of the original disposition, and the size of the shift increases with the degree of the initial polarization.?59 Similar results have been found in many contexts, involving, for example, questions about economic aid, architecture, political leaders, race, feminism, and judgments of guilt or innocence.60 The parallel here is of course the increase in large awards (for juries whose members were individually disposed in this direction) and the decrease in small awards (for juries whose members were originally so disposed).
29 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? C. Two Mechanisms
There have been two main explanations for group polarization, both of which have been extensively investigated.61 Massive support has been found on behalf of both explanations.62
The first involves social comparison.63 On this view, people want to be perceived favorably by other group members (and also to perceive themselves favorably), and once they hear what others believe, they adjust their positions in the direction of the dominant position. They may want to signal, for example, that they are not cowardly or cautious, and hence they will frame their position so that they do not appear such by comparison to other group members.64 The result is to press the group?s position toward one or another extreme.
The dynamic behind the social comparison explanation is that most people may want to take a position of a certain socially preferred sort?in the case of risk-taking, for example, they may want to be perceived (and to perceive themselves) as moderate risktakers, and their choice of position may be partly a product of this
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 30 desire.65 No one can know what such a position would be until the positions of others are revealed.66 Thus individuals move their judgments in order to preserve their image to others and their image to themselves. A key claim here is that information alone about the actual positions of others?without discussion?will produce a shift, and evidence has confirmed this fact. Research shows that this effect helps explain a shift toward caution (the ?cautious shift?) as well.67
The second explanation emphasizes the role of persuasive arguments.68 The key point here is that an individual?s choice or position on an issue is a function of the number and persuasiveness of arguments presented. The choice therefore moves in the direction of the position held by the most confident and outspoken members of the group. Because a group that is inclined in a certain direction will have a disproportionate number of arguments supporting that direction, the result of discussion will be to move individuals further in the direction of their initial inclinations.
The persuasive arguments theory begins with the intuition that if a group is deliberating about some difficult question with a factual answer (how many countries are there in Africa, for example), discussion will produce some movement, not toward the mean, but toward the minority view on which one or a few members have
31 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? accurate information. Of course many of the questions involving group polarization do not have purely factual answers. But a key aspect of those discussions is that the person with the correct answer is likely to state his view with a high degree of confidence, and also be able to make some argument in favor of that view. Novel arguments, bringing up fresh points, are especially likely to be persuasive. Thus it is suggested that the ?important thing that happens in discussion is that individual arguments are expressed and become fully shared.?69
When people hear arguments that they perceive as valid, or find to be new, they will shift in the direction suggested by those arguments. Discussion produces larger ?argument pools.? If a group of moderately feminist women become more feminist, a group moderately opposed to gun control more extremely so, and so forth, the reason is that the ?argument pool? of any such group will contain a preponderance of arguments in the direction suggested. Once the set of individual arguments is exposed to all individual members, there will be an inclination in the direction of initial inclinations, but more extremely and intensely so. ?Because the choice dilemmas have total argument pools in which the balance favors either risk or caution, the larger sample of the pool made available to all in discussion will produce either a risky shift or a cautius shift according to the direction of prediscussion inclinations as revealed in the means of initial decisions.?70 The suggestion is that group polarization will occur when convincing arguments produce a shift in the direction of prediscussion inclinations, revealed in the means of the initial decisions. At the same time, the persuasive arguments theory suggests that there will be ?depolarization? if and when new persuasive arguments are offered that are opposite to the direction initially favored by group members, and there is evidence for this phenomenon as well.
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 32 Of course it is not the case that all groups polarize. There are two qualifications to the claims made thus far. First, these are statistical regularities, and some groups will not polarize at all, a statement confirmed by many individual juries in our study. Second, depolarization, rather than polarization, will be found when the relevant group consists of individuals drawn equally from two extremes.72 Thus if people who initially favor caution are put together with people who initially favor risk-taking, the group judgment will move toward the middle. It is remarkable, then, that despite the presence of some groups who did the opposite, the groups in our study who did polarize were numerous enough to cause the aggregate pattern of our results to mimic polarization.
V. Implications and Reforms A. Is There A Problem? What Kind of Problem?
The group polarization phenomenon (and other evidence involving group performance) raises questions about the common belief that groups, and in particular juries, generally make better decisions than individuals. The common belief does seem sensible if only because the averaging of multiple judgments should reduce errors and variance?even if group deliberation has no effect on individual judgments.73 But a now considerable literature, using a wide variety of tasks, concludes that deliberating groups hold no generalized advantage over individuals in the performance of judgment tasks.74
More specifically, a review of judgmental biases in legal contexts suggests that jury deliberations are actually slightly more likely to amplify the biases of individuals than to attenuate them.75 Indeed, a series of studies involving juries suggests that in a variety of contexts,
33 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? jury judgments are likely to be more erratic than the judgments of (the mean or median of a group of the same number of) individuals.76 The simplest conclusion from our study here is that to the extent that there is a concern about unpredictable damage awards, deliberation is not likely to alleviate that concern. On the contrary, deliberations increase unpredictability in the particular sense that the dollar judgment of one group of six (or twelve) is highly unlikely to predict the dollar judgment of another group of six (or twelve)?in fact it is less likely to predict that judgment that it would if the group judgment were based on the median judgment of the individual members.77
Unpredictability is a serious problem for jury judgments, partly because it ensures that the similarly situated will not be treated similarly (and thus produces unfairness for plaintiffs and defendants alike), partly because it may produce overdeterrence in risk-averse defendants, partly because of the sheer cost involved in litigationrelated expenses. But unpredictable awards might be worthwhile if many or most of them are sound predictable awards are nothing to
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 34 celebrate if they are invariably too low or too high. Indeed, it is possible that the deterrent signal created by a range of variable awards, including a number of very high awards, is better, from the standpoint of preventing undesirable conduct, than the comparable signal of any realistic alternative.78 There is thus an important remaining question: whether jury deliberation, including group polarization, produces a better deterrent signal or more accurate judgments than alternative arrangements.
It is certainly possible that the median judgment of a set of (say) 100 deliberating juries is more accurate than the median judgments of (say) 600 individuals. Without an independent account of good outcomes, in this contested area of the law, this possibility is very hard to assess.79 But an understanding of the mechanisms that underlie group polarization certainly does not give much reason for optimism, at least in the context of damage awards. To the extent that polarization occurs as a result of social comparison, there is no reason to think that the higher and lower post-deliberative awards are better (or for that matter worse) than the lower and higher median of pre-deliberative individual judgments. When social comparison helps generate both larger and smaller awards, no relevant information is producing improved judgments.80 The increased unpredictability caused by polarization, however, is still present and problematic, even if the means are no more or less valid.
To the extent that polarization occurs as a result of persuasive arguments, there might appear to be more reason to believe that group discussion produces better, more informed outcomes. Recall that with respect to purely factual questions on which one or a few
35 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? group members have expertise, people are pushed toward a (correct) minority view simply because one or a few members of the group actually know the right answer.81 But it is not at all clear that there is an analogy in the context of punitive damage awards. In this setting, arguments that turn out to be persuasive may or may not be sound. This is especially so in light of the pervasive problem of ?scaling without a modulus.? Even those with convincing arguments are likely not to have a good reason to favor one or another dollar figure (which is not to say that their numbers are worse than those of anyone else), We conclude that the fact that high awards become higher, and low awards become lower, should not be seen as a tribute to the power of deliberation to lead people in better directions?though aside from exacerbating the problem of unpredictability, it may not lead them in worse directions either. B. Reform Proposals
With respect to punitive damage awards, and damages awards in related areas, many proposals have been motivated by a desire to decrease unpredictability. This goal has, for example, played a role in proposals for damage caps, for simple multipliers (relating punitive awards to compensatory awards), and for informing the jury of average awards or of intervals.82 It has played a role in constitutional limitations as well.83 The desire to reduce unpredictability motivation our discussion of the possibility of eliciting from the jury not dollar awards, but normative judgments on a bounded numerical scale.84 These judgments might be converted into a dollar award through some kind of calibration function, based on experts (?technocratic populism?) or on population-wide data relating normative judgments to dollar awards (?predictable populism?).85 Of course it is possible to question whether it is practical to ask a deliberating jury to make a moral judgment on a bounded numerical scale, hardly an ordinary practice in daily life, and indeed a task that might seem even odder
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 36 than the somewhat more familiar one of punishing wrongdoers through dollar awards.
The findings here do not lead directly to any particular reform proposal86 but they add two points to the existing literature. First, they demonstrate that juries can use a bounded punishment scale reliably. Juries are able to answer the normative question directly, and they are also able to use a bounded numerical scale far more reliably than the familiar dollar scale. And if deliberating juries are thought to have advantages over other, less populist institutions?as many people clearly believe87?then there is reason to consider a reform proposal that would involve directly eliciting the jury?s moral judgment. As noted, these judgments might be converted into a dollar award by some kind of calibration formula, defined by expert judgments about what different dollar awards would mean or do to particular defendants, or instead on population-wide data relating normative judgments to dollar awards. Either route would greatly diminish unpredictability.88 The data here, along with previous data, show that a calibration formula is also feasible to develop and use.89
The second point stems from the finding that deliberating juries do not reduce erratic awards, and indeed that the process of deliberation is one of the causes of unpredictability. We have seen that deliberation can even produce ?runaway juries,? if these are understood as juries in which group discussion yields awards much higher than those of even the highest of pre-discussion judgments. Such juries can be produced even in a mock jury task. Thus our findings fortify the suggestion that difficulties with the dollar scale make it hazardous to continue to rely on the current system, in which juries must map their moral judgments onto that scale without being given any guidance about the meaning of the various ?points? on the scale.
37 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? To be sure, eliciting moral judgments rather than dollar awards would not answer all of the relevant questions, because group polarization also produces not only higher and lower dollar awards, but also higher and lower moral judgments. There is no reason, however, to think that the resulting ?verdicts? are worse than the mean of individual judgments before discussion, just as there is no reason to think that they are better (except that increased unpredictability is unambiguously worse in itself). In the absence of an independent criterion of rightness, it probably makes sense to continue the tradition of obtaining the deliberative judgment, without at the same time creating the forms of unpredictability and unfairness that can come from the unbounded dollar scale.
The most radical reform would be to dispense with the jury entirely and to move toward judicial judgments or even to develop a kind of penalty schedule, based on the judgments of some combination of representative and expert institutions.90 We cannot evaluate these alternatives here. But to the extent that our study shows both decreasing and increasing awards as a result of group polarization, operating independently of better-informed or sounder judgments of any kind, it supplies additional support for that more radical reform. Of course the radical reform might be rejected if the relevant institutions would be unreliable, perhaps because bureaucracies might be vulnerable to the exercise of politically powerful private groups. The question is one of comparative institutional competence. What we have added here is that the process of deliberation will increase high awards and diminish low awards, a result that cannot be comforting in light of the increased unpredictability and the pervasive problem of scaling without a modulus.
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 38
VI. Conclusion We have found that as compared with the median of individual judgments, deliberation substantially increases group polarization: Small awards become smaller, and large awards become (significantly) larger. The point has implications for damage awards in general and also for understanding social deliberation. From the normative point of view, it is hard to know whether the resulting judgments are better than the median of pre-deliberative individual judgments. But four points seem clear. First, moral judgments about personal injury cases are very widely shared over diverse communities and demographic categories. Second, those shared moral judgments do not produce predictable dollar awards. Third, group polarization occurs, in a quite dramatic fashion, in the context of damage awards. Hence both social influence and persuasive arguments drive group judgments to more extreme points in the direction of the inclination originally indicated by the median of pre-deliberation judgments. Fourth, the problem of unpredictable and erratic judgments is likely to be aggravated, rather than alleviated, by virtue of the fact that juries are deliberative bodies.
39 Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals?
Appendix Glover v. General Assistance Joan Glover, a five-year-old child, ingested a large number of a non-prescription allergy medicine called Allerfree, and required a three-week hospital stay. The Allerfree bottle used a faulty childproof safety cap. The Glovers sued the manufacturer of Allerfree, the General Assistance company. The trial jury ordered General Assistance to pay the Glovers $200,000 in compensatory damages. Facts of the Case Established at Trial
Joan?s parents testified that after her birth they had ?childproofed? their house and ensured that all of their medications had childproof safety caps. The Allerfree bottle carries a label reading ?Childproof Cap.? Joan found the pills in a kitchen drawer and ingested most of the bottle. The overdose permanently weakened her respiratory system, which will make her more susceptible to breathing-related diseases such as asthma and emphysema for the rest of her life.
General Assistance is a large company (with profits of $100-200 million per year) that manufactures a variety of non-prescription medicines. The company has sold tens of thousands of bottles of medicines with childproof safety caps that were generally effective, but had a failure rate much higher than any others in the industry. Internal company documents showed that General Assistance had chosen to ignore federal regulations requiring more effective safety caps. An internal memo presented at trial says that ?this stupid, unnecessary federal regulation is a waste of our money? it acknowledges the risk that Allerfree might be punished for violating the regulation but says ?the punishments are extremely mild basically we?d be asked to improve the safety caps in the future.? An official at the Food and Drug Administration had previously warned a General Assistance executive that the company was ?on shaky ground on this one.?
Chicago Working Paper in Law and Economics 40 Closing Argument by Glovers? Attorney
The attorney for the Glovers argued that General Assistance?s disregard for children?s safety and for the law was abhorrent and represented exactly the kind of reckless corporate greed deserving of a high award of punitive damages. He concluded that General Assistance?s shocking profit-mongering should be punished so that the company would not feel itself at liberty to put children at risk in the future. Closing Argument by General Assistance?s Attorney
The attorney for General Assistance emphasized that while the cap had a high failure rate relative to others on the market, it had nonetheless been conceded at trial that the cap was effective in most cases. She argued that, given that the FDA official had only communicated to them verbally, and had not required the company to take any action, it was not at all clear that the cap was actually in violation of the regulation at all.
Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals?
This is a preliminary draft of a paper forthcoming in the Columbia Law Review. All rights
Readers with comments should address them to:
Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 1. William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries
and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July
1991). 2. Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The
Theory and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August
1991). 3. Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism
(September 1991). 4. Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of
Contract (February 1992). 5. Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and
Common Pools (February 1992). 6. Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation
of (April 1992). 7. Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April
1992). 8. William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An
Economic Analysis (July 1992). 9. William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of
Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992). 10. Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law:
A Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy
(September 1992). 11. Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing
Contracts (November 1992). 12. Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life
(January 1993). 13. J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages:
Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 14. Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental
Law (April 1993). 15. Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize?
(The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993).
16. Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). 17. J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts:
The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August
1993). 18. William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics
of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 19. Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent
Law (September 1993). 20. Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis
(October 1993). 21. Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle
(March 1994). 22. Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the
Law (June 1994). 23. William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis
(June 1994). 24. J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from
Early Modern Japan (August 1994). 25. Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement
Escrows (August 1994). 26. Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the
Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994). 27. Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994). 28. David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond
Cimino (December 1994). 29. Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational
Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). 30. Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract
Damages (February 1995). 31. Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller,
Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A
Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation
(March 1995). 32. Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the
American Business Enterprise (April 1995). 33. Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995). 34. J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995).
35. Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995). 36. Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January
1996). 37. J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial
Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from
Japan (January 1996). 38. Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights:
Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996). 39. Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996). 40. William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics
of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and
Other Collectibles (July 1996). 41. John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence,
and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). 42. Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September
1996). 43. Douglas G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An
Overview of the la and Economics of Financially Distressed
Firms (March 1997). 44. Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality
(March 1997). 45. William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An
Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). 46. Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997). 47. John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and
Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California?s State
Legislative Races (May 1997). 48. Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A
Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997). 49. Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large:
Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August
1997). 50. Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade,
Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and
Valuation in Law) (December 1997). 51. William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E.
Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal
Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998).
52. John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998). 53. Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An
Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998). 54. Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and
Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April
1998). 55. Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A
Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998). 56. John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?:
Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May
1998). 57. Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order
Decisions (June 1998). 58. Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive
Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and
the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to
Limit Awards (July 1998). 59. Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August
1998). 60. John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women?s Suffrage
Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September
1998) 61. Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of
Chapter 11 (October 1998) 62. David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency
in the Tax Law (November 1998) 63. Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of
Customary International Law (November 1998) 64. John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and
Totalitarianism (December 1998) 65. Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest:
Notes Toward A ?Third Way? (January 1999) 66. Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of
Evidence (February 1999) 67. Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared
Information Goods (February 1999)
