 Formerly University of Florida Law Review Cass R. Sunstein* We have now had the second impeachment of a President in the Nation's history, and it is actually the first impeachment of an elected President. The previous impeachment concerned an unelected President and was politically inflected in obvious ways after the Civil War and the death of Lincoln.1 What might be done now, now that it appears to be over, is to see if we can make something good of it. Often in American history, when we have had a serious problem, there have been reform efforts that * Editor's note: Portions of this Lecture are reprinted with permission of the publisher, Georgetown University and Georgetown Law Journal. © 1998. Additional portions of this Lecture are reprinted with permission of the publisher, the Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Pennsylvania Law Review. © 1998. This address was presented at the University of Florida Fredric G. Levin College of Law on March 19, 1999 as the annual Dunwody Distinguished Lecture in Law. To retain the speech's original character, it has been edited only sparingly. Footnotes have been added where material is directly quoted and where further readings might prove useful or interesting. A VHS copy of the Lecture is on file with the Florida Law Review. have made something bad into something better. It is quite early to get an historical sense of this astonishing set of events, but maybe it is not too early to have some preliminary reactions. I am going to propose two general thoughts and three particular thoughts. So there are really five thoughts, in sum. notion is intended to pick up on my belief that the impeachment of President Clinton was unconstitutional, a violation of the constitutional responsibilities of the House of Representatives. But those who reject that view might be able to agree on the proposition that impeachment should be limited to the most extreme cases on the theory, perhaps, that President Clinton's case was one of the extreme cases, for reasons I will get into. against someone or on someone's behalf, there ought to be a degree of reflection first. This notion was that we would have a deliberative democracy combining popular responsiveness with reason-giving. What the Framers added to that goal was an understanding of likely incentive effects of different institutions. And, at their most ingenious, what they sought to create were institutions that would have a realistic picture of human nature, and would use that in the service of the ideal of deliberative democracy. The notion of national representation, of which Madison was so fond, was designed to ensure a kind of separateness from the play of faction, so that representatives could engage in deliberative tasks. In Madison's words, this would allow our representatives "to refine and enlarge" the public view, rather than just replicate it.5 That is to suggest that we might think of the Constitution's structure as attempting to wed an ideal-that of a deliberative democracy-with some mechanisms which were attuned to incentive effects. What institutions will have what incentive effects on what people? Now, let us turn to the Independent Counsel Act, and think, in particular, about the incentives it creates for the most important actors in our system, such as political officials generally; the media; and the independent counsel, herself or himself. If you look at political officials generally, any party that is out of power is under tremendous pressure by virtue of the Act's existence to call for the appointment of an independent counsel when allegations of wrongdoing are made, and to draw attention to the independent counsel's activity or inactivity as the proceedings go on. Under the Independent Counsel Act, whenever a party is out of power, one or more members of that party have a tremendous incentive to call on the Attorney General to appoint an independent counsel, to ensure that serious allegations of wrongdoing are taken seriously by someone who is not in the President's pocket. It is no wonder that no matter whether that Congress is controlled by Democrats or Republicans, no matter which is in the majority or minority, a certain number of members of the party opposed to the president in office will spend a considerable of time calling for the appointment of an independent counsel. So much so, that the pressure to appoint an independent becomes for an administration nearly irresistible. Hence, it is the case that every administration since the Independent Counsel Act has been enacted has been subjected to an independent counsel investigation at least once.6 It is not as if corruption is high; it is that the incentive effect is created by the Act for members of the opposing party, and the ability to resist that pressure on the Attorney General's part is extremely limited. (1998) (providing an appendix detailing investigations under the subject Act). Politicians who think the appointment of an independent counsel would not be a good idea-it would be diversionary or such-are unlikely to resist their fellow Democrats' or fellow Republicans' pleas, because it makes them look soft on corruption or soft on the opposing party. So, the pressure for opposition and scandal-mongering is very hard to resist for members of the opposing party. If we look at the media in particular, the Framers hoped that the media would serve the interest of having a genuinely deliberative democracy. But in the current media, it is no news to say that there is a tendency for sensationalism. What is a little more interesting is to suggest the way in which the Independent Counsel Act feeds and aggravates that tendency, by diverting attention from problems such as the increase in asthma in the inner-cities to such problems as whether the Vice President made the phone call from the wrong office. The truth is that scandals sell, and newspaper people know that fact. They are under tremendous pressure to cover political scandals, even if they would like not to. Congress, you just watch T.V. branch officials. They came from the United States Department of Justice. Sometimes, in the extraordinary cases, the Department of Justice would, by regulation, create an independent counsel, and the system worked pretty well; it was not broken. The Watergate example, sometimes taken to be the strongest argument on behalf of the Independent Counsel Act, seems more to be the strongest argument against the Independent Counsel Act. The Watergate situation was handled not with an independent counsel statute but with some combination of ordinary Justice Department activity and political safeguards. You will recall that President Nixon had Archibald Cox fired-unlawfully, by the way. He was, by regulation, an independent counsel, and President Nixon replaced Archibald Cox with another independent officer, Leon Jaworski-who did his job well. The system worked plenty well enough without an Independent Counsel Act. thinking of things of the same kind and magnitude as treason and bribery. And, at the time of the Founding, there is no question that "treason" would mean basically what everyone today would think it means. the United States,"1 clearly signaling Mason's concern that you could have things that were like treason and bribery-offenses against the Nation as such, that did not qualify-that should be grounds for impeachment, too." The words "against the United States" were deleted by the Committee on Arrangement and Style, which had no authority to make substantive changes, and thought, it appears, that they were just eliminating redundancy. 2 It turned out to be an important act by the Committee on Arrangement and Style. In any case, it seems pretty clear that by the period 1789, 1790, and 1791, there was general agreement that the defining cases for impeachment, at least, were large-scale abuses of distinctly presidential authority. Thus, what President Clinton did, and some of what President Nixon was alleged to have done, do not fall within the cases that the Framers had in view, however egregious some or all of those things are. If we look forward and get a sense of our constitutional history, we will notice a remarkable fact: a tradition of forbearance and restraint on the part of both parties, even in an extraordinarily large number of cases in which something other than forbearance and restraint might have been expected. Here is an historically non-exhaustive list of cases. President Reagan, it was alleged, sold arms unlawfully to the Contras, and there was extensive discussion of this. Vice President Bush, it was alleged, was also involved in the deal, in violation of the Boland Amendment, which expressly prohibited this kind of transaction. For all of the noise and fury over President Reagan's allegedly unlawful acts, there was no serious talk, at any point, of impeachment. There was an unwillingness to invoke the kind of artillery that would destabilize the Nation, even the face of allegations of unlawful transfers of arms to a nation with whom our relations were quite complex. overwhelming. He also lied to the country about transferring arms to an unfriendly nation in return for the release of hostages. He said that it did not happen. It did-the documents are crystal clear. 14. Aaron Xavier Fellmeth, A Divorce Waiting to Happen: Franklin Roosevelt and the Law and obstruction ofjustice, while quite serious and severe-these are, after all, felonies, and are nothing to laugh at or trivialize-are not legitimate bases for impeachment, even though they are legitimate bases for criminal punishment. system. What is unusual about this view is that the President committed quite serious crimes in the course of activities which frequently place ordinary citizens at risk. This does not endanger the general principle that impeachment is generally for cases of large-scale abuse of distinctly presidential power. All this means is that this-President Clinton's particular crimes of perjury and obstructing justice-is one thing that does not fall within "generally." In other words, it is a narrow exception to the Senate prerequisite. are investigating the highest officials in the land to be subject to discharge by the highest official in the land. that The notion judgment by Congress is reasonable constitutionally illegitimate seems extremely adventurous. So this is my suggestion: Justice Scalia had the policy right, but he did not have the Constitution right. And the proper remedy, as Justice Scalia often says, for an objection of this kind, is political and not constitutional. The same thing might be said about Jones v. Clinton. After all, there are some immunities in the Constitution-the Speech or Debate Clause, for example, gives Congress immunity with regard to speeches on the House floor; but there is no express presidential immunity from civil suits. 17. See Testimony Before the United States House of Representatives comm. on the to-and, if encouraged, will-take its constitutional obligations quite seriously. And we ought not to think of the judiciary as uniquely invested with power to think about the meaning of the Constitution. But in this, the most public encounter between our elected representatives and the Constitution of the United States, there were many troubling features. Many members of Congress repeatedly suggested that any crime or violation of the oath of office or violation of the "take-care" clause calls for impeachment, even though the Constitution unambiguously says otherwise, and even though many people, including members of those representatives' own staffs, were told that the Constitution expressly says otherwise. The problem that turned up is that in any case involving a sexual harassment allegation, it is apparently open to the plaintiff, at least in some trial courts, to undertake fairly extensive discovery about the consensual sexual activity of the defendant. That is bad for two reasons. One reason is that it opens up to public view activities that may well have a legitimate claim to secrecy. The other problem with this is that it creates a tremendous weapon to extract settlements. Now we do not know the magnitude of the problem, but from talking with trial judges, I, at least, have a sense that this is not a trivial problem. It happens. There is fresh reason to be uncertain about whether Congress can be trusted to interpret the Constitution fairly. At the same time, the law of sexual harassment, while hardly the culprit, has a problem-a problem that I have a hunch can be fixed, pretty reasonably.