 Article 4 Should the Government Recognize Same-Sex Marriage? Session Two: Legal, Equitable, and Political Issues Teresa Stanton Collett David Orgon Coolidge George Dent Andrew Koppelman Mark Strasser See next page for additional authors Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable Recommended Citation Collett, Teresa Stanton; Coolidge, David Orgon; Dent, George; Koppelman, Andrew; Strasser, Mark; and Sunstein, Cass (2000) "Should the Government Recognize Same-Sex Marriage? Session Two: Legal, Equitable, and Political Issues," The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable: Vol. 7: Iss. 1, Article 4. Available at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable/vol7/iss1/4 This Article is brought to you for free and open access by Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. Authors Teresa Stanton Collett, David Orgon Coolidge, George Dent, Andrew Koppelman, Mark Strasser, and Cass Sunstein This article is available in The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable/ vol7/iss1/4 Same-Sex Marriage 33 weight, and therefore any weight at all, if they are supported by a moral theory behind it all-a theory like autonomy or more generally a theory that would come out of human agency, which could not be denied by any rational actor. Such a theory I think would say that you have to afford certain kinds of interpretations and within a range. And then more particular interpretations within that range will still be possible on various needs that a society has, as well as individuals, with relevant statistical and empirical evidence. another panel at four. going to deal primarily with law, so this might be a good transition point. MADIGAN: This panel will focus on legal issues. I'll go down our list of esteemed speakers in alphabetical order. 34 Roundtable back in law school. So she understands the hectic stuff I've been doing lately, so I appreciated her words of comfort. Same-Sex Marriage 35 moment yet has really focused on as far as their public remarks. The question that is posed is "Should the Government Recognize Same Sex Marriage?" And embedded in that tide is an assumption about the reality of marriage. It is that the state recognizes marriage, rather than creates marriage. And I found it very interesting that Reverend Dell opened with his statement saying that the point of the wedding where the clergy is involved is where there is a creation of a legal relationship. I think that part of the difficulty that Americans are having when we talk about this topic is the competing understandings of what marriage is and how it is created. 36 Roundtable final characteristic such that we flourish best not when we seek our own self-satisfaction, but when we seek mutual self-giving the that I believe characterizes marriage throughout history and in all cultures is that it calls for procreative potential. Procreative potential. Now that can be challenged certainly in contemporary America today where you could suggest, "But Professor, is it not true that the majority of Americans, who are heterosexual who enter into a marriage relationship use contraception and in fact intentionally thwart the procreative potential within that union?" In response to that, I could give you the statistics from the Gudmacher Institute that were published just this summer, while good intentions are only half done because in fact fifty percent of all pregnancies in America are unintended. I can suggest to you that the pill, which is often suggested to be three percent error rate, when actually measured against user effectiveness, has a twenty percent failure rate. In fact, the desire not to have a procreative union certainly does not define the biological potential of that union. And it is that biological potential that I believe has led to the status recognition of marriage. Same-Sex Marriage 37 so that their will and their autonomy can be made manifest-do not require state sanction, recognition, or protection as a form of marriage. 38 Roundtable statute that classifies individuals on the basis of their gender must carry the burden of showing an "exceedingly persuasive the classification. "The burden of justification is demanding and it rests entirely on the state." There was a lot of talk about burden of proof in the last panel. I'm not sure how far we get in the argument. But the law gives you precise answers for those questions. for The state can't justify a sex-based classification on the basis of generalizations that are only statistically accurate, such as the generalization that many heterosexual couples produce children, and same-sex couples tend to be childless. As soon as you start getting into statistics, I think you need generalizations of that sort to make the claim that Teresa was just making about the purpose of the marriage laws as protecting vulnerable women and children. It is just not the case that there are no vulnerable women and children in same-sex relationships, no women or children who are in danger of being abandoned by the more financially prosperous partner or rendered destitute. So if that's a reason for the law to intervene, that reason obtains for same-sex couples. One might say laws that don't allow same-sex couples to marry classify on the basis of marriage and not on the basis of gender. Now the most supportive precedent for this would be Geduldig v Aiello" in which the Supreme Court Same-Sex Marriage 39 held that discrimination against pregnant women is not sex-based. The court noticed that the insurance scheme that the state provided that didn't cover pregnancy "divides recipients into two groups, pregnant women, and nonpregnant persons. The first is exclusively female, the second includes members of both sexes."" The trouble with this argument is that the persuasive authority of Geduldig is weak. The decision hasn't been overruled, but similar reasoning in the Title VII context has been rejected by Congress. And Geduldig's reasoning has been almost universally condemned by scholars. it-is in many ways the question of how we are to live together in peace when we deeply disagree about matters, which all sides hold dear. Is our goal to eliminate all differences? Or is it to insist that differences must not matter? Or is it to learn to live with differences even though none involved will be satisfied with the results? If I were to state this in more religious-sounding language, I would say that the goal of the struggle over marriage is not to annihilate one's opponents, or to pretend that they don't exist, but in fact to learn to love them. And I don't mean that as a statement of pure sentimentality. I think that's at the heart of civic tolerance. It's based on my conviction that every person is a child of God, and that every person, however they identify themselves, has a contribution to make to American society. Same-Sex Marriage 41 conundrum, I think. After all, intimacy flourishes in many settings, and it's generally only Americans who always confuse sex and intimacy. 42 Roundtable only answer I can come up with is the tendency to view all contentious issues, including this one, through the paradigm of race. According to this narrative, there is the victimizing majority represented by the legislatures and the people, and the victimized minority whose defenders are the courts. In such a case, the only way to vindicate the victims is to remove the issue from the people. Would that the issue were so simple. Same-Sex Marriage 43 is merely an individual contract or just a means of social stability and choose to redefine it, so be it. Others will disagree, but we will have followed the rule of law. On the other, hand it might turn out differently. Either way, we might be able to live better together in peace. Thank you. society."" Now same sex parents do have rights-rights to privacy with respect to their children. Following Zablocki, at least there's a suggestion that maybe the right to enter this relationship ought to be recognized. Nonetheless, courts and commentators are suggesting that procreation is a reason not to allow same sex unions, so let's look at the argument. Commentators and panelists here have suggested that only a man and a woman can have a child through their union yet the state's interest in the next generation is not only in children produced through the union of the different members of a married couple else our adoption laws would be much different. It's unlikely, for example, that adoptive parents and biological parents would be treated the same in the eyes of the law. It's unlikely that Congress would be trying to push adoption. It's unlikely that legislatures would have created a step-parent exception to make it easier for adults not biologically related to the children to adopt them. Same-Sex Marriage 45 agree-suppose we had the criteria-it's pretty clear the state does not say that only those who will have the optimal marriage will be allowed to marry. Perhaps the question to ask, as has been suggested here, is not better or worse but what is essential to marriage? My interest, at least, is what's essential for the civil institution. So, merely, for example, because it would not meet some religious definition should not suffice. For example, a religion might say, "A marriage with someone not of this religion is not a marriage in our eyes" or "A marriage with someone not of the right race is not a marriage in our eyes." This might be essential for the religion but that's presumably not what's at issue here. If Vermont, for example, comes to recognize same sex marriages then at least for the state, and for purposes here, I believe that suffices. 46 Roundtable reason to promote stable, long-standing same sex relationships. Perhaps it should be thought "no, let's just let the state decide what its own vision of morality is and enforce that." Presumably both Loving and McLaughlin'6 would show why that is not an acceptable option. As to whether in fact same sex marriage bans involve sex discrimination or orientation discrimination, this is an empirical question. We can see how laws will be applied. If in fact it's sex discrimination, then we can see whether there are important purposes served. I would suggest the following: if the reason that this is offered, that same sex marriages should not be allowed, is that the state has a compelling in precluding individuals who cannot reproduce through their union, but that same interest is not recognized when, for example, the elderly or those either incapable of reproducing or who simply don't want to have children-won't be applied there-and further, if it's also the case, as is the case in several states, only certain people who cannot reproduce will be allowed to marry-if you look at some of the first cousin statutes-then I would suggest that that reason is not the real reason. If it's argued that the reason is to provide a setting for the raising of children but nonetheless those who are raising them will not be allowed to marry, it seems that really can't be the reason. One of the benefits, at least, of imposing heightened scrutiny will be that either real reasons will be offered or it will be clear that there aren't such reasons. Thanks. GEORGE DENT: Let's begin by asking why society, through government, should single out for honor this relationship called marriage. It is important to remember that gay marriage is not singled out for disfavor. There are many sexual and/or loving relationships, including relatives, marriage to animals, and polygamy, that are not eligible for this honor. One valid reason to revere traditional marriage is that it is intrinsically good. We value life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness as intrinsically good but these are also mysteries, as Andy Koppelman said, or as some others would say, metaphysical mumbojumbo. That is you can't show empirically that life is better than death, but since we can't prove the intrinsic goodness of this claim, I don't think there's much point in dwelling on it and in any case Professor Collett has already talked about it. Same-Sex Marriage 47 marriage focuses human energies in socially productive ways. Men are especially prone to be disruptive and self-destructive. Marriage to a woman and fatherhood tend to point men in the right direction. Many arguments for gay marriage discuss gender stereotyping and taboos against homosexuality. Those issues are interesting, but they're not relevant to the marriage issue that we're discussing here. We're not discussing criminal sodomy statutes and no law forbids, for example, an effeminate man to marry a masculine woman. 48 Roundtable children don't need much education or socialization to learn their roles. Today, children need lots of attention and the best source of attention is caring parents. But, and this is the second point, the modern world often undermines good parenting. The anonymity and mobility of modern life enable parents, especially fathers, to neglect or abandon their families without incurring community condemnation. Our resources for encouraging good parenting are limited. No one wants to throw unwed parents in jail. Perhaps our best weapon, then, is to exalt traditional marriage as the most fertile ground for good parenting. Same-Sex Marriage 49 relationships be tolerated but not honored to the same degree that traditional marriage is honored. However, I suspect that the loud forces on both sides of the debate will reject this, or any compromise. the Supreme Court ultimately responded to it was, for the first and only time in it's history, to use the words "white supremacy." What the Court tried to do was to get in back of the formally discriminatory at first glance classification, at second glance not really formally discriminatory and that the discrimination that we see before us stands or falls as a commitment to white supremacy. Now the question to be asked, then, is whether discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation reflects a commitment to male supremacy. I confess that I believe that it does and the reason that it does is it embodies a judgment that there are two kinds of people, men and women, and it reflects a concern that the institution of male-male relationships and female-female relationships disrupts, though in quite different ways, the sexual stereotypes that accompany the distinction of humanity into two kinds. I don't think the Supreme Court should accept that argument. It's too early. It's a democratic argument, not a judicial argument though it is a constitutional argument. That's the basic claim. the distinction What I think socially speaking-this is not a comment about any individual-but socially speaking what underlies the expressive character of recognizing marriage and the debate is one about nothing material but about the expressive character of law. The last speaker put his finger on it with the thought that to allow homosexual marriages is to legitimate same sex relationships, or to approve them in ways that domestic partnerships don't threaten to do. I do believe that's right and, socially speaking, that that's the core of the difference. What is the statement that is being made by same sex marriages and why is there such contestation about that when the material consequences are so low? We might just isolate the fact that it's a statement we're concerned about and nothing material, or very little material, if the compromise suggested would go through. I think the underlying expression is that gay people ought not to be excluded by virtue of their homosexuality and there's no sense in which they're second-class citizens Same-Sex Marriage 51 in the United States. This is not a suggestion that everyone who opposes same sex marriages believes that gay people count as second-class citizens. It's a more general statement about the dynamic of the debate and the social meaning of the exclusion to heterosexuals and homosexuals alike. Martha Nussbaum reflected an interesting concern that marriage isn't the greatest thing in the world always and that the mere availability of marriage to same sex couples might actually undermine freedom because it would put them in the position of choosing an option which they would rather not have available because it would pressure-the word was "push" I think, offered by the philosopher Claudia Card-her into marriage when she really didn't want to be there. There's an interesting suggestion there about the extent to which an option might deny freedom because a social norm might act on the option so as to push people toward it and they might rather not have it there, but I don't think that's sufficient justification for denying same sex marriages because of the asymmetry between heterosexual and homosexual couples and because of the expression of exclusion and, socially speaking again, "contempt" I think is the right word, that the exclusion imposes on gay couples. 52 Roundtable as soon as you open up the door." It seems to me analogous. The same arguments have been used traditionally to say we don't want to take an extra step. I'm not saying it's a good argument, I'm just saying it might sound familiar. I believe the Loving Court suggested, although it talked about white supremacy, that even if that had not been at issue, they nonetheless would have held that way, so I guess that's my question for Professor Dent. If this hadn't involved racial subordination and if really it could be credited that the state was just doing what it said, keeping the races separate and allegedly there were legitimate reasons, I'm wondering what you think. Would that do it? COOLIDGE: This is sort of an awkward question because I want to ask Mark, and it's going to be awkward for him and I to wait until the end. I can answer that because I don't have any question for anybody. I did not mean that at all about any particular person. This is really a question about the socially understood meaning of the act on the part of, let's say, broad segments of the population confronted with laws that they support or despise. So just like you could have supported a literacy test just because you want people to be literate, the social meaning of a literacy test for our culture might be that you want to exclude African-Americans, as it was. So it's very much a contextual argument, not an a priori argument. Not an argument about any particular person. Same-Sex Marriage 53 It strikes me that Professor Koppelman has mistaken me for John Finnis. I'm deeply honored, but I am not John Finnis, and my argument is different from John's although I have tremendous respect and wish that I had the intellectual horsepower that that man does. 54 Roundtable and about material benefits. The material benefits are not completely inconsequential given the way that health insurance is structured in the United States. Part of what is driving the domestic partnership debate is that people want health insurance. They want some basis for getting it. in a roundabout way, beginning with a confession that I am a recovering libertarian. There's no mystery what caused me to change my mind. My wife and I had children and a libertarian vision of the world works very well if everyone in the world is a competent adult who can make his own decisions and fend for himself. When you throw children into the equation, it starts to break down. Good parenting requires tremendous sacrifices and many people are going to make those sacrifices no matter what the state says. Unfortunately as we know, we don't have to look far to see many parents do not. The question is how do we get parents-how do we encourage parents-to make those tremendous sacrifices? To put it another way, if tomorrow morning we read in the paper that some scientist has created a robot that does a great job at raising children, then to my mind this whole debate has changed. Maybe then I'm back to my libertarian position-that is to say, why should the state care if you're married or not? Gay and traditional marriages are treated equally and then the state does not care about either of them. That brings me around to Mark's question about anti-miscegenation laws: if the Court had been persuaded that this was not a matter of white supremacy would the result have been different? That's a hard question for me to answer because it's like an extension of a world in which there are robots who can do outstanding parenting. Maybe the best answer I can come up with is to think of the rule against intermarriage in Jewish law. What is the purpose for that? Some people say that it is a way Jews have of saying we're better than everybody else. But many Jews at the same time accept the argument that for thousand of years we have been an embattled tribe and intermarriage is a threat to the survival of the tribe-certainly to survival in America today. So that's at least one circumstance where I could at least see an argument against intermarriage. Of course, it's not a legal matter, it's a matter of Jewish law. I guess I have a hard time answering Mark's question, but I guess I could possibly imagine some circumstances somewhere where a law against, or a principle against, intermarriage might make some sense, as possibly it does in the case of Jewish law. Same-Sex Marriage 55 AUDIENCE: I have a question for Professor Collett about procreation. That obviously has become an issue for many people on both sides of this issue. In light of the fact that there is a distinction that-I think you tried to bring out-potential procreation matters, not necessarily actual procreation. I wondered if you could illuminate why that is one of the necessary-one of the essential-characteristics of marriage? From my perspective in the Divinity School-so all that metaphysical mumbo-jumbo actually is what I work withI want to know where that comes from and whether or not that is changing because of the other demographic realities of today such as overpopulation and undercare for the children who are already being born. the argument about That's a very different argument the abandonment or neglect of children. In that respect, I would share with you a comment that I received from the principal of the very nice suburban middle school that one of my daughters goes to, when she and I were visiting. I said "You have to excuse me, I have to leave because I have a Supreme Court committee meeting and I have to get to it." She said "It's so refreshing to find a family where both parents are engaged outside of the home and yet your children are not simply being pet sat." I said "I'm not sure I know what that means," and she said "It's the sort of parenting style that says while you're a baby you're cute and cuddly and we'll play with you like a puppy but once you achieve a certain age and difficulty, we're going to put you in the backyard with your food and water and leave you to mature on your own." I'm not sure that there is not a real problem with neglect of children, and I do not think it's confined to the inner city as so often it is mischaracterized in the press. That leads to sort of a critique of what has been the underlying assumption of much of the feminist critique of the existing social order, which is that women were not fulfilled in the home. Some of the most interesting work being done in 56 Roundtable feminism today is work that suggests that in fact there are some underlying values of those norms that are not being well served and that the task is to get them served in a way that is fair and allows for the full development of both individuals in that marriage. think procreation is STRASSER: Is it o.k. to just add something? One of my interests is what the state laws actually are and how marriages are treated. There is no requirement, not only that you have children, but that you have to have sex. You can have a marriage voided because one of the parties said, "That's what I thought we were going to be doing and we're not," but if there's an agreement beforehand, the state recognizes the marriage. It's unusual, at least, to say "not only no children, but no sex is fine," but here the difficulty that you can't have children through your union ought to suffice. getting it voided is that one of the parties says ... Same-Sex Marriage 57 am curious why it is in the state's compelling interest for me to be able to marry an eighty-two year old woman where there is no procreative interest whatsoever, but I cannot marry the man I consider to be my husband when the relationship might have the first three of Professor Collett's important ontological features of the marriage but neither situation can have the last. assuming that a woman who is eighty-two years old can't have a baby... AUDIENCE: And the relationship that I have with another man is thus dishonorable? Am I correct in inferring that from what you have just stated? DENT: Certainly that is the attitude that has been traditional in most societies throughout history, yes. COLLETT: I think in the social ordering that that's one of the sort of arrangements that Professor Nussbaum suggested might in fact be something we should consider. Then the question becomes is it going to be a matter of democratic process where you and I come together with our representatives and 58 Roundtable dialogue and say it's not that there's not a compelling interest in the protection of children but it's not narrowly tailored enough, the idea of marriage, and so let's rethink it. If we're going to accommodate all of these benefits, we're going to attach them to those whose sexual intercourse, whether intentional or not, results in children. My argument would be, I'm willing to entertain that at the legislative table and talk about that. I think my concern is I would want more of a commitment than a "Whoops, now I'm caught into the thralls of law and I'm now required to be in union with this woman and help her raise this baby." We've seen that work with welfare reform, and it hasn't worked real well. But it's certainly something that I find within the realm of imagination and not an illegitimate way of structuring society. Shoot people for not reading to their children? COLLETT: No, I just beat my husband for that! [laughter] COOLIDGE: Now there's a reason for marriage! MADIGAN: I know we have one in the back corner. This is going to be the last question. children. Same-Sex Marriage 59 COOLIDGE: One other quick thought on your question. It's a good question, and maybe it was confusing having the rabbi and the pastor talking just to the extent that it sort of felt like it conflated the two, but I would just say that to formulate it the way that you did is to answer the question the way that you did. And, the question that remains open is: what do equal rights mean? I mean, rephrasing it in those terms doesn't solve the question. And, the other question that it doesn't solve is: what is the proper relationship, if any, between folks who are religious or folks who aren't, who are both advocates in areas of public policy, and what legitimate role they have, you know, when we're making decisions together as a society, and I certainly, I agree that whatever the United Methodist Church does with marriage is not what the state of Illinois will do with marriage necessarily, but I certainly would not deny or argue that Greg Dell doesn't have the right to not only argue his point as a pastor, but to go down and argue his point in Springfield, which he may well have done under other circumstances. MADIGAN: I would really like to thank Ellen Fulton and the members of the Roundtable board who worked very hard to make this all happen. I want to thank the panelists, especially those who traveled to be with us. I would leave with a thought of why these sort of talks are so important. We're not just talking and preaching to the various choirs. If you look in the past two years, someone walked into a Baptist church and shot eight people dead, screaming anti-Baptist rhetoric. A year later, a young man named Matthew Shepard was beaten to death after being identified as gay, and hung out on a fence, effectively crucified, you know, two millennia after the crucifixion we know of best in our tradition. What's sad about all this is that people don't always choose the best way of communicating rationally about subjects on which they disagree. That's what makes my admiration for our panelists so great, because they come to this discussion whole-hearted, and really listen to one another. It means a lot.