Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles Part of the Law Commons
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman & David Schkade, "Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift Empirical Study," 100 Columbia Law Review 1139 (2000).
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.
David Schkade, Cass R- Sunstein,** and Daniel Kahneman***
How does juy deliberation affect the predeliberation judgments of individualjurors? In this paper we make progress on that question by reporting the results of a study of over 500 mock juries composed of over 3000 juy eligible citizens. Our principalfinding is that with respect to dollars, deliberation produces a "severity shift," in which the jury's dollar verdict is systematically higher than that of the median of its jurors' predeliberation judgments. A "deliberation shift analysis" is introduced to measure the effect of deliberation. The severity shift is attributed to a "rhetorical asymmetry," in which arguments for higher awards are more persuasive than arguments for lower awards. When judgments are measured not in terms of dollars but on a rating scale of punishment severity, deliberation increased high ratings and decreased low ratings. We also find that deliberation does not alleviate the problem of erratic and unpredictable individual dollar awards, but in fact exacerbates it. Implications for punitive damage awards and deliberation generally are discussed.
How, if at all, is the outcome of group deliberation different from a statistical aggregation of individual predeliberation judgments? How might jury deliberations depart from the median or mean of individual judgments? Speculation is not difficult. Perhaps juries converge toward the midpoint of individual judgments perhaps juries move away from, or toward, the high or low of individual extremes. Perhaps juries produce an outcome that is more just or more accurate perhaps juries generate more predictable and less erratic judgments, so that unpredictability at the individual level, or at the level of the mean or median of (six or twelve) individual judgments, is further reduced by deliberation at the
* Herbert D. Kelleher/MCorp Professor of Business, Graduate School of Business, University of Texas, Austin.
** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago.
*** Eugene Higgins Professor of Psychology and Professor of Public Affairs, Princeton University. The authors are grateful to Exxon Company, U.S.A. for support of the research in this Empirical Study. Exxon bears no responsibility for our analysis or our conclusions the data reported and the opinions expressed here belong to the authors. For helpful comments we are grateful to participants in workshops at Harvard, Stanford, and the University of Chicago, and also to Robert MacCoun, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Jeffrey Rachlinski, and Michael Saks.
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
jury level. A pervasive question is whether a deliberating jury has the effect of producing outcomes that treat the similarly situated similarlyperhaps in terms of civil or criminal liability (do people who have engaged in the same conduct receive the same verdict?), perhaps in the determination of appropriate damage awards, either compensatory or punitive (do similarly situated people receive the same awards?).'
In this Empirical Study, we attempt to make some progress on these questions. We do so principally by reporting the results of an extensive study of mock juries (over 3000 people and 500 juries in total). Six-person juries were asked to deliberate about the appropriate punishment in civil cases involving personal injury in two ways, by setting punitive awards in dollars and by indicating, on a rating scale, the severity of the punishment they wished to inflict on the defendant. Our most important and general finding is that with respect to dollar awards, deliberation produces a severity shift: Thejury's dollar verdict is typically higher, and often far higher, than the median judgment of the same jury's individual members before deliberation began.
To compress a long story, our specific findings are these:
" Jurors followed a simple principle of majority rule in deciding whether to impose punitive damages at all the decision
to award damages was largely a function of the majority of
individual predeliberation votes.
" Where the median of individual predeliberation judgments
favored a high punishment rating, deliberation typically increased the rating of the group.
" Where the median of individual predeliberation judgments
favored a low punishment rating, deliberation typically decreased the rating of the group.
* Where the median of individual predeliberation judgments
favored large dollar awards, deliberation typically increased
the dollar award of the group, often dramatically so: Among
juries that voted to award punitive damages, 27% reached dollar
verdicts that were as high as or higher than the highest predeliberation judgment of their individual members.
" Where the median of individual predeliberation judgments
favored small dollar awards, deliberation typically increased
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
respect to dollar awards, jury deliberation substantially increased unpredictability.
with respect to the underlying moral evaluation, groups of different (non-deliberat-
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
6. As explained below, see infra text accompanying notes 15-16, we looked at "statistical juries" consisting of random groups of 12 individual judgments, with the mean or median judgment of each group of 12 reflecting the "verdict." See Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2100-01.
7. See id. at 2095-100.
8. See id. at 2097-100.
9. See id. at 2100-04.
10. Note that we hold constant several factors that can be used to capture some of the variability in punitive damage awards, such as compensatory damages, case category, case particulars, and jurisdiction. It has been proposed by some authors that when analyzed using these factors, punitive awards are reasonably predictable. See Theodore Eisenberg et al., The Predictability of Punitive Damages, 26J. Legal Stud. 623, 644 (1997). Because we hold these factors constant, they cannot account for the unpredictability that we documented previously and that we document here.
11. See Paul H. Rubin et al., BMW v. Gore: Mitigating the Punitive Economics of Punitive Damages, 5 Sup. Ct. Econ. Rev. 179, 184 (1997).
12. See Judy Shih & Cass R. Sunstein, Damages in Sexual Harassment Cases 1-3, in Sexual Harassment (Catharine MacKinnon & Reva Siegel eds., forthcoming 2000) (manuscript on file with the Columbia Law Review) (finding that compensatory and punitive damage awards are random in sexual harassment cases).
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
tution.1 Perhaps juries should be asked to come up with punishment ratings, not with dollar awards, and the legal system should "translate" jury ratings into dollar awards by some preset formula. Our findings also raise a set of novel issues about deliberation as a whole. Is deliberation anything to celebrate if groups tend to move further in the direction suggested by their original tendency-if (for example) high dollar awards go up, low punishment ratings go down, and groups opposed to gun control and in favor of affirmative action end up thinking a more extreme version of what individual group members originally thought? We offer a brief discussion of some of these issues, with particular reference to the effects of deliberation on punishment ratings and on dollar awards.
I. Jury awards of punitive damages have become one of the most controversial topics in modem public law. To take just one example, an award of $4.9 billion against General Motors attracted a great deal of national attention in July of It is now clear that the Due Process Clause imposes constraints on permissible awards. A number of statutes, enacted and proposed, create punitive damage "caps,"22 and high awards have become a primary impetus for tort reform in general. There are also controversial issues about punitive damage awards in civil
18. See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, Corporate Risk Analysis: A Reckless Act?, 52 Stan. L. Rev. 547, 549-52 (2000) (challenging jury verdicts on ground that they are often irrational). The point is generally discussed in Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2126-30.
19. See, e.g., William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Economic Structure of Tort Law 160-65, 184-85, 223-24 (1987) (developing economic model of damages) Marc Galanter & David Luban, PoeticJustice: Punitive Damages and Legal Pluralism, 42 Am. U. L. Rev. 1393, 1394-96 (1993) (defending punitive damages as a morally necessary part of a private law system) David G. Owen, The Moral Foundations of Punitive Damages, 40 Ala. L. Rev. 705, 705-08 (1989) (analyzing punitive damage rules in terms of moral theory and arguing that moral philosophy supports such rules) A. Mitchell Polinsky & Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 869, 870-76 (1998) (arguing that punitive damages should only be imposed if an injurer has a chance of escaping liability for an injury it caused, and claiming that current legal rules fall short of this goal) Symposium, The Future of Punitive Damages, 1998 Wis. L. Rev. 1, 1-426 (offering various assessments of the "future of punitive damages").
20. See General Motors Appeals Record Lawsuit Damages, N.Y. Times, July 31, 1999, at A9.
21. See BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore, 517 U.S. 559, 574-75 & n.22 (1996).
22. See generally Developments in the Law-The Civil Jury, 110 Harv. L. Rev. 1408, 1533 & n.158 (1997) (discussing actual and proposed caps). A number of state supreme courts have invalidated such measures. See, e.g., State ex rel. Ohio Academy of Trial Lawyers v. Sheward, 715 N.E.2d 1062, 1090-95 (Ohio 1999) (striking down caps on punitive and general damages as violating state constitutional provisions of right to jury trial and due process).
23. See, e.g., Product Liability Reform Act of 1997, S. 648, 105th Cong. ยง 2(a)(2) (1997) (listing "[e]xcessive, unpredictable, and often arbitrary damage awards" as a factor motivating the bill). For a general discussion skeptical of the attention paid to high awards, see Marc Galanter, Shadow Play: The Fabled Menace of Punitive Damages, 1998
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
rights cases, most notably in sexual harassment cases. At the same time, the problems created by punitive awards bear on related questions in other areas of the law, involving, for example, compensatory damages for pain and suffering, libel, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. Similar problems arise in the area of criminal sentencing whenever an administrative agency is asked to impose civil fines.2
Participants in the legal system are often asked to come up with some kind ofjudgment, factual or normative, and then to "translate" that judgment into a dollar award. In the area of punitive damages, it is necessary to make some assessment of the character of the defendant's behavior, and then to ascertain the appropriate dollar amount to be paid to the plaintiff by way of punishment. In many domains, compensatory judg-
"fact"-what amount of money would restore the plaintiff to the status quo ante?-it is often extremely difficult to monetize the relevant harm, and normative judgments undoubtedly play a significant role. In the case of punitive damages, it is extremely difficult for even experts to agree on what dollar amount constitutes adequate "punishment" or produces an appropriate deterrent signal.
In all of these areas, the legal system is pervaded by a degree of unpredictability and variance, resulting in apparent arbitrariness, as the similarly situated are treated differently. An extensive study of pain and suffering cases found that as much as 60% of the awards consists of
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
29. See Leebron, supra note 13, at 310. 30. See Shih & Sunstein, supra note 12 (manuscript at 1-3). 31. See Karpoff & Lott, supra note 28, at 540-45. There is some dispute over the degree of unpredictability. Eisenberg et al., supra note 10, show that the logarithm of punitive awards is predicted reasonably well from a set of objective characteristics of cases in which awards were made in particular, the authors show that the compensatory award is a fairly good predictor of the punitive award. See id. at 644. But the authors themselves note that the range of possible awards in regular (i.e., not logarithmic) dollars is still quite high even after controlling for the many factors in their regression model, including compensatory damages. For example, in their data, for a case with a $500,000 compensatory award, 5% of punitive damage awards would be $10,000 or less, but another 5% would be $6,500,000 or more. See id. at 657 see also Karpoff& Lott, supra note 28, at 540-45 (discussing the difficulty of predicting punitive damage awards and the consequences of that difficulty).
Note also that predictability can be understood in different ways: (a) predictability exists when case characteristics predict punitive awards (b) predictability exists when the judgments of one group of six or twelve predicts the judgments of another group of six or twelve (c) predictability exists when an actor can assess expected liability when something goes wrong. Our principal emphasis here is on (b) Eisenberg's emphasis is on (a) both are relevant to (c). Of course the three are closely related in practice. We offer a more detailed treatment of predictability below. See infra Part II.B.8-9.
32. See Eisenberg et al., supra note 10, at 637-39.
33. See Karpoff & Lott, supra note 28, at 543.
34. See Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2094-108.
35. See id. at 2097-99.
[Vol. 100: 1139
DEIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
36. See id. at 2100-03. 37. We relied on evidence suggesting that the median judgment of a group of predeliberative individuals is a good predictor of the judgment that group will reach as a result of deliberation. See id. at 2101 nn.127-28, citing James H. Davis, Group Decision Making and Quantitative Judgments: A Consensus Model, in 1 Understanding Group Behavior 35, 47 (Erich H. Witte & James H. Davis eds., 1996) Shari Diamond & Jonathan Casper, Blindfolding the jury to Verdict Consequences, 26 L. & Soc'y Rev. 513, 553 (1992). We noted, however, the possibility of effects of the sort we observed in the current study. See Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2101 n.128 (noting that deliberation may result in more extreme awards due to "amplification of bias").
38. See S.S. Stevens, Psychophysics 25-31 (1975).
39. See Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2106-07.
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
The key point is that when a modulus is supplied, the variability greatly decreases in its absence, respondents adopt their own moduli. Juries asked to assess punitive damage awards are in effect asked to scale without a modulus. Unpredictable judgments are a natural result even when people do not disagree about the significant issues 0-even when, that is, there is a kind of "bedrock" moral judgment in place. If this point is correct, it helps explain the observed variability in dollar awards in many areas of the law. It also helps explain the disparities that led to the enactment of the Sentencing Guidelines before the guidelines, judges were being asked, in effect, to scale without a modulus, since the relevant scale (years) has a great deal in common with the dollar scale (i.e., bounded below at zero, but with great discretion at the high end).
Our earlier study did not, however, involve deliberating juries, and a natural question was whether deliberating juries would produce similar or quite different results. Perhaps deliberation would reduce variability. An alternative possibility was that the process of collective delibera-
[Vol. 100: 1139
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
tion would move the group further in the direction of the initial tendency suggested by the individual judgments. In any case, a test of deliberating juries would help to confirm or deny the wisdom of the decision to treat the median judgment of a group of twelve as the likely judgment of any deliberating group (for purposes of creating statistical juries). Hence our main purpose in this Empirical Study was to examine the effects of jury deliberation on dollar awards and, in particular, to see whether deliberation would increase or decrease predictability. In the process, we also hoped, as a secondary goal, to find out whether the original findingsshared moral judgments but erratic awards-would be replicated with a new sample of citizens from a different state, and with new and richer case materials.
II. A. Method
Jury-eligible citizens from Phoenix, Arizona were recruited by a survey firm and paid $35 for their participation. Each juror was randomly assigned to a six-person jury, and each jury was assigned to a response mode order half of the juries judged dollar awards first and punishment ratings second, and the other half completed the tasks in the opposite order. Each jury judged only one case, which was the subject of both its punishment rating (on a scale of 0 to 8) and its dollar award. Six juries (out of a total of 480) had only five members because an insufficient number of participants showed up at a given appointment time. A pilot test of twenty-nine juries was conducted in Phoenix to test the materials and procedure. Because adjustments were very minor, these juries were added to the main sample and the combined sample was analyzed together. Therefore, a total of 3048 citizens participated in 509 juries.
The procedure consisted of four parts. In Part 1, all participants in a given session viewed a videotape for the case they would consider, read the corresponding written materials, and recorded their personal judgment of the appropriate punitive damage award or punishment rating. In Part 2, participants were randomly assigned to juries of six members, which were given thirty minutes to deliberate on and reach a unanimous verdict on a punitive damage amount or a punishment rating. In Part 3, a new individual response form was distributed, which asked participants to record a second personal judgment for the same case, using the type of verdict (punishment rating or dollar damages) complementary to the one they had already used. In Part 4, eachjury again deliberated to reach a unanimous verdict on this second type of judgment for the same case. Thus, for each individual, and for each jury, we have both a dollar award and a punishment rating for the case they considered. We use the terms dollar and punishment judgments to refer to the dollar awards and punishment ratings made by individuals. For juries we will refer to these as dollar and punishment verdicts. For purposes of understanding realworld behavior, the dollar awards are most important. We inquire into
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
punishment ratings both to understand the relation between punishment ratings and dollar awards, and to see the effect of deliberation on both of these.
Punishment How much should the defendant be punished because of their actions, and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that the defendant must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please circle the number that best expresses the jury's judgment of the appropriate level of punishment.
$ Damages
What amount of punitive damages (if any) should the defendant be required to pay as punishment and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that the defendant must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please write the amount of punitive damages that the jury agreed on in the blank below.
The case materials consisted of fifteen personal injury scenarios (summarized in Table 2).44 An example is provided in the Appendix. A videotape was prepared for each case, in which a professional actor read the text of the case and all instructions aloud. To maximize comprehension, participants were required both to view the videotape and to read the written version. The size of the defendant firm (annual profits of $100-$200 million) and compensatory damages ($200,000) were the same for all cases. Thus, the variability we observe cannot be accounted for by a model that depends on variability in compensatory damage awards or in the defendant's ability to pay.
B. Results
1. Preliminaries. Notwithstanding the half-hour time limit for deliberation, 91% of juries reached a unanimous verdict on a punishment rating (a total of 461 verdicts) and 82% of juries reached a unanimous
[Vol. 100: 1139
Extremely Severe
8
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
Description Motorcycle driver injured when brakes fail Circus patron shot in arm by drunk security guard Auto airbag opens unexpectedly, injuring driver Man suffers skin damage from using baldness cure Elderly woman suffers back injuries from using exercise video Child ingests large quantity of allergy medicine, needs hospital stay Employee suffers anemia due to benzene exposure on the job Small child playing with matches burned when pajamas catch fire Disabled man injured when wheelchair lift malfunctions Secretary chronically ill due to radiation from computer monitor Seaman injured when molten sulfur container fails Train hits car at crossing, injuring driver Shopper injured in fall when escalator suddenly stops Store employee raped in mall parking lot Man nearly drowns when defective boat sinks
verdict on a dollar award (a total of 416 verdicts). The remainder had not reached a verdict when the time limit expired these were treated as hung. All further analyses were conducted on the 401 juries that reached both a punishment verdict and a dollar verdict.45 Because there were no statistically significant differences between the verdicts of juries that judged dollars first and those that judged punishment first, we analyzed together the verdicts made by dollar-first juries and punishment-first juries.
2. Overview: How Do the Verdicts of DeliberatingJuries Compare to Those of Statistical Juries? - We assessed the effect of deliberation on juror judgments by comparing each jury's verdict to the median predeliberation
45. We chose the more conservative path of focusing on juries with complete responses to ensure that comparisons between punishment and dollar verdicts, and between individuals and juries, were based on the same set of respondents. Recreating our Tables and Figures with all available responses produces the same pattern of results, with some slight differences in exact numbers.
Case Williams v. National Motors Smith v. Public Entertainment
Douglas v. Coastal Industries Sanders v. A&G Cosmetics
Stanley v. Gersten Productions
Glover v. General Assistance
Lawson v. TGI International
Newton v. Novel Clothing
West v. MedTech
Windsor v. Int'l Computers
Reynolds v. Marine Sulfur
Crandall v. C&S Railroad Dulworth v. Global Elevator
Hughes v. Jardel Nelson v. Trojan Yachts
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
Statistical Juies 5.5 5.0 4.3 5.0 5.5 5.0 5.0 4.5 4.0 4.0 3.5 3.0 1.0 0.3 0.0
Deliberating
Juries
6.0
5.0
4.5
5.0
6.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
4.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.5
0.0
0.0
Average
DSM
15%
1%
4%
14%
19%
20%
12%
9%
11% -8% -8%
-26%
0%
-15%
3%
judgment of the individuals who composed thatjury. We will refer to the median predeliberation judgment of the individuals in a jury as the verdict of the statistical jury. To evaluate the effects of deliberation, we compare the verdicts of deliberating juies with those of statistical juries.
The results observed for the fifteen cases are shown in Table 3.46 The cases are arranged in the Table in descending order of the median dollar verdict of deliberatingjuries. Note first that the median verdicts of deliberating and statistical juries produce very similar rankings of the cases. For dollars, there is a Spearman rank correlation of .88 between the deliberating and statistical jury verdicts in Table 3 for punishment verdicts the average rank correlation is even higher, at .98. The correlation between punishment verdicts and dollar verdicts is also high, at .87. These results confirm the finding of earlier research that, in the aggregate, judgments of punitive intent and of dollar awards share the same core of moral outrage, and therefore produce the same ordering of cases.
While there is agreement on the ordering of cases, the level of verdicts tells a different tale. Punishment verdicts are, on average, quite close for statistical and deliberating juries, but dollar verdicts show a dra-
Reynolds Glover Lawson Williams Smith Nelson Hughes West Douglas Crandall Sanders Windsor Dulworth Newton
Dollar Verdicts
Statistical
Juries
1,875,000
1,000,000
475,000
550,000
325,000
450,000
450,000
500,000
225,000
200,000
50,500
37,500
0
0
0
Deliberating
Juries
10,000,000
4,000,000
2,000,000
1,500,000 1,000,000 1,000,000
1,000,000
1,000,000
500,000
500,000
100,000
50,000
0
0
0
Average
DSM
54%
52%
53%
46% 52% 48%
45%
34%
40%
35%
25%
38%
0%
17%
23%
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
Jury Verdicts Non-Zero Punishment Ratings
99%
48% 8%
Individual Predeliberation Judgments Majority non-zero Even split Majority zero
Non-Zero $ Awards
98%
45%
4%
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
4. Deliberation Shift Analysis. - We now turn to the severity of punishment verdicts chosen by the juries that determined that some punishment was appropriate. We wish to examine the relationship between the postdeliberation verdict of a jury and the predeliberation distribution of judgments among its members. For this purpose we introduce a deliberation shift analysis, which we will apply to both punishment ratings and dollar awards. The predeliberation judgments of jurors are first ranked, from the most lenient to the most severe the eventual verdict of the jury is then inserted in that ordering, and its rank is computed. For example, suppose that the individual jurors had predeliberation judgments of $0, $200,000, $300,000, $500,000, $1,000,000, and $5,000,000, and that the jury verdict was $750,000. The jury verdict ranks fifth in the distribution of individual judgments of its members. In this instance, the jury was more severe than four of its original members, and less severe than two of its members, indicating that, overall, deliberation made judgments more severe.
If the outcomes of deliberation were determined by a simple voting model, the jury verdict would always be in the middle of the distribution of initial judgments, at the median. There would be no shift, either toward greater leniency or toward more punishment. With no shift, for a jury of six (with the jury verdict added as the seventh member), the predicted position of the jury in the distribution of the opinions of its members is always The deliberation shift measure (DSM) is the difference between the observed and the predicted rank of the jury verdict, as a percentage of the maximum possible shift in the direction taken. To continue our dollar example above, since the jury verdict ranks fifth among its jurors' predeliberation judgments, the difference would be 5 - 4 = 1. For ajury of six, the maximum possible upward shift is 7 - 4 = 3, and the DSM would be 1/3, or 33%. This means that the rank of the jury verdict was 33% of the way from the rank of the median juror (4) to the rank of the maximum juror (7).49 The DSM is positive if the jury is more severe than its median member it is negative if the jury is more lenient than its median member. If the jury verdict was higher than the judgment of the maximum juror, the DSM would be 100% if it was lower than the judgment of the minimum juror, the DSM would be -100%. To study the systematic effects of deliberation, we computed the DSM for every nonhung jury, separately for punishment verdicts and for dollar verdicts. Table 3 shows the mean values of the DSM for each of the fifteen cases, for both punishment and dollar verdicts.
5. Punishment Ratings Either Up or Down. For punishment verdicts there is a clear pattern in the results, which can be observed both in the column of DSM values and by comparing the statistical and deliberated
48. For a jury of 12, the expected rank would be 7 for a jury of nine, the expected rank would be 5.5 and so forth. the same interpretation for, a jury of any size.
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
verdicts: Deliberation increased the severity of punishment for high-punishment cases and reduced it for low-punishment cases. Reading down the table, the DSM is positive for nine of the top ten cases, and negative for four of the bottom five cases. There was a severity shift for the highpunishment cases, and a leniency shift for the low-punishment cases.
Because the table is arranged roughly in decreasing order of punitive intent, we can see that the DSM is positive for high-punishment cases (average for the top ten cases is 10%) and negative for low-punishment cases (average for the bottom five cases is -9%). Further, the correlation between the DSM and the median statistical jury verdicts is .67, which means that the more severe the individual predeliberation judgments, the greater the shift. In the language of the group polarization literature, we observe systematic choice shifts, in which deliberation generally increases differences among cases, by making severe verdicts more severe and lenient verdicts more lenient, relative to the predeliberation judgments of jurors.
6. Dollar Awards and the Severity Shift: Deliberation Increases Punitive Damages. We now turn to the task of understanding the remarkable difference between the dollar awards obtained from deliberating juries and those obtained from a statistical pooling of the predeliberation opinions of jury members. The basic result is that deliberation causes awards to increase, and it causes high awards to increase a great deal. As extreme but actual illustrations of the severity shift, consider a few examples from the raw data:
" A jury whose predeliberation judgments were $200,000,
$300,000, $2 million, $10 million, $10 million, and $10 million reached a verdict of $15 million.
" A jury whose predeliberation judgments were $200,000,
$500,000, $2 million, $5 million, and $10 million reached a
verdict of $50 million.
" A jury whose predeliberation judgments were $2 million, $2
million, $2.5 million, $50 million, and $100 million reached
a verdict of $100 million.
Now consider the DSM column for dollar verdicts in Table 3. Recall that the value of the DSM is positive if the jury verdict is more severe than the median judgment of its jurors and negative if the jury is more lenient. The pattern of results is clear: The DSM is generally positive, indicating that deliberation generally produced a severity shift. Furthermore, the DSM for dollar verdicts is much higher for high-punishment cases than for low-punishment cases: The correlation between the median punishment verdict and the DSM for dollar verdicts is .95.
The difference between deliberating and statistical juries is very large, especially for the high-punishment cases: For the top ten cases in Table 3, the average DSM of 46% means that the jury verdict is about halfway between the second-highest and third-highest individual judgments. Even more surprising, for the ten high-punishment cases, 10% of jury verdicts were even higher than the highest individual judgment (i.e.,
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
the DSM was 100% for thesejuries). A further 17% of verdicts were equal to the highest individual judgment (i.e., a DSM of 83%). These extreme verdicts were less common for the five low-punishment cases, in which 15% of verdicts equaled the highest individual judgment, and none exceeded this maximum. The pattern is clear: Deliberation made dollar verdicts more severe, especially for high-punishment cases.
Notably, we did not find that the degree of dispersion between individual predeliberation judgments contributed to greater or lesser shifts as a result of deliberation. For example, for juries with non-zero verdicts for the same case, the average correlation between the standard deviation of individual judgments (a measure of dispersion) and the DSM was -. 05 for dollars and .08 for punishment (neither correlation is statistically different from 0). In other words, juries whose members were in rough agreement (i.e., had a low standard deviation) about dollars or punishment did not show a different shift from groups whose members were in substantial disagreement about dollars or punishment.
7. Do People from Arizona Agree with People from Texas? The Effects of Geography, Race, Gender, Education, Age, and Wealth. - A subsidiary but nonetheless important question is whether the findings of the earlier study were replicated under the current study's changes in stimuli, procedure, and sample. The answer is that the previous results were replicated in every essential respect. The findings in the Texas study were replicated in Arizona, and despite evident differences between the two regions, people from the two areas evaluated cases in the same way. As before, dollars and ratings produced very similar rankings of the cases (a rank correlation of .90 compared to .91 for the comparable condition in the previous study ). Different demographic groups again produced very similar average evaluations, as indicated by the extremely high correlations in Table 5.
In addition, the ordering of case evaluations closely matched that in our previous study. There are ten cases common to both studies, and evaluations made by Texans in the previous study were highly predictive of those made by Arizonans in the current study-the rank correlation between the two samples was .90 for punishment ratings and .98 for dollar awards. Thus, the current, larger study, with several nontrivial changes, confirmed the conclusion of our previous study that individual moral judgments are predictable and shared, but expressing them in dollars produces unpredictability and confusion.
White .92 .88
$30K .98 .99
30 30-39 40-49 Age 30-39 .97
40-49 .96 .97
50 .96 .97 .97
8. With Respect to Dollars, How Predictable Are Jury Verdicts? An important goal of the legal system is to treat the similarly situated similarly. Our previous study showed that both the dollar judgments of individuals and the dollar verdicts of statistical juries would probably fail this test of procedural justice, because of a high degree of unpredictability in damage awards for the same case, as well as inconsistency in distinguishing between cases of more and less egregious conduct. Among many in the legal community there is the hope, and indeed the conviction, that deliberation by a group of jurors will overcome individual biases and produce more just and more predictable verdicts. As will be seen, our findings lend no support to this view.
The simplest and most practical criterion for predictability is reflected in the distribution of possible verdicts for a given case (a criterion that asks the extent to which the identically situated are treated identically). This is of course a critical piece of information for a lawyer advising a client about whether or not to settle a dispute, or for an actor contemplating liability for a potentially tortious course of conduct. In our sample, we had multiple independent juries rendering punitive damage verdicts for the same case, and this information can be used to estimate verdict distributions. Table 6 presents selected distributional statistics for each case. The range of possible dollar verdicts is strikingly large. For example, each of the top five cases has a minimum award of $500,000 or less, and yet the average maximum award for these cases is over
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
as the median verdicts (for cases with non-zero medians). Even for the three cases at the bottom with zero medians (i.e., a majority of juries for that case awarded no punitive damages), plaintiffs could still be awarded $500,000. Also, although there is considerable noise (in part because the number of juries for each case is relatively small), the range of verdicts for a given case tends to increase in proportion to the median verdict.5 Note that these variations between juries occurred on identical presentations of identical facts, unaffected by differences in (for example) compensatory awards or lawyers' presentations.
To make the uncertainty of these dollar verdicts more concrete, imagine that a statistically sophisticated and greatly experienced lawyer is advising a defendant about a possible punitive damages award, on the basis of the data illustrated by Table 6. For the purpose of the illustration, assume that the lawyer is not only sophisticated but also wise, and able to make unbiased predictions ofjury decisions: When she states that her best guess is an award of $X, the actual award is equally likely to be above or below X (this is her estimate of the median award). On the basis of our data the lawyer would be able to provide the client with the following information:
"My best guess is that you will face ajudgment of $X. There are
equal chances that it will be higher or lower than this amount.
However, there is a lot of uncertainty about how much higher or
lower it will be: There is a 10% chance that you will have to pay
more than a times that amount, and there is a 10% chance that
you will have to pay less than 1/b of that amount."
Averaging across cases, the best estimates53 of a and b, respectively, are 7.74 and 6.61. On the basis of these values, a lawyer who prediits a verdict of $2 million should also estimate that there is a 10% chance that the actual verdict will be over $15.48 million, and a 10% chance that it will be less than $0.30 million. Because the range increases proportionately with the median (except for noise), the same values of a and b apply for any value of $X.5 Finally, these estimates assume a jury of six. The uncertainty would very likely be reduced somewhat with a larger jury.55
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
9. Are Deliberating Juries More Predictable Than Statistical Juries? In the Introduction, we asked whether deliberating juries would produce dollar verdicts that are more predictable than those of statistical juries. We can now use the a and b analysis set forth above to answer this question. As with the verdicts of deliberating juries, variability in the verdicts of statistical juries is roughly proportional to the median verdict.57 We can apply the same procedure as before to estimate the factors a and b, which measure the estimated relationship of the 10th and 90th percentiles for each case to the median award for that case.
For statistical juries, our estimates of a and b are 2.88 and 4.11, which are both far lower than the corresponding figures of 6.61 and 7.74 for deliberating juries. In our example above, the lawyer's predicted range for a statistical jury verdict would be from $0.69 to $8.22 million compared to the range for a deliberating jury verdict of $0.30 to $15.48 mil-
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
cal juries than about those of deliberating juries. This pattern is remarkably consistent across cases. There is greater uncertainty in deliberating jury verdicts than in statistical jury verdicts for each of the ten cases for which a can be calculated (those with non-zero medians), and greater uncertainty for eleven of the twelve cases for which b can be calculated (those with non-zero 10th percentiles). It is important to note that this estimation procedure effectively controls for the severity shift, and therefore that these differences are not due merely to the generally higher level of verdicts by deliberatingjuries. We conclude, rather to our surprise, that deliberation is a significantly poorer way of aggregating opinions than is statistical pooling-at least if the goal is to decrease the arbitrary unpredictability of awards.
We now turn to a discussion of these results. We emphasize three phenomena. The first is identified for the first time here, while the second and third have been studied in many previous experiments.
" The first and most important phenomenon is the severity
shift. We believe that this occurred because of a rhetorical
asymmetry that gives one set of arguments an automatic,
other-things-equal upper hand in a group discussion, so that
groups will typically shift in the direction holding that upper
hand.
" The second phenomenon, described standardly though
somewhat vaguely as a "choice shift," occurs when the decision of a group shifts toward a more extreme version of the
view held, before deliberation, by the group's median member.5 Our evidence clearly shows choice shifts with respect
to punishment verdicts, and because high awards increased
much more than low awards, we think that something similar
played a role in dollar verdicts as well.
" The third phenomenon, known as "group polarization," occurs when individuals, polled privately after group discussion, shift toward a more extreme point in the direction set
by the original distribution of views. Because our jurors
were not polled privately after discussion, we do not have direct evidence of group polarization, though there is reason
to believe that it may have occurred.
58. See, e.g., Zuber et al., supra note 3, at 50.
59. See id. Choice shift and group polarization ordinarily accompany one another, although it is possible to have one kind of movement without the other. See id. at 59.
60. See Roger Brown, Social Psychology 229 (2d ed. 1986) ("In every [mock jury study] where the report of data makes it possible to check, group polarization occurs." (citations omitted)). Brown infers group polarization from the fact that "for ninety percent ofjuries that must reach unanimous agreement and do not hang, the final verdict is consistent in direction with the majority on the initial ballot." Id. Similarly, it is
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
A. The Severity Shift and Rhetorical Asymmetry 1. Rhetorical Asymmetry. - By far the most striking finding in our data is the severity shift produced by deliberation. What mechanism causes a jury to decide on an award that exceeds the initial judgment of its median member-and sometimes to exceed the highest predeliberation judgment of all its members?
We hypothesize that a feature of deliberation, a rhetorical asymmetry, helps produce the one-way movement that we observe. Specifically, we hypothesize that once the jury has agreed that there will be a non-zero dollar award, the arguments for a larger award have a rhetorical advantage and are more persuasive. If this is the case, then a jury would be drawn disproportionately toward the larger predeliberation judgments of its jurors. No such asymmetry would be expected for the punishment scale, if it is hypothesized that social norms give the advantage, not to anyone arguing that the conduct of a corporate defendant was "worse" in the abstract, but to anyone arguing for a higher dollar award against a corporate defendant. The key point has to do with the translation of a punishment judgment into a dollar award those who argue that "more" money is necessary to punish a corporation appear to have the upper hand. The unbounded dollar scale affords great latitude in the expression of what "more" means.
To examine the hypothesis of rhetorical asymmetry more directly, we asked eighty-seven University of Chicago law students whether it would be harder to argue for a smaller or a larger award. In this study, respondents were simply told that they were deliberating about punitive damage awards and were given no details of any particular case. They were first asked to generate arguments for a higher or lower award, and then asked which award (higher or lower) would be easier to justify. Half of the students were asked to argue for a higher award half were asked to argue for a lower one. After generating the relevant arguments, they were asked to complete a second task, presented as follows:
Imagine that ajury in a civil trial is deliberating about a personal
injury case in which the defendant is a large corporation (with
annual profits of approximately $200 million). The jury has already (a) unanimously ordered the defendant to pay an amount
of compensatory damages that fully compensates the plaintiff,
and (b) unanimously concluded that while the underlying conduct was not truly horrendous, it was sufficiently reckless to justify an award of punitive damages as well (in addition to compensatory damages).
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
We turn to some normative issues for the moment we note simply that there is much room for further study here.
3. An Alternative Possibility: The Mean Juror Hypothesis. - Another explanation for the severity shift would suggest that groups move toward the mean of individual dollar judgments, rather than the median. Because individual dollar judgments are skewed to the right, and include many extreme judgments, the mean will be above the median (this is true for 91% of juries), and could account, in theory, for the higher level of verdicts. From an analysis of our data, our basic conclusion is that while it is possible that movement toward the mean may have played some role in producing severity shifts, such movement cannot fundamentally account for them. The simplest demonstration of this comes from the fact that 27% of non-zero jury dollar verdicts were as high as or higher than that of the highest predeliberation dollar judgment of individuals. A fuller explanation requires a more detailed analysis.
To examine the hypothesis that the mean of individual awards would predict jury dollar verdicts and hence the severity shift, we recomputed the statistical jury results using the mean individual judgment, rather than the median. As expected, the mean juror produces higher statistical jury dollar verdicts than the median juror, although these are still lower than 64% of non-zero deliberative jury verdicts (albeit an improvement over the 83% figure for the median juror). This partial success, however, comes at a high price. Even though the mean juror's award is consistently higher than the median juror's award (and seemingly closer to jury verdicts), the mean is less reliable, and is actually a worse predictor of jury verdicts on the conventional measures of predictive success, than is the median: It explains less of the variance in jury verdicts (4% vs. 26%), and has larger prediction errors on average (compared to the median juror predictions, the root-mean-square error64 for the mean juror is 2.21 times larger, and the mean absolute error is 1.53 times larger). The choice between the median and the mean is mainly a matter of choosing between types of errors-with the median juror, the statistical jury's verdict is almost always too low, but almost never disastrously wrong. With the mean juror the signs of the errors are more balanced (2/3 too low and 1/3 too high), but there can occasionally be huge positive errors
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
(i.e., mean juror far above the jury verdict).65 Thus, even if the mean juror with its higher overall levels did fit jury verdicts better (and it does not), we would still need to account for a consistent upward movement in jury verdicts, relative to the mean juror, and for those verdicts that are at or above the maximum juror judgment, predeliberation.
B. Choice Shifts and Group Polarization
1. The Data and Some Central Ideas. Our study shows what is conventionally called a "choice shift" with respect to punishment ratings, pivoting around the rating of "3."66 Choice shifts of this general sort are common consequences of deliberation, and they have been found in many diverse tasks. The result is that groups often go in more extreme directions-both higher or lower on the relevant scale-than would the typical or average individual in the group. As noted, the related phenomenon of group polarization-for which we did not test here-occurs when individuals move to a more extreme position in the direction indicated by the mean of predeliberation judgments. We offer a brief summary of relevant literature.
With respect to group polarization, consider some examples from relevant experiments. (a) A group with moderately profeminist attitudes becomes more strongly profeminist after discussion. (b) Citizens of France become more critical of the United States and its intentions with respect to economic aid after discussion. (c) After discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice offer more negative responses to the question whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced by African Americans in American cities. (d) After discussion, whites predisposed not to show racial prejudice offer more positive responses to the same question. Choice shifts and group polarization stem from similar mechanisms, and for punishment ratings, the pattern described above is exactly what would be predicted from the literature on choice shifts.
[Vol. 100: 1139
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
2. Risky Shifts. Before 1961, conventional wisdom had been that as compared with the individuals who compose it, a group of decisionmakers-for example, a committee or board-would be likely to favor a compromise and thus to avoid risks. But the relevant experiments, originally conducted by James Stoner, found otherwise they identified what has become known as the "risky shift."7 Deliberation tended to shift individual members in the direction of greater risk-taking (group polarization) and deliberating groups, asked to reach a unanimous decision, were generally more risk-inclined-sometimes far more risk-inclined-than the mean individual member, predeliberation (choice shift).
In Stoner's original data, subsequent researchers noticed, the largest risky shifts could be found when group members "had a quite extreme risky initial position," in the sense that the predeliberation votes were weighted toward the risky end, "whereas the item [s] that shifted a little or not at all started out near the middle of the scale." Discussion among very cautious individuals would produce a significant shift toward greater caution discussion among individuals inclined toward risk-taking would produce a significant shift toward greater risk-taking and discussion among individuals in the middle would produce smaller shifts in the direction indicated by their original disposition. In short, "group discussion moves decisions to more extreme points in the direction of the original inclination .... which means shift to either risk or caution in the direction of the original disposition, and the size of shift increases with the degree of initial polarization." Similar results have been found in many con-
leaders, race, feminism, and judgments of guilt or innocence. We do not know if our jurors were susceptible to a group polarization, because members were not polled individually afterwards. But group polarization usually occurs where choice shifts are found, and
3. Two Mechanisms, and Severity Shifts Again. There have been two main explanations for group polarization and choice shifts, both of which have been extensively investigated.8 Massive support has been found on behalf of both explanations.8 '
The first explanation involves social comparison. On this view, people want to be perceived favorably by other group members (and also to perceive themselves favorably), and once they hear what others believe, they adjust their positions in the direction of the dominant position. They may want to signal, for example, that they are not cowardly or cautious, and hence they will frame their position so that they do not appear such in comparison to other group members.83 The dynamic behind the social comparison explanation is that most people may want to take a position of a certain socially preferred sort, and no one can know what such a position would be until the positions of others are revealed.8 Thus individuals move their judgments in order to preserve their image to others and their image to themselves. This dynamic helps explain a shift toward caution (the "cautious shift") as well as toward risk-taking (the "risky shift")85
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
The second explanation emphasizes the role of persuasive arguments.86 The key point here is that an individual's choice or position on an issue is a function of the number and persuasiveness of arguments presented. Because a group that is inclined in a certain direction will have a disproportionate number of arguments supporting that direction, the result of discussion will be to move individuals further in the direction of their initial inclinations. Thus it is suggested that "[t]he important thing that happens in discussion is that individual arguments are expressed and become fully shared." Once the set of individual arguments is exposed to all individual members, there will be a movement toward a more extreme point in the direction of initial inclinations, simply because arguments in that direction have been pressed and repeated more frequently than opposing arguments.
These two mechanisms help account for severity shifts as well they help explain rhetorical asymmetry. As our University of Chicago study suggests, arguments for higher awards are more persuasive, other things being equal, than arguments for lower awards. This is exactly what is meant by rhetorical asymmetry, in the sense that certain arguments (for "sending a stronger signal") are, we hypothesize, more convincing than others (for "ensuring against overdeterrence"). In addition, social influences, given existing norms, are likely to push people toward higher awards, simply because a concern for reputation, and for self-conception, generally argues in favor of supporting higher awards in the face of conflict. People who argue for higher awards seem to want to give appropriate punishment to wrongdoing (a good thing to seem to want), whereas those who argue for lower awards seem, other things being equal, to be lenient toward wrongdoing by corporations, or solicitous to them (not a good thing to seem to be). We emphasize that these are simply descriptive points, and that social norms could be otherwise, as they apparently are in the context of criminal conviction, where leniency shifts have been observed.8
To know whether the dollar awards of deliberating juries are better than the dollar awards of statistical juries, it seems necessary to have a theory of appropriate punitive damage awards, and it is not our purpose
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
90. Note also that because our study stipulated compensatory damages, and held them fixed across cases, we may well have understated true variance in punitive awards, because according to previous research, real juries anchor on their own compensatory award, rather than on some constant value. See Eisenberg et al., supra note 10, at 637-39, 647 Karpoff & Lott, supra note 28, at 543.
91. See Saks, Tort Litigation System, supra note 43, at 1269, 1271-74.
92. See Saks et al., supra note 40, at 246 (discussing alternative approaches and their effects).
93. See BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore, 517 U.S. 559, 585-86 (1996) (BreyerJ., concurring) (suggesting that punitive damages award is "grossly excessive" and beyond the "constitutional limit").
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
100. To be sure, eliciting moral judgments rather than dollar awards would not answer all of the relevant questions, because choice shifts produce not only higher and lower dollar awards, but also higher and lower moral judgments.
101. Cf. Lane v. Hughes Aircraft Co., 93 Cal. Rptr. 2d 60, 72 (2000) (Brown, J., concurring in the result) (citation omitted):
U[lury determinations of punitive damages are likely to contain an element of
arbitrariness as long as the awards remain uncalibrated. To assure basic fairness,
courts must consider ways of calibrating punitive damage awards. We must ask
what anchoring variable will make an award of punitive damages an appropriate
measure of punishment rather than a test of a jury's ability to imagine big
numbers.
102. The idea has received considerable attention in the analogous area of contingent valuation. See Murray B. Rutherford et al., Assessing Environmental Losses: Judgments of Importance and Damage Schedules, 22 Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. 51, 51-56 (1998) Richard B. Stewart, Liability for Natural Resource Injury: Beyond Tort, in Analyzing Superfund 219, 241-44 (Richard L. Revesz & Richard B. Stewart eds., 1995). In the area of compensatory damages, see the plea for damages schedules in Bovbjerg et al., supra note 25, at 922, 937. In the punitive damage context, see Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2121-25 Viscusi, supra note 18, at 589-90. For problems with the current damages regime generally, see Atiyah, supra note 27, at 66-71.
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
democracy revolving around "the transformation rather than simply the aggregation of preferences") Gutmann & Thompson, supra note 17 (developing "a conception of democracy that secures a central place for moral discussion in political life").
104. An exception isJames Fishkin's set of studies of the "deliberative opinion poll." See James S. Fishkin, The Voice of the People 161-76 (1998).
105. Note, however, that our study did not and could not guarantee what many theorists of deliberative democracy take to be the preconditions of well-functioning deliberation: an absence of strategic behavior, a willingness to listen, a norm of reciprocity, and equality among members. Undoubtedly some of those in the groups we studied behaved strategically and some were not willing to listen some were undoubtedly more equal than others. Ours is a test of real-world deliberation, not ideal deliberation. An examination of the tapes gives an overall impression, however, that the participants generally listened well and obeyed a principle of equality.
106. A more extended treatment of the normative issues raised by choice shifts and group polarization can be found in Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2075-82.
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
rence," or, "a punitive damage award will give the plaintiff a windfall." Here too it is not clear whether the severity shifts lead to better judgments.
It is always possible that the rhetorical asymmetry is counteracting some other kind of asymmetry, or a bias in the system. If, for example, jurors have a systematic bias against personal injury actions, a pro-plaintiff rhetorical asymmetry, with respect to dollar awards, might supply a corrective. What is disturbing about the rhetorical asymmetry that we have described is not necessarily that it produces worse awards, but its mechanical, case-independent quality. If the result of the rhetorical asymmetry is to produce better awards, it would not be a shock-stranger things have happened-but it would be a lucky coincidence.
To be sure, there may be procedural reasons to have some confidence in the outcomes of a deliberative process. By hypothesis, more time is spent on the problem, and more time might well help, at least in general-judgments reached after deliberation will be more informed, simply because more arguments will be introduced deliberation tends to increase consensus and deliberation will, other things being equal, produce movement in the direction favored by more confident group members, and more confident people are likely (though hardly certain) to have some reason for their confidence. On procedural grounds, these points give some reason to think that with respect to punishment ratings, the outcomes of deliberation are likely to be better than the outcomes that would be produced by identifying the median or mean judgment of individuals. But because of the arbitrariness introduced by the selection of a modulus, we have no such confidence for dollar verdicts. There is little reason to believe that the dollar awards of actual juries are better than the dollar awards of statistical juries. If all existing punitive damage awards were doubled, or subject to a sliding scale of increase, so that small awards would go up a little, and large awards would go up a lot, would the system of civil penalties be better? We cannot insist on a negative answer, but it is far from obvious how one would defend an affirmative answer.
We have found that as compared with the median of individual judgments, deliberation makes low punishment judgments decrease and high punishment judgments increase. It also makes-and this is our most important finding-dollar awards generally increase, while making high dollar awards substantially increase, in a general severity shift. We have also found, somewhat to our surprise, that deliberating juries produce more unpredictability than would be found by taking the median of jurors' predeliberation judgments.
These findings have implications for damage awards in general and also for understanding social deliberation. From the normative point of view, it is hard to know whether deliberative verdicts are better than the
[Vol. 100: 1139
COLUMBIA LAW REVIEW
GLOvER GENERAL ASSISTANCE
Closing Argument by General Assistance's Attorney.
The attorney for
DELIBERATING ABOUT DOLLARS
Please do not turn to the next page until requested to do so.
Deliberating over an Amount of Punitive Damages
A Jury's Decision
Which is Harder to Defend?
