 Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position Cass R. Sunstein Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein & Robert H. Frank, "Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 102, 2000). Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein This paper can be downloaded without charge at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id= XXXXXX Preliminary draft 7/27/00 All rights reserved Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position Robert H. Frank* and Cass R. Sunstein** The movement for cost-benefit analysis of regulatory problems has proved stunningly successful. By Executive Order, Presidents Reagan, Bush, and Clinton have all required cost-benefit analysis of major regulations.1  Partly as a result, agencies routinely attempt to calculate the costs and benefits of their activities.2 Congress has also shown considerable interest in cost-benefit analysis, requiring both OMB and EPA to produce monetized accounts of the consequences of regulation.3 Courts themselves have been highly receptive to efforts to mandate cost-benefit analysis,4 asking agencies to monetize costs, benefits, or both.5 In a recent decision, the court of appeals for the D.C. Circuit –- the most important court in federal regulatory law -- has made clear that Congress will have to speak unambiguously if it intends to forbid consideration of cost.6 In sum, both the executive and the judiciary have converged on a kind of default rule in favor of cost-benefit analysis, to be used unless Congress expressly precludes it. Policy analysts rely for the most part on two methods for estimating willingness to pay. One is the hedonic pricing method, which attempts to infer valuations from observable market behavior. For example, analysts might estimate the value of safety by examining how wages vary with workplace injury levels.9 In the contingent valuation approach, generally used when market evidence is unavailable, analysts ask how much people would be willing to pay to reduce or avoid a wide range of dangers -- specific health problems associated with ozone or particulate matter; various kinds of workplacerelated mortality risks; risks associated with air travel; risks of injury or death in automobile accidents; and so on.10  Relying primarily on hedonic pricing studies, but also on contingent valuation studies, federal agencies have used estimates of the value of a statistical life saved that range from $1.5 million (used by the FAA) to $5.8 million (used at least once, but not consistently, by the EPA). 11 Monetization, as measured by estimates of willingness to pay, is not limited to mortality risks. For example, the EPA recently provided a wide range of numbers for health problems short of mortality.12 It considers a risk of congestive heart failure to be worth $20,600 for people under 65, but $16,600 for people over 65.  It considers an episode of acute bronchitis to be worth $45; an emergency visit to the hospital for asthma, $9000; chronic bronchitis, $260,000; and a single episode of shortness of breath, $5.30.  In all cases, these numbers are generated on the basis of estimates of what affected individuals would be willing to pay to avoid negative outcomes. 9 See, for example, Richard Thaler and Sherwin Rosen, The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the Labor Market, in Household Production and Consumption 266 (ed. N. Terleckjz 1976). 10 For general discussion, see Symposium, J. Econ. Persp. (Fall 1994). 11 See Mathew Adler and Eric Posner, Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, J Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). 12 See U.S. EPA Innovative Strategies & Economics Group, Office of Air Quality Planning & Standards, Regulatory Impact Analyses for the Particulate Matter and Ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standards and Proposed Regional Haze Rule 12-43 (1997). 13 This is an assumption and no more. It is criticized in Sunstein, supra note, and defended in Frank, supra note. amounts of other goods and services he can buy, but also a decline in his relative living standards.  In contrast, when a regulation requires all workers to purchase additional safety, each worker gives up the same amount of other goods, so no worker experiences a decline in relative living standards. If relative living standards matter, then an individual will value an across-the-board increase in safety more highly than an increase in safety that he alone purchases. discusses the central importance of relative economic position to people’s perceptions of their own well-being. Part III explores how some of the key benefit calculations would be altered by an understanding of the importance of relative position. Part IV discusses several theoretical issues, focusing on the objection that positional concerns should play no role in public policy. Part V explores some limits and extensions of our argument. We consider the implications of the fact that many regulatory programs benefit not all people but subclasses, and we discuss how positional concerns help justify nonwaivable contractual terms in employment law. Part VI is a brief conclusion. In this section, we outline the rise of cost-benefit analysis, as produced by the executive, judicial, and legislative branches of the national government. The general lesson is that we are fast approaching the end of a “first generation” debate, between advocates and critics of cost-benefit analysis, with general victory for the advocates.16 At the same time, we have only started to enter into the equally important “second generation” debate, over the appropriate method for valuing costs and benefits. Hence neither Congress nor courts have given even minimal guidance for valuing regulatory benefits, and there is a great deal of unexplained disparity even within the practices of those agencies firmly committed to cost-benefit principles. During the last twenty years, cost-benefit analysis has become a prominent practice within the executive branch of the national government. Though economic advisers have attempted to ensure cost-benefit review since the Nixon Administration,17 the cost-benefit principle did not receive prominent recognition until Executive Order 12291,18 issued by President Reagan in 1981. The purpose of this executive order was to ensure that all major rules would be subject to cost-benefit analysis and that such analysis would be the “basis” of decision, at least to the extent permitted by law.19 At the same time, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) was entrusted with the power to oversee agency cost-benefit analyses to ensure their basic rationality and sense.20 The movement in the direction of cost-benefit analysis was much accelerated in 1985 with the issuance of Executive Order 12498,21 requiring that cost-benefit analysis provide the basis for an “annual regulatory plan” to be issued by all executive agencies.  It was 16 By this we mean both a political victory and an intellectual victory. One of us has criticized some defenses of cost-benefit analysis on the ground that they wrongly assume the “commensurability” of all social goods, see Cass R. Sunstein, Incommensurability and Valuation in Law, 92 Mich L Rev 779, 842 (1994). But this criticism is not meant as an objection to the comparison of costs and benefits as a policy tool, designed to discipline inquiry. See id. at 842. We are concerned here with cost-benefit analysis as a policy tool, and for that purpose it is not necessary to engage other, more abstract debates on the nature of human valuation.. 17 See Richard Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U Chi L Rev 1, 13-14 (1995). 183 CFR 128 (1981). 19 Id 20 Id 213 CFR 323 (1985). pursuant to this executive order that annual volumes, often containing OMB instructions for the valuation of risks, became a prominent basis for understanding federal regulatory activity.22 Many people doubted whether President Clinton would endorse the idea that regulatory judgments should be made with close reference to cost-benefit balancing. Despite the misgivings of some environmental organizations, President Clinton's Executive Order 12866,23 issued in 1993, firmly embraced cost-benefit analysis as a central ingredient in regulatory decisions. The Order does shift, in certain ways, from the Reagan-Bush initiatives, principally via references to "equity" and "distributive impacts" as relevant factors in agency analysis.24 But these are modest changes in a presidential requirement that continues to require cost-benefit analysis of major rules. Thus the executive branch has endorsed cost-benefit balancing for over twenty years, and it seems reasonable to suggest that insofar as the White House is overseeing the federal regulatory process, cost-benefit analysis will continue to play a central organizing role, no matter the party affiliation of the president. B. Courts: A Cost-Benefit Default Principle The executive branch has not acted alone. In one of the most noteworthy developments in the last twenty years of administrative law, courts have also enforced a form of cost-benefit balancing, at least where Congress has not barred them from doing so.27 Indeed, the most dramatic innovation, noted above, is a new doctrine permitting and possibly even requiring cost-benefit analysis unless Congress has expressly directed otherwise.28 Federal law now reflects a kind of default principle: Agencies will consider costs, and thus undertake cost-benefit analysis, if Congress has not unambiguously said that they cannot. of proportionality between costs and benefits.30 Sometimes courts have been quite aggressive in requiring proportionality as part of their function in reviewing agency action to test whether it is "arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion."31 Courts have insisted that some amounts of money are too much to spend for small benefits.32 On the other hand, they have failed to give much guidance for deciding, in general, when a great deal is too much. Here, as within the executive branch, the appropriate valuation of regulatory benefits has received exceedingly little attention. Executive and judicial developments do not mean that the regulatory state is now routinely subject to scrutiny for conformity with cost-benefit criteria.33 Presidents and courts have circumscribed authority; they must act consistently with federal statutes, which often forbid cost-benefit balancing. Consider, for example, the Clear Air Act34, the Clean Water Act35, the Occupational Safety and Health Act36, the Delaney Clause37, and the Safe Water Drinking Act38, many of whose provisions ban agencies from balancing costs against benefits. It is partly for this reason that the American regulatory state contains many regulations imposing high costs not justified by corresponding benefits.39 Hence much of the contemporary interest in regulatory reform has been directed toward Congress. Consider the fact that in the mid-1990s, repeated efforts were made to impose a “supermandate” that would require all agencies to undertake cost-benefit analysis and to make decisions on the basis of that analysis.40 Notably, these proposals included no guidance for the valuation of life and other benefits from regulation. Partly because of irreconcilable legislative differences over the question of valuation, the proposed supermandate was defeated. But the national legislature has not uniformly rejected cost-benefit balancing. In the area of health and environmental protection, two important statutes, involving toxic substances and pesticides, contemplate a form of costbenefit analysis.41  More recently and more globally, the Unfunded Mandates Act contains two relevant provisions, imposed on all regulatory activity.42 First, significant regulatory actions must be accompanied by a statement that includes "a qualititative and quantitative assessment of the anticipated costs and benefits of the Federal mandate."43 Second, all agencies must "identify and consider a reasonable number of regulatory alternatives and from those alternatives select the least costly, most cost-effective, or least burdensome alternative that achieves the objectives of the rule."44 These provisions enshrine a form of cost-benefit analysis for major rules; but in keeping with the pattern that we have seen thus far, they are silent on how agencies are supposed to value the goods at stake. What have agencies actually done when they have done cost-benefit analysis? It is clear that the general practice is to build on some version of the contingent valuation and hedonic pricing methods discussed above. Thus agencies attempt to measure people’s willingness to pay, using actual choices if possible, and contingent valuation if necessary. It is on the basis of this sort of analysis that the EPA recently compiled the following table45: Table 1 Willingness-to-Pay Estimates (Mean Values) Health Endpoint Mortality Life saved Life year extended Hospital Admissions: All Respiratory Illnesses, all ages Pneumonia, age < 65 COPD, age > 65 Ischemic Heart Disease, age < 65 Congestive Heart Failure, age > 65 Emergency Visits for Asthma Chronic Bronchitis Upper Respiratory Symptoms Lower Respiratory Symptoms Acute Bronchitis Acute Respiratory Symptoms (any of 19) Asthma Shortness of Breath Sinusitis and Hay Fever Work Loss Days Restricted Activity Days (RAD) Minor RAD Respiratory RAD Worker Productivity Visibility: residential Recreational Household Soiling Damage 432 USC 202(a)(2). 442 USC 202 (a)(3)-(4). Of course a cost-effectiveness principle should not be identified with a cost-benefit requirement. The idea that agencies should seek the lowest cost way of achieving a goal is narrower and less controversial than the idea that agencies should compare costs with benefits. 45 Innovative Strategies Group, Environmental Protection Agency, Regulatory Impact Analysis, Ozone and Particulates (1998). But there is also a great deal of variation both within and across agencies. With respect to statistical lives, consider the following table46: Table 2: Valuations of Life Department of Transportation – Federal Aviation Administration Department of Agriculture – Food Safety and Inspection Service Department of Health and Human Services – Food and Drug Administration Department of Transportation – Federal Aviation Administration Environmental Protection Agency Department of Health and Human Services – Food and Drug Administration Department of Transportation – Federal Aviation Administration Department of Agriculture – Food and Nutrition Service Environmental Protection Agency Environmental Protection Agency Department of Health and Human Services – Food and Drug Administration Department of Health and Human Services – Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration Environmental Protection Agency Environmental Protection Agency Environmental Protection Agency Proposed Establishment of the Harlingen Airport Radar Service Area, TX Pathogen Reduction: Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point Systems Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children and Adolescents Aircraft Flight Simulator Use in Pilot Training, Testing, and Checking and at Training Centers Protection of Stratospheric Ozone Proposed Rules to Amend the Food Labeling Regulations Financial Responsibility Requirements for Licensed Launch Activities Proposed National School Lunch Program and School Breakfast Program National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ozone Medical Devices: Current Good Manufacturing Practice Quality Mammography Standards Requirements for Lead-Based Paint Activities in Target Housing and Child-Occupied Facilities National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: Disinfectants and Disinfection Byproducts Radon in Drinking Water Health Risk Reduction and Cost Analysis 46 Borrowed from Matthew Adler and Eric Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). We do not intend to give a full answer to the question of which of these numbers is appropriate. But we do mean to identify a substantial problem with current practice, a problem with which agencies have yet to come to terms or even to acknowledge. We now attempt to show that relative economic position is important for people’s subjective and objective well-being, and that absolute economic position is less significant than is ordinarily thought. For purposes of establishing our minimal proposition here, it is necessary only to establish that willingness-to-pay numbers undervalue safety and other benefits if they ignore concerns about relative position. (Notice that we are assuming a point that we will defend below: For many regulatory benefits, positional considerations are less important than they are for income.) We draw on a wide array of evidence in order to establish this point. Of course each piece of evidence is vulnerable to counterarguments, at least if taken on its own; and we will not be reluctant to mention some counterarguments here. But taken as a whole, the evidence strongly suggests that traditional methods of estimating willingness to pay seriously understate the social value of many regulatory benefits. A. Survey Evidence The economic theory that underlies cost-benefit analysis suggests that World A is the uniquely correct choice. The question unambiguously specifies that the income figures represent real purchasing power, and hence prices would not be higher in World A than World B. Neoclassical economics rests on the assumption that people derive satisfaction primarily from the absolute quantity of goods and services they consume. On that measure, World A is better because it offers higher absolute consumption for every citizen. (For choosers who do not want higher levels of consumption, no matter; they might put the money in the bank for their children, or give it to their favorite charity.) That fact notwithstanding, however, a substantial proportion of people confronted with this choice say they would opt for World B.47 47See, for example, Sara J. Solnick and David Hemenway, Is More Always Better? A Survey on Positional Concerns, 37 Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 373 (1998). When these authors offered subjects a choice similar to the one we posed above, 56 percent chose the world with higher relative income and lower absolute income. Similar numbers – with about half opting for higher relative income -- have emerged from several experiments, with about 200 subjects, involving law students at the University of Chicago Law School. We do not claim that theirs is necessarily the better choice. But we do argue that it is a rational and coherent one, in part because of the importance of what the late economist Fred Hirsch called positional goods.48 A positional good is one whose value depends in significant part on how it compares with goods in the same class consumed by others.  The ability to purchase such goods depends strongly on one’s position in the relevant distribution of income. For example, one’s ability to buy a fine painting or a house with a good view typically depends more on relative income than on absolute income. But such goods are not the only reason that relative income is important. Some people want to be toward the top of any relevant hierarchy; many more do not want to be at the bottom; and below we will discuss evidence that once a threshold level of affluence is reached, physical and psychological well-being are much better predicted by relative consumption levels than by absolute consumption levels.49 2. The Happiness Surveys. Perhaps the most striking evidence of the importance of relative position comes in the form of happiness surveys conducted over time in a variety of countries. These surveys ask people to report whether they are "very happy," "fairly happy," or "not happy." They find that happiness levels within a country at a given moment are strongly positively correlated with relative position in the country's income distribution. But the same studies find only weak long-term trends in average reported happiness levels, even for countries whose incomes have been growing steadily over time. The counterintutive conclusion is that substantial increases in economic growth do not produce substantial increases in subjective well-being. similar work, something is wrong, unless you have decided to substitute nonpecuniary for pecuniary income. Evening out all incomes would thus deprive people of a great deal of information about their status and prospects.” Richard Posner, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000). The point is correct but not responsive. We agree that relative pay is an important signal, and to make this point is not to argue for evening out all incomes. 48 Fred Hirsch, Social Limits to Growth (Harvard Univ. Press, 1976). 49For an extensive summary of this evidence, see R. H. Frank, Choosing the Right Pond, chapter 2 (Oxford University Press. 1985). 50 See Richard Easterlin, Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? in Nations and Households in Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz, Paul David and Melvin Reder, eds., (Academic Press, 1974). 51 See Ed Diener and Carol Diener, The Wealth of Nations Revisited: Income and the Quality of Life, 36 Social Indicators Research 275 (1995). food or shelter, they are likely to report themselves as happier as economic growth reduces those needs. It has also been found that average satisfaction levels are significantly higher in rich countries than in very poor ones.52 But the basic pattern identified by Easterlin continues to hold: average satisfaction levels are not significantly correlated over time with income. A second question involves the relationship between subjective happiness and objective well-being.56  People with a greater capacity to purchase goods and services may not be subjectively happier, but they may be far better off. Among other things, they are likely to be healthier and to live longer lives.57 It is therefore reasonable to say that people who earn $70,000, in a society where that is the median income, are likely to have better lives, other things being equal, than people who earn $30,000, where that is the median income – even if people in these different societies report the same subjective happiness. The fact that people in relatively poor nations show relatively high levels of subjective happiness may simply reflect adaptation to relative deprivation.58 We agree that subjective happiness is not all that matters; it does not capture everything that a society should be aiming to promote.59 Economic growth would certainly be desirable insofar as it increases longevity and diminishes various risks to life and health, even if it had no effect whatever on subjective well-being. But subjective happiness is an important component of overall well-being, and a society whose members mostly report themselves as “unhappy” surely has a serious problem, just as a society whose members report themselves as “happy” is entitled to congratulate itself on this fact. If any income loss from a regulatory intervention does not itself decrease subjective happiness, and if the intervention confers substantial benefits, subjective and otherwise, it would seem likely that people are gaining rather than losing; and this is sufficient for our claims here. Survey measures of subjective well-being are not the only evidence that people care strongly about relative income.  Unlike psychologists, who often rely on survey evidence, economists prefer behavioral evidence when attempting to make inferences about what people care about.  The relevant literature is not extensive, but there are several studies that shed light on the strength of concerns about relative income. 60 See, e.g., Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (1991). 61 See id; Jennifer Arlen et al., Endowment Effects, Other-Regarding Preferences, and Corporate Law for a recent overview. 62 See Truman Bewley, Why Wages Don’t Fall During A Recession (2000). 63 See, e.g., George Loewenstein and David Schkade, Wouldn’t It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings, in Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology 85 (Daniel Kahneman et al eds 1999). 64 David Neumark and Andrew Postlewaite , Relative Income Concerns and the Rise in Married Women's Employment, J. Public Economics (70)1 (1998) pp. 157-183 whom they associate most closely. Unfortunately, researchers seldom have reliable data about who knows whom, much less about which specific individuals people care most about. 65 Ibid, Table 3. 66 A recent, detailed treatment is Truman Bewley, Why Wages Don’t Fall DuringA Recession (2000). 67 Id. at 310. The point may be most familiar in professional sports, where athletes seek higher salaries on the basis of the salary set by relevant others. Often such athletes contend that their demands are not really “about money” but are really “about respect.” These claims are frequently ridiculed on the ground that “respect” is a disguise for what really matters, which is “the money.” If we are right, there is no disguise here; money is a proxy for “respect.” Labor market behavior shows that this is a pervasive phenomenon, not limited to professional sports. (Imagine if you discovered that the median salary in your workplace, for people like you, was 5% higher than your salary.) 68 Id. at 81. 69 Id. at 80. 70 As it happens this is the practice at the University of Chicago Law School; there is an exceptionally strong norm against public discussion of salaries, even among good friends. The evident basis of the norm is to prevent dissatisfaction about relative position in the face of satisfaction with absolute position. an elegant experiment known as the "ultimatum game."71  The game is played by two players, "Proposer" and "Responder."  It begins with Proposer being given a sum of money (say, $100) that he must then propose how to divide between himself and Responder. Responder then has two options: 1) he can accept, in which case each party gets the amount proposed; or 2) he can refuse, in which each party gets zero and the $100 goes back to the experimenter. An obvious irony is that the effect of Proposer's believing that Responder cares about relative wealth is to boost substantially the amount that Proposer offers Responder. By virtue of his concern about relative wealth, Responder becomes a much more effective bargainer. Thus the outcomes of the ultimatum game strongly support the proposition that 71See Werner Guth, Rolf Sdhmittberger, and Bernd Schwarze, An Experimental Analysis of Ultimatum Bargaining, 3 J. of Economic Behavior and Organization 367-68 (1982). 72 For example, see Colin Camerer and Richard Thaler, Ultimatums, Dictators, and Manners, 9 J Ec Persp. 209 (1995); Alvin Roth et al. Bargaining and Market Behavior in Jerusalem, Ljubljana, Pittsburgh, and Tokyo, 81 Am. Ec. Rev. 1068 (1991); for a recent overview, see Jennifer Arlen et al., Endowment Effects, Other-Regarding Preferences, and Corporate Law (forthcoming 2000). 73 See Gary Charness and Matthew Rabin, Social Preferences: Some Simple Tests and A New Model (unpublished manuscript 2000, available from Social Science Research Network). 74 See id. relative income, not only absolute income, matters a great deal,75 and indeed that this concern for relative position can strengthen bargaining positions. There is evidence that relative position affects health and even fundamental biochemical processes in the nervous system. For reasons that remain poorly understood, and not easily traced to a simple causal mechanism, high relative position is correlated with good health, and low relative position with worse health – holding absolute income constant.77 In a study involving 19 groups of adult vervet monkeys, McGuire et al. found a relevant mechanism: the dominant member in each group had roughly 50 percent higher concentrations of the neurotransmitter serotonin, which affects mood and behavior in a variety of ways.78 They also showed that this difference was both a cause and an effect of high status.79  Fortunately the evidence is not limited to monkeys; McGuire and his 75 As noted in the text, we do not contend that the outcomes of the ultimatum game can be explained solely on this basis. The responder’s perception of the proposer’s intentions, and character, is therefore an important factor in these experiments. See Rabin, supra note; Sally Blount, When Social Outcomes Aren’t Fair: The Effect of Causal Attributions on Preferences,” 63(2) Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 131, (1995), for instructive treatments. 76 Sheryl Ball and Catherine Eckel.  Status and Discrimination in Ultimatum Games: Stars Upon Thars, Virginia Polytechnic Institute Department of Economics mimeo, 1994;  Sheryl Ball, Catherine Eckel, Philip Grossman, and William Zame, Status in Markets, Department of Economics Working Paper, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, January 1996. 77 See Robert Frank, Luxury Fever 142-43 (1999). 78See Michael McGuire, M. Raleigh, and G. Brammer, Sociopharmacology, 22 Annual Review of Pharmacological Toxicology, 643, 643-61 (1982). 79To do this, they removed the initially dominant animal from each group and placed him in an isolation cage. Shortly thereafter, a new individual established dominance within each group, and after roughly 72 hours passed, serotonin concentrations in the newly dominant animal rose to the levels seen in the formerly dominant animal. At the same time, the serotonin concentrations in the formerly dominant animal fell to the level associated with subordinate status. When the initially dominant animal was returned to the group, he reasserted dominance and serotonin concentrations in both the originally dominant and interim dominant animals responded accordingly. See Michael J. Raleigh, and Michael T. McGuire, Serotonin, Aggression, and Violence in Vervet Monkeys, 146-58 in The Neurotransmitter Revolution: Serotonin, Social Behaivor, and the Law, Roger Masters and Michael McGuire, eds., Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press (1994).  Michael Raleigh and his co-authors also found that animals were more likely to ascend in the social hierarchy after having been given drugs that boost concentrations of serotonin. See Michael Raleigh, Gary Brammer, Edward Ritvo, and Edward Geller, Effects of Chronic Fenfluramine on Blood Serotonin, Cerebrospinal Metabolites, and Behavior in Monkeys, 90 Psychopharmacology 503 (1986). colleagues have also found elevated serotonin levels in the leaders of college fraternities and athletic teams.80  In another study, Douglas Madsen finds that the status-serotonin relationship is positive for some groups of male college students.81 Like dopamine, norepinephrine, and other neurotransmitters, serotonin affects mood and behavior in a variety of ways.  Within limits, having elevated serotonin concentrations is associated with enhanced feelings of well-being. Serotonin deficiencies are associated with a variety of affective disorders, including irritability, sleep disorders, mania, and depression.82  Recent work suggests that serotonin deficiencies are also strongly linked with impulsive aggression and suicide attempts.83 In males, concentrations of the sex hormone testosterone appear to have a relationship with status similar to the one seen for serotonin. Reductions in status thus tend to be followed by reductions in plasma testosterone levels, whereas these levels tend to rise following increases in status.84 A player who wins a tennis match decisively, for example, experiences a post-match elevation in plasma testosterone, and his vanquished opponent experiences a post-match reduction.85  And as with serotonin, there is some evidence from primate studies that elevated concentrations of testosterone facilitate behaviors that help achieve or maintain high status.86 To be sure, it is not simple to extrapolate from such data to judgments about the importance of relative position with respect to income (and other goods) within all human contexts and societies; socialization matters a great deal and can undoubtedly increase or decrease people’s concern with their standing in the group. But there is at least plausible reason to think that a high relative position is associated with desirable physiological effects, and that low relative position is associated with undesirable ones. 80 McGuire, personal communication to Robert Frank (1998). 81 Douglas Madsen, Serotonin and Social Rank Among Human Males, in The Neurotransmitter Revolution: Serotonin, Social Behaivor, and the Law, Roger Masters and Michael McGuire, eds., Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press, 146-158 (1994). 82 Alec Coppen, Role of Serotonin in Affective Disorders, in J. Barchas and E. Usdin, eds., Serotonin and Behavior, (Academic Press, 1973); see also the summary discussion in J. Barchas. and E. Usdin, eds., Serotonin and Behavior, (Academic Press, 1973). 83 Emil F. Coccaro, The Biology of Aggression, 38 Scientific American, 38 (1995). The drug Prozac, widely prescribed for depression and other mood disorders, is a serotonin uptake inhibitor, which means that it increases the effective concentrations of serotonin in the brain. 84 See, for example, Allan Mazur, Physiology, Dominance, and Aggression in Humans, in A. Goldstein, ed., Prevention and Control of Aggression, (Pergamon, 1983); Allan Mazur and T. Lamb. Testosterone, Status, and Mood in Human Males, 14 Hormones and Behavior 236 (1980); and M. Elias, .Serum Cortisol, Testosterone and Testosterone Binding Globulin Responses to Competitive Fighting in Human Males, 7 Aggressive Behavior 215 (1984). 85 Mazur and Lamb, supra. 86 See Rose, Bernstein, and Gordon, (1975). 87 See Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines (1981). position is also adaptive insofar at it prods people to monitor how they are doing relative to their competitors and to boost their effort levels if they start falling behind.88 In sum, evidence from several disciplines strongly suggests that interpersonal comparisons are an important determinant of both physical and psychological well-being. Such comparisons take place along many dimensions other than income.  In what follows, however, our focus will be on comparisons in the income domain.  We emphasize income comparisons because relative economic position is of obvious importance and because positional concerns typically loom larger with income than with the goods that regulation attempts to provide (safety, leisure time, leave to take care of children and ailing relatives). Our basic objection is that the conventional estimates used in cost-benefit analysis of health and safety regulation are derived from models that assume, quite implausibly, that people do not care at all about relative economic position. This produces a serious distortion, as we shall now see. There is an initial question about the use of willingness to pay as a measure for many regulatory benefits: Who is actually going to pay for them? Suppose, for example, that government proposes to impose workplace safety requirements or to require all employers to provide a certain period of leave time for new parents. Will the cost of these requirements be borne by (a) workers, in the form of reduced salary (or other benefits), or (b) consumers, in the form of increased prices, or (c) firms, in the form of reduced profits (and perhaps reduced compensation for high-level executives), or (d) the unemployed, in the form of lost job opportunities? Though theoretical considerations can provide useful guidance,89 this is of course an empirical question; and as a general rule, decisive empirical evidence is lacking. There is, however, evidence that at least in some cases, requirements of this sort do result in lower wages. The workers’ compensation programs of the early twentieth century, for example, appear to have resulted in something like a dollar-for-dollar reduction in the earnings of nonunionized workers; the parental leave program of the early 1990s appears to have had a similar effect.90 For the sake of discussion, we make a simple assumption here, without insisting that the assumption is correct: The people who benefit from regulatory programs will also have to pay for those benefits. We suggest that even if they do have to pay for those benefits, existing methods for eliciting their willingness to pay substantially understate the appropriate amount, from the beneficiary’s own point of view. A. The Distortion 1. Smith and Jones. To illustrate how concerns about relative position affect willingness to pay for an amenity such as workplace safety, we begin by working through a simple, stylized example of an employment decision confronting two workers, Smith and Jones.  Also for simplicity’s sake, we assume that each gets satisfaction from, or cares about, three things—his income, his safety on the job, and his position on the economic ladder. We make no assumptions about why he cares about that position, though we will say a few words on the point below. The choice the two confront is between a safe job that pays $300/wk and a risky job that pays $350/wk. The value of safety to each is $100/wk, and each evaluates relative income as follows: Having more income than his neighbor provides the equivalent of $100/wk worth of additional satisfaction; having less income than his neighbor means the equivalent of a $100/wk reduction in satisfaction; and having the same income as his neighbor means no change in the underlying level of satisfaction. (For purposes of understanding the general point, the specific numbers do not matter; the same point could be illustrated in any number of ways.) The question is: Which jobs will Smith and Jones choose? If we viewed each person’s decision in isolation, the normatively correct choice would be the safe job. Although it pays $50/wk less than the risky job, the extra safety it provides is worth $100/wk, by assumption. So if we abstract from the issue of concern about relative income, the value of the safe job is $400/wk (its $300 salary plus $100 worth of safety), which is $50/wk more than the $350 value of the risky job. Table 3.  The Effect of Concerns about Relative Income on Worker Choices Regarding Safety Suppose, for example, that Jones chooses the safe job. If Smith then chooses the unsafe job, he ends up with total satisfaction worth $450—$350 in salary plus $100 from having more income than Jones. Jones, for his part, ends up with only $300 worth of total satisfaction—$300 in salary plus $100 from safety minus $100 from having lower income than Smith. Alternatively, suppose Jones chooses the unsafe job. Then Smith again does better to accept the unsafe job, for by so doing he gets $350 worth of satisfaction rather than only $300. Since the payoff matrix is symmetric, each player’s dominant strategy is to choose the unsafe job. 91 For simplicity, we are assuming here that the reference group consists of workers in the same firms; of course people are not so limited in their reference groups. We discuss some complications below. analogous to the familiar stadium metaphor: all stand up to get a better view, yet no one sees any better than if all had remained seated. The Elasticity of Position and A Simple Solution What has been said thus far is sufficient to show that there is a distortion; but it does not establish its size. How big is the distortion, and how might a cost-benefit analyst attempt to correct for it?  To answer these questions, we need to know how much an individual’s own income would have to increase in order to fully compensate for any negative effects caused by a general rise in the incomes of others. More precisely, we define the elasticity of position as the percentage by which an individual’s own income would have to rise in order to fully compensate for the effects of a 1 percent rise in the incomes of others in his social comparison set. For example, if an individual would be indifferent between the status quo and a change in which his income rose 0.5 percent while others’ incomes rose 1 percent, the elasticity of position would be 0.5. 92 See, for example, Richard Thaler and Sherwin Rosen, The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the Labor Market, in N. Terleckyj, ed., Household Production and Consumption, 265-71 (NBER, 1976). 93 Benjamin Friedman, 2000 (forthcoming). century.94 Lee Rainwater found that for surveys taken between 1950 and 1986, the "income necessary to get along" has grown at about the same rate as per-capita national income.95 These findings suggest that the elasticity of position is 1.0—or that an individual’s income would have to grow in the same proportion as overall income to maintain a constant level of subjective well being. To say that the elasticity of position is 1.0 amounts to saying that relative income is the only important economic determinant of subjective well-being. Although this conclusion is broadly consistent with the survey evidence reviewed by Richard Easterlin, it is nonetheless clearly an extreme position. If we accept this conclusion at face value, the implication is that safety and other nonpositional regulatory benefits can be provided essentially for free! For the reasons earlier discussed, however, we reject the conclusion that only relative income matters, and indeed other survey evidence appears to suggest an elasticity of position significantly less than one. The most conservative estimate we could find comes from a study by three Dutch economists. Using data collected in The Netherlands, van de Stadt, Kapteyn, and van de Geer (vKv) estimate an elasticity of position equal to roughly 1/3—that is, that a family would need about a 3.3 percent increase in its real income to compensate for a 10 percent increase in the incomes of all others in the community.96 For illustrative purposes, we employ this estimate to construct a simple multiplier for adjusting willingness-to-pay values generated by hedonic pricing models. 94Eugene Smolensky, The Past and Present Poor, in The Concept of Poverty, Task force on Economic Growth and Opportunity, Washington, DC: Chamber of Commerce of the United States, 1965. 95Lee Rainwater, Poverty and Equivalence as Social Constructions, Luxembourg Income Study Working Paper 55, 1990. 96 Huib van de Stadt, Arie Kapteyn, Sara van de Geer (1985), The Relativity of Utility: Evidence from Panel Data, Review of Economics and Statistics 67, 179-187. See also B.M.S. van Praag and Arie Kapteyn, Further Evidence on the Individual Welfare Function of Income: An Empirical Investigation of the Netherlands, 4 European Economic Review 33 (1973). vis-à-vis coworkers (although it does still mean having lower income relative to members of other groups). If one’s personal reference group consisted entirely of one’s coworkers, the distortion caused by concerns about relative position would not arise, and conventional hedonic estimates would not be biased. Typically, however, an individual’s personal reference group contains not just coworkers, but also friends, neighbors, family members, and other acquaintances who are not in a position to participate in collective decisions about safety expenditures. 1. An overview. Many analysts may feel uncomfortable adjusting benefit estimates on the basis of responses to survey questions regarding subjective well-being. In this section we examine an alternative procedure that rests not on surveys but on objective market data – on what behavior within markets reveals about people’s value of higher rank, or elasticity of position. If people care about relative position not just in a global sense, but also within the context of specific groups to which they belong, it is possible to infer the value of relative income by examining the relationship between wages, local rank, and productivity among groups of co-workers.97 The full story is somewhat technical. For those uninterested in the details, the simple version begins with the suggestion that in the labor market, compensating wage differentials must be and are paid, not only for higher risks98 and less vacation time, but also for lower relative positions within firms.99  Just as in the context of risk-taking, where the use of compensating wage differentials is well-established,100 so too here. Actual labor market behavior can be used to ascertain the amount that people are willing to pay to avoid occupying positions of low rank vis-à-vis their coworkers. Compensating wage differentials, once ascertained, can be used to adjust private willingness to pay by incorporating concerns about relative position. We attempt an exercise to show how such differentials might be calculated, with the qualification that a full analysis would require 97 R. H. Frank, Are Workers Paid Their Marginal Products?, 74 American Economic Review 549 (1984). 98 See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1992). 99 Of course different people will have different tastes on this count, as we discuss; some people do not much care about a high relative position, and some people even dislike having much more income than their coworkers. We use survey and labor market evidence to capture aggregates. 100 See id. access to a fuller and more up-to-date labor market data than those used here. What is important is the principle and the basic inquiry, not the details. Our account begins with the observation that, by the laws of simple arithmetic, not everyone's preference for high rank in the wage distribution of his firm can be satisfied. After all, only 50 percent of the members of any group can be in the top half. But if people are free to associate with whomever they please, why are the lesser-ranked members of groups content to remain? Why don't they all leave and attempt to form new groups of their own in which they would no longer be near the bottom? Many workers undoubtedly do precisely that.  And yet we also observe many stable, heterogeneous groups.  Not all accountants at General Motors are equally talented; and in every law firm, some partners attract much more new business than others. If everyone prefers to be near the top of his or her group of coworkers, what holds these heterogeneous groups together? An important part of the answer is that their low-ranked members receive extra compensation – partly from a prestigious association, partly from an advantageous wage structure. If they were to leave, they would gain by no longer having to endure low rank. By the same token, however, the top-ranked members would lose, because they would no longer enjoy high rank. If their gains from having high rank are larger than the costs borne by members with low rank, it does not make sense for the group to disband. Everyone can do better if the top-ranked workers induce their lesser-ranked colleagues to remain by sharing some of their pay with them. less productive than themselves. For the privilege of occupying top-ranked positions in those firms, they will have to work for less than the value of what they produce. Product ivit y Figure 1. The Wage Structure when Local Status Matters. in relative position—the essential piece of information we need to adjust conventional estimates of the monetary value of safety and other workplace amenities. Of course the amount that workers are willing to pay for high local rank will be different for different occupations.  In occupations in which coworkers do not associate closely with one another, people will not be willing to pay much for a high-ranked position. After all, the comparisons that matter most are those between people who interact most intensively. The price paid for high rank (and received for low rank) will be highest in occupations in which coworkers work closely together for extended periods. Wage = Product ivit y (st andard model) Local rank model wit h less int ensive int erac tion Local rank model wit h more int ensive int erac tion Product ivit y Figure 2. Wage Schedules and the Intensity of Interaction. In the sample studied, the most productive chemists accounted for over $200,000 more in revenues each year than their least productive colleagues, yet received only slightly higher salaries. Auto salespersons do not associate nearly as intensively as chemists, but unlike real estate salespersons, they do spend their working hours together in the same location. And as predicted, the price of high-ranked positions for auto salespersons lies between those of the other two occupations. 4. Calculating the proper multiplier. We propose the following procedure for generating an estimate of the lower bound of the extent to which concerns about local rank contribute to wage compression. (That number will then serve as the basis for our estimate of the extent to which concerns about relative position reduce willingness to pay for safety and other amenities.)  We start with the assumption that real estate agents assign no value at all to their income rank vis-à-vis coworkers. This is an exaggeration, to be sure, but perhaps not a serious one in light of the fact that agents spend relatively little time in one another’s company. Since real estate agents’ earnings grow by 70 cents for every dollar they generate for their employers, our assumption implies that factors other than concern about local rank reduce the slope of the wage-productivity gradient by 0.30—from 1.0 to 0.70.104 In the absence of any adjustment, the entry for research chemists in Table 4 says that the salary of a member of this group will rise by less than 9 cents with every additional dollar of productivity. To simplify, we round up to 10 cents. Applying the 0.30 adjustment, we then estimate that a chemist’s salary would rise by 40 cents with every additional dollar of productivity if all factors unrelated to local rank could be controlled for. On this estimate, a university research chemist would be roughly indifferent between the following two events: a) he and his colleagues each receive a $10,000 increase in salary; and b) he receives a $4,000 increase in salary while his colleagues’ salaries remain the same. 104 See Spinnewyn, supra, for a discussion of these factors. positions among their coworkers should be smaller than the value they place on having high relative position more generally. 105 To simplify, we assume that the cost of a variable decline in relative income vis-à-vis different groups is equal to the cost of an equiproportional decline of the same average amount. reduction in the probability of death despite the implied 1 percent reduction in his relative standard of living, he would be willing to pay $750 more for that same benefit if it could be provided without a reduction in relative living standards. Thus, for cases in which conventional estimates would peg the value of a life at $5,000,000 on the basis of observed individual willingness to pay, our estimate would imply a social valuation that is 75 percent larger, or $8,750,000 per life. Our argument has been based on a claim about the harmful external effects introduced by the increased income of other people. In our account, increases in the wages of some people impose costs on others. In form, this is a simple externality story, of the sort that has become quite conventional in many areas of law and policy. Economists and noneconomists alike accept the proposition that market allocations may be suboptimal when production is accompanied by the discharge of environmental pollutants, and most concede that air and water quality are proper concerns of public policy. Our suggestion here is that because subjective well-being depends on relative wealth, increases in the income of some people give rise to positional externalities.107 Analytically, positional externalities are no different from ordinary environmental pollutants. But although most people accept the existence of positional externalities as a purely descriptive matter,108 it might seem tempting to question whether such externalities 106 One complication is that workers might engage in offsetting behavior, designed to ensure a better relative position along the dimension of income even with the regulation. Some might, for example, seek overtime work or a second job. On the general issue of offsetting behavior, see Mathew Adler and Eric Posner, J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2000) 107 R. H. Frank, Positional Externalities, in Richard Zeckhauser, ed., Strategy and Choice: Essays in Honor of Thomas C. Schelling, 25-47 (MIT Press, 1992) . 108 There is indeed an extensive literature in which economists have discussed the dependence of satisfaction on relative living standards. In addition to the authors previously cited, see Arie Kapteyn and F. G. van Herwaarden, Interdependent Welfare Functions and Optimal Income Distribution, 14 Journal of Public Economics 375 (1980); Bernard van Praag, The Relativity of the Welfare Concept, in The Quality of Life, 363, Martha Nussbaum and Amartya Sen, eds., (Clarendon, 1993); Easterlin, 1974; Richard Easterlin, Will Raising the Incomes of All Increase the Happiness of All, 27 Journal of Economic  Behavior and Organization, 35 (1995); Amartya Sen, Poor, Relatively Speaking, 35 Oxford Economics Papers 153 (1983); Amartya Sen, The Standard of Living (Cambridge University Press, 1987); Fred Hirsch,. Social Limits to Growth, (Harvard University Press, 1976); Arthur J. Robson, Status, the Distribution of Wealth, Private and Social Attitudes to Risk, 60 Econometrica, 837 (1992); and Tibor Scitovsky, The Joyless Economy (Oxford University Press, 1976). are a proper basis for policy and law. The principal objections involve, first, freedom and rights and, second, the status of envy. 109 Among other things, the example shows a problem with the traditional interpretation of John Stuart Mill's idea that government cannot regulate private conduct unless there is “harm to others.” See John Stuart Mill, On Liberty. Speaking purely descriptively, a gain to one may impose a “harm” on others, not only because of envy but for other reasons as well. See below. A judgment that this harm cannot count for law and policy may be right, but it must be defended  by some kind of claim about the illegitimacy of taking certain harms into account, and not on the basis of the “harm to others” idea alone. It is the question of legitimacy that we discuss in text. agreement would simply make them worse off – and in an important sense, and even in the most important sense, diminish their freedom as well. 2. Envy? One possible basis for denying the legitimacy of positional concerns is that society has an interest in discouraging negative emotions, above all envy, and that in any case it ought not to reward those who are envious. Perhaps the reason that some are harmed by the income of others is that they are envious; and though envy is a genuine hedonic loss, it might seem wrong to suggest that government has a legitimate interest in taxing those who induce envy in others. To be sure, our argument for reassessing willingness to pay would impose no tax on activities merely because they arouse envy. But the logic of the argument might seem to support that conclusion.111 We do not attempt to answer here the complex question whether reducing envy is a legitimate basis for social and legal policy.112 On purely utilitarian grounds, it might seem to be, except for the fact that rewarding envy may have unfortunate social effects—by, for example, discouraging production and encouraging further envy, used strategically or otherwise.. At the same time, envy might have desirable social effects insofar as it encourages productive activities.113 For many people, the question of whether envy should count as a social cost will undoubtedly depend partly on whether it is unfairness that has produced the envy. 110 Alternatively, one might object that an agreement limiting what job seekers spend on suits is bound to be unenforceable. After all, if wearing a better suit than others really does help you win the job, there will be powerful incentives to evade the spending limit. One could buy a suit off the rack, for example, and then make under-the-table payments to a tailor who completely re-cut it.  This objection might indeed prove decisive. But it concerns the practicality of the proposal, not its political legitimacy. 111 For a discussion of whether tax policy should respond to positional concerns, see Robert Frank, Luxury Fever, supra. 112 The point is treated in some detail in John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 530-41 (1971); Rawls urges (to summarize a complex discussion) that rational people do not feel envy when inequalities are not unjust. 113 The question here is whether people would work too little in the absence of envy; it is possible that envy will induce excessive labor. For a relevant discussion, see Richard McAdams, Relative Preferences, 102 Yale LJ 1 (1992). consequences of inferior relative position often have nothing to do with envy. Envy entirely to one side, the wealth and consumption of other people sets the frame of reference for our evaluation of our own wealth and consumption, and this effect is impossible to avoid.114 The frame of reference is inevitably set socially, not individually, and our experience of social goods – and to some extent our reputation and our selfconception -- will be a function of that frame. In a remote mountain village in India, people can function well without owning an automobile, yet a middle-class citizen in Los Angeles cannot meet even the most minimal demands of social existence without one. This point generalizes to a broad spectrum of goods.  When almost everyone has a computer produced in, say, 2005, your computer from 1995 will not only seem hopelessly slow and outdated, its performance will place you at a real competitive disadvantage; but if everyone had computers built in 1995, little or nothing would be amiss. Envy is not involved here; the problem is the frame of reference, which is not within any individual’s control. The point holds for people at every level of the economic ladder, except the extremely poor (for whom, it will be recalled, an absolute economic gain is always important, subjectively as well as objectively). Indeed, some of the effects described here appear driven largely by the same neurophysiological mechanisms that explain why a Helsinki resident's evaluation of a 60-degree day in February is more favorable that a Havana resident's evaluation of a 60-degree day in November. By necessaries I understand not only the commodities which are indispensably necessary for the support of life, but whatever the custom of the country renders it indecent for creditable people, even of the lowest order, to be without. A linen shirt, for example, is, strictly speaking, not a necessary of life. The Greeks and Romans lived, I suppose, very comfortably though they had no linen. But in the present times, through the greater part of Europe, a creditable day-labourer would be ashamed to appear in public without a linen shirt, the want of which would be supposed to denote that disgraceful degree of poverty which, it is presumed, nobody can well fall into without extreme bad conduct. Custom, in the same manner, has rendered leather shoes a necessary of life in England. The poorest creditable person of either sex would be ashamed to appear in public without them.115 114 It might be said here that those who have a lower frame of reference lack information about possible alternatives. This way of understanding the point is not entirely wrong, but it is imprecise and insufficiently informative; what we mean to emphasize is that the frame of reference is provided socially, not individually, and that any frame of reference will have effects, some of them adverse, on people who must live with it. If most people have cars that are 10% worse than they might otherwise be, the problem is not that people lack information, but that the relatively less good car produces more satisfaction that it otherwise would. 115 Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations (Random House, 1937). The absolute standard of living in the United States today is vastly higher than it was in Adam Smith’s 18th-century Scotland. Yet Smith’s observations apply with equal force to contemporary industrial societies.  Consider, for instance, the journalist Dirk Johnson’s recent account of the experiences of Wendy Williams, a middle-school student from a low-income family in Dixon, Illinois.116 Watching classmates strut past in designer clothes, Wendy Williams sat silently on the yellow school bus, wearing a cheap belt and rummage-sale slacks. One boy stopped and yanked his thumb, demanding her seat. A lanky, soft-spoken girl with large brown eyes, Wendy pursed her lips to hide a slight overbite that got her the nickname Rabbit, a humiliation she once begged her mother and father to avoid by sending her to an orthodontist. An adolescent in 18th-century Scotland would not have been much embarrassed by having a slight overbite, because not even the wealthiest members of society wore braces on their teeth then. Rising living standards have altered the frame of reference that defines an acceptable standard of cosmetic dentistry. The toll that low relative position takes on individuals is no less legitimate because it occurs in psychological rather than explicitly monetary terms. As a purely descriptive matter, concerns about relative position cause current methods to underestimate public willingness to pay for risk reduction and a variety of other benefits by substantial margins. To the extent that we accept citizens’ preferences as the basis for policy, we have every reason to believe that correcting for this bias will lead to policy changes that meet public favor. In this section we venture some brief remarks on two questions that will eventually deserve extended treatment. The first involves the fact that many regulations involve subclasses of people, rather than (for example) all workers. The second involves the implications of our argument for the much-discussed question of nonwaivable contractual terms. Thus far we have written as if the effects of the program at issue will be felt by all persons in the relevant class – as if an environmental regulation would reduce all income by the same amount, or as if an occupational safety and health law would reduce workers’ earnings at the same time and in the same way. When this is the case, the regulation may produce something close to a Pareto improvement – holding relative position constant with respect to income (and thus imposing little or no loss on that dimension), but offering workers a benefit with respect to a nonpositional good (such as safety or leisure time). Of course things are more complicated than this. Some occupational and safety regulations, for example, will have distinct subclasses of workers – as, for example, when a regulation of coal dust applies largely in the mining industry, but without affecting most other workers at all,117 or when a regulation of HIV transmission affects workers in the dental and health care industries, but without applying elsewhere.118 When regulation affects subclasses of workers, its positional effects will differ from the ones we described above, where all lose in absolute position, but where relative position is held constant. When subclasses are affected, some will gain in relative position and some will lose. Consider, for example, a safety regulation that applies only to dental workers.  In contrast to a regulation that imposed an equally costly safety requirement on all workers -- which, as noted above, does not affect relative living standards -- this more limited regulation will reduce the relative living standards of dental workers. Thus, to the extent that the personal reference groups of dental workers consist largely of non-dental workers, the regulation will make it more difficult for dental workers to match the consumption standards that constitute their social frame of reference. workers will understate the social value of the regulation. The reason is that the decline in relative living standards experienced by dental workers is counterbalanced by an increase in relative living standards experienced by others in their social comparison group. Relative position cannot be reduced in the aggregate. When some lose position, others necessarily gain.  One upshot is that if dental workers are armed with perfect information, and if they know that their relative and absolute income will decline, a regulation that affects dental workers alone is less likely to be popular among dental workers than one that affects all workers in the relevant social comparison group. Another upshot is that while the more general regulation may produce something close to a Pareto improvement, with few real losers, the more targeted regulation cannot be justified on that ground. If government is nonetheless to use numbers of the sort we are urging, it will be on Kaldor-Hicks grounds – the gainers (including the gainers in terms of relative position) are gaining more than the losers (including the losers in terms of relative position) are losing. In other words, there is a distributional shift, in terms of relative position, with the more targeted regulation, whereas there is no such shift with the general one. B. Extensions The argument we have made has obvious implications for the question whether law should impose nonwaivable terms – as, for example, through legislation involving maximum hours, job security, parental leave, health care, and leave time. Let us continue to assume that the cost of workers’ rights, when they are not waived, will be borne in whole or in part by workers, in the sense that the legal grant of a right, to workers, will result in a lower paycheck. The standard view is that if labor markets are generally competitive, nonwaivable terms cannot be justified as promoting the interests of the supposedly benefited class. We submit that the standard view is far too simple. If workers care about relative position, nonwaivable rights might, in principle, make workers better off on the dimension along which they are helped (by giving them something important) while also not making them significantly worse off along the dimension along which they are apparently harmed (by decreasing their income while also decreasing that of everyone else). The promising possibility here is that legal initiatives will produce real gains of one or another kind (for example, leisure time, health care, job security, which are, by hypothesis, nonpositional goods), without producing real losses (because the only loss is to absolute position in terms of income). Cost-benefit analysis is an increasingly pervasive practice within the national government, and it promises to grow as a tool of decision in the next decades. The first generation debates involved whether to do cost-benefit analysis at all. The second generation debates, now at their inception, involve debates about appropriate valuation. them. People care about relative position not only and not even mostly because of envy, nor even because of status anxiety, but because the position of others sets a general frame of reference within which economic and social activity takes place.120 The point bears not only on cost-benefit analysis, but also on a wide range of regulatory possibilities, including nonwaivable terms in the labor market. If relative position is what matters to most workers, nonwaivable terms, if generally imposed, may turn out to be justified even if the result of such terms is to lower workers’ salaries. This suggestion is a natural corollary of our basic suggestion here: Any approach to valuation that concentrates solely on absolute economic position, and neglects relative economic income position, will produce outcomes that are wrong in terms of the conventional arguments that justify cost-benefit analysis in the first place. Robert H. Frank Goldwin Smith Professor of Economics, Ethics, and Public Policy Cornell University Johnson Graduate School of Management 327 Sage Hall Ithaca, NY 14850 Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 1. William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 4. Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of 8. William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An 13. J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 14. Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 21. Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle 22. Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the 23. William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). American Business Enterprise (April 1995). and Biotechnology (November 1995). Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) 61. Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of 62. David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in 63. Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) 64. John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 65. Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: 66. Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of 67. Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) 68. Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic 69. Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 70. Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? 71. Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 72. Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost 73. John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 74. Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 75. Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It 76. William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) 77. Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 78. Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) 81. David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 82. Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 83. Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) 84. Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at 85. Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis 86. Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 87. Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) 88. Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing CostBenefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) 89. Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) 90. David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 91. Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 92. Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 93. Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) 94. Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 2000) 95. David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) 96. Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 97. Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform 98. Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in 99. David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax 100. Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 101. William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error 102. Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000)