University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2000 

Experiences 
Experiences 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

American Advice and New Constitutions Global Affairs 
American Advice and New Constitutions Global Affairs 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "American Advice and New Constitutions Global Affairs Experiences," 1 Chicago Journal 
of International Law 173 (2000). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

American  Advice  and New Constitutions
Cass  R. Sunstein*

T he  early  1990s  were  among  the  most  extraordinary  periods  for  constitution-

making  in the history  of the  world. Several  people at  the University  of Chicago
Law School played  a role  in  this period, mostly  as observers,  to some  small  degree as
participants.  The  editors  of this Journal  have asked  me  for some  brief reflections  on
this remarkable time; I am grateful to have  been asked and happy to oblige.

This  is  an  impressionistic  essay, but I  do have  a principal  theme. It involves  the
conflict  between  what  might  be  called  pragmatic  and  expressive  conceptions  of
constitution-making  and  constitutionalism.  Americans  generally  tend  to  think  of
constitutions  as pragmatic  instruments,  important  for what they do in the real  world.
In  Eastern  Europe  and  (to  a  lesser  extent)  South  Africa,  by  contrast,  expressive
considerations  loomed very large;  what constitutions say-what  ideals they express-
was  extremely  important,  not  merely  what  constitutions  would  do.  Of course  what
constitutions  do  is  often  a function  of what they  say;  I  am  emphasizing  the  role  of
constitutions  as  carriers  of symbols  and statements,  largely  for their own  sake. I  also
offer  some brief notations  on the contrast  between Eastern Europe  and South Africa,
and on what Americans might learn from constitution-making  efforts  elsewhere.

I.  FOUR TRANSITIONS AND  RECURRING  ISSUES

After  the  downfall  of  the  Soviet  Union,  a  large  number  of  nations  were
embarking  on a remarkable  enterprise in self-definition  and constitutional reform.  At
the  time  it was  clear  that  several  quite  different  transitions  were  involved.  Four  are
easy to identify. The first involved  a  shift from a command economy to  some form  of
capitalism,  or at least  a  system  in which private property  was acceptable.  The second
was  a  shift  from  party  rule  to  some  form  of democracy.  The  third,  of particular
interest  to  law  professors  and  lawyers,  involved  a  shift  from  rampant  official
lawlessness,  and  meaningless  constitutions,  to some  version  of constitutionalism  and
the  rule  of law.  "Constitutions  did  not play  an  important  role  under  communism."'
One of the principal goals  of the transition from communism was to produce  a system
of meaningful  constitutions;  ten years later  this goal has  been largely  achieved,  to one
degree  or another.  The fourth transition  involved a shift to  domestic  rule from more
than  occasional control  by the Soviet  Union. This  shift-from Soviet  domination  to

•Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor,  Law  School  and  Department  of  Political

1. See Jon  Elster,  Claus  Offe and  Ulrich  K. Preuss,  Institutional Design  in Post-Communist Societies  63

Science,  University of Chicago.

(Cambridge  1998).

2.  See id at 107.

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  173 2000

Chicago Journal of International Law

national  self-government-turned  out to  be  extremely  important  to the  early  1990s,
and often  it seemed foremost in the minds of the reformers.

Soon after the fall  of communism, it was clear to several of us  at the University of
Chicago that it would be very valuable to attempt to track and analyze  the new efforts
at  constitution-making.  Jon  Elster,  Stephen  Holmes,  and  I  created  a  Center  on
Constitutionalism  in  Eastern  Europe,  designed  above  all  to  house  records  and  to
engage  in  fact-gathering  and analysis.'  Our mission  was  emphatically  not to  provide
"advice"  to  nations  involved  in constitution-making.  As  an  organization,  we  believed
that the academic  tasks might be compromised by advice-giving  roles.

Nonetheless,  some of us did participate, to a greater or lesser  extent, as spectators
and advice-givers  with respect to constitution-making, not only in Eastern Europe but
also  in  South  Africa  (with which  the  Center  was  not  concerned).  Many  issues were
discussed, in quite similar terms, in  a range of countries-for example,  whether to give
the  Constitutional  Court  the  power  to  issue  advisory  opinions;  whether  the  Court
should be available to ordinary citizens,  to government  officials,  or both; whether  and
how to handle problems  of ethnic pluralism; whether  and how to promote sex equality
(an issue that was greatly neglected  in Eastern Europe, but quite prominent in  South
Africa);  the  circumstances  in  which  rights  could  be  abridged  (what  form  of words
would  be appropriate  for identifying  those circumstances?);  whether  to  include  social
and  economic  guarantees;  and  whether  to  distinguish  between  constitutional  rights
against the state and constitutional rights against private actors.

II.  A CONTRAST

My informal  impression  was that the South African constitution-makers  had  an
extraordinary  degree  of sophistication  about  constitution-making  and  constitutions,
including  encyclopedic  knowledge  of  other  nations'  constitutions.  Indeed,  this
encyclopedic  knowledge  put  their  American  counterparts  to  considerable  shame;
Americans  tend  to  know  little  or  nothing  about  constitutionalism  elsewhere.  For
example, I well  remember a debate  in South Africa about whether  (and how) the new
constitution  should  include  guarantees  of  minimal  economic  well-being.  The
participants  had  full  knowledge  of actual  and  possible  approaches  to  the  topic.  In
addition,  all  of the  concerns  voiced  by American  observers  were  well-understood  by
the South Africans,  and the South African  debate went far beyond the American  one
in its appreciation  of possible rejoinders  (partly having to do with  desirable effects  on
the legislature,  whose responsibility would be made clear in the founding  document).

This  degree  of  sophistication  sharply  distinguished  the  constitution-making
experience  in  South  Africa  from  the  experience  in much  of Eastern  Europe,  where
knowledge  about constitutionalism  was new and partial, and where  many of the most

3.  The  original  plan  was  for  a  five-year  center,  compiling  information  and  producing  the  East
European  Constitutional  Review. The center  and the Review  were  eventually  moved  to New  York
University.

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  174 2000

C'o  1 N.I

American Advice and New  Constitutions

Sunstein

basic ideas seemed  unfamiliar.  Sometimes there was little thought about the nature of
judicial  review or about the pragmatic  consequences  of one  or another  approach.  Law
itself seemed  in disrepute, a point that might have contributed to  the enthusiasm  for
expressive  understandings  of  constitutions.  I  remember,  for  example,  an  exchange
with Ukrainian constitution-makers  (during a meeting held in Prague) -
true heroes,
by the way, who  had helped to break apart  the Soviet  Union, with a range of activities
on behalf of freedom and democracy. In that exchange,  the Ukrainians  asked whether
the Constitution ought not to have a provision requiring the press and the media to be
"objective." It was responded  that a free  country recognized  that what was "objective"
was  itself disputed,  and  that  a  newspaper  should  be  permitted  to  say what  it liked
however  "subjective."  To  this  response,  the  Ukrainian  constitution-makers  replied
with uneasy stares.

The same  was  true of frequent  discussions  of whether parts of the Constitution
might be made  applicable only to  the government,  and not to the private sphere;  this
seemed  to  be  a quite  unfamiliar  idea.  I  also  remember  that  some  of the  Ukrainian
constitution-makers,  like  some  of  those  involved  in  constitution-making  in  other
that  domestic  political  constraints  called  for  particular
nations,  emphasized 
constitutional provisions,  above all provisions  that would give some kind of security to
citizens generally  or to particular constituents  concerned  about what they might lose.
In this way  the Constitution's  real-world functions were less important than ensuring
agreement  from  potentially  troublesome  groups.  And  because  it  seemed  unclear
whether  the  Constitution  would  actually  function  as  law-because  the  notion  of a
constitution  as  binding law  seemed unfamiliar-the  real-world  issue  often  appeared
to be obtaining consensus,  rather than obtaining  a Constitution that would have good
effects  once ratified.  Compare the South African  experience,  where difficult questions
about judicial  enforcement  led to  the ratification  of a number  of provisions  making  it
clear that  the legislature would  have enforcement  authority, with a  supplemental  (or
no) judicial rule.4

It  is  noteworthy  in  this  connection  that  in  both  Eastern  Europe  and  South
Africa,  constitution-making  was  often  made  possible only by virtue  of agreement  on
abstractions  amidst  uncertainty  or disagreement  about what those abstractions  might
specifically  entail.  General  principles  of  free  speech,  religious  liberty,  and  equality
under  the  law  could  be  accepted  amidst  sharp  social  contests  about  the  concise
substance  of  those  principles.  There  is  a  large  lesson  about  law,  I  think,  in  the
possibility  of  obtaining,  amidst  considerable  social  heterogeneity, 
incompletely
theorized agreements  about abstractions!5

4.  See, for example, S  Afr Consr Art 9(4) ("National  legislation  must be enacted to prevent or prohibit
unfair discrimination.");  Art  3(3)  ("National  legislation  must  provide  for the acquisition,  loss  and
restoration  of citizenship.").  For similar  provision  requiring  legislative  action,  see  also  Art  6(4)
(national languages);  Art 26(2)  (housing);  Art 27(2)  (health  care,  food, water  and  social  security);
Art 32(2)  (access  to information); Art 33 (3) (just administrative  action).

s.  This point is emphasized  in Cass  EL  Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict at 35-61  (Oxford

1996); I learned the lesson from experience in Eastern Europe.

Spring 2000

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  175 2000

Chicago Journal of International Law

III.  CONSTITUTIONS:  PRAGMATIC  OR  EXPRESSIVE,

One impression, however, lingers  above all others,  and this has to do with  a large
difference  between  the  process  of  constitution-making  that  we  witnessed  and  the
more  distinctly American  understanding of constitutionalism. In brief, Americans,  or
at  least  American  lawyers,  tend  to  think  that  constitutions  are  largely  pragmatic
instruments,  to  be  evaluated  for  what  they  do,  not  merely  what  they  say.  For us,  a
successful  constitution  accomplishes  a great deal in the real world;  it is far more  than a
set  of  statements  of  basic  commitments.  (This  is not  to  say  that  the  American
Constitution is fuly implemented  in the world; for example, there are violations  of the
fourth  amendment  every  day.)  In  Eastern  Europe,  by  contrast,  one  of the  central
points of constitution-making  was emphatically expressive-to make a statement about
what was  being accomplished  and  to articulate  national  commitments  or goals.6  It is
easy to overlook what was entirely visible at the time: the struggle, on the part of many
nations,  to reassert  national identity, or more simply nationhood,  in the aftermath  of
what  had  been  seen  by  many  as  a  form  of  Soviet  occupation.  Discussions  with
constitution-makers  at the  time  made  quite  clear  that  casting  off Soviet  rule  was  a
widely  shared  goal,  and  a  key  part  of what  the  new  constitutions  were  to  claim.
Whether the  consequence  was to  produce  liberal democracy,  and if so  of what kind,
was a much harder question.

But  the  expressive  nature  of  constitutional  provisions  extended  far  beyond
nationhood,  and  captured  a  great  deal  of  additional  territory.  When  the  new
constitutions  speak,  as  many  of  them  do,  of a  right  to  work7  or  to  a  healthy  or
favorable  environment,8  what  was  generally  envisioned  was  a  statement  of general
policy  and  intention,  rather  than  judicially  enforceable  rights.9  In  these  ways,
constitution-making  in Eastern  Europe  had some of the features  of design  of a party
platform  in the United  States, though  of course  the stakes,  in the former  case,  were,
and were broadly perceived as,  much higher.

South Africa was  an interesting  contrast in this regard. There it was understood
that the  Constitution  would  have a preeminent  legal  function,  and crucial  provisions
were devised with attention squarely directed to real-world  consequences.  At the same
time,  it  was  thought  important  to  devise  some  rights  that  would  not  be  self-
implementing, partly for expressive reasons,  but partly also  to give both a political  and

6.  For similar  reflections  about Italy,  see Guido Calabresi,  Two  Functions of Formalism, 67 U Chi  L Rev

(forthcoming  2000).

7.  Considering references  to Slovenia,  please see attached letter. See, for example,  Hungary Const Art
70/B(1),  Czech  Republic  Const  Charter  Art  26(1);  Slovak  Republic  Const  Art  35(3);  Bulgaria
Const Art 48(1).

8.  Regarding  reference  to Hungary, please see attached letter. See,  for example,  Czech  Republic Const

Charter Art 35(1); Slovak Republic Const Art 44(1); Bulgaria Const Art 55.11.

9.  The constitutions  may not contemplate  legislative  enforcement  either;  the relevant  provisions  have
some ambiguity  on this point, with some specifying  that  the rights "may be claimed only within  the
scope  of the laws implementing  these provisions."  Czech Republic  Const Charter  Art 41(1); Slovak
Republic Const Art 51.

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  176 2000

rof 12 No.1

American Advice and New Constitutions

Sunstein

a  rhetorical  advantage  to  those  arguing  on  behalf of certain  claims  in  the  political
process.  As  I have  noted,  the South  African  Constitution  makes  a  sharp  distinction
between  judicially  enforceable  rights  and  rights  whose  enforcement  is  left  to  the
political  process.  The  South African  Constitution  also  has  an  expressive  dimension,
especially  in  the  firm  commitment  to  national  unity  amidst  a  recognition  of great
pluralism."0  Thus, the  South African  Constitution  has  a  great  deal  of sophistication
about various  classes  of provisions:  those that require judicial  enforcement;  those  that
will  be  implemented  legislatively;  and  those  that  are  designed  simply  to  state
something about national  self-conception."

The conflict between  the expressive  notion of a constitution,  and the notion of a
constitution  as  a  genuine  guarantee  of  individual  rights,  has  created  some  obvious
puzzles  in  Eastern  Europe.  The  Constitutional  Court  has  played  a  large  role  in
welfare  reform  in  Hungary,  a  role  that,  to  say  the  least,  has  not  been  regarded  as
productive  or  desirable  by  all  observers.  But  in  retrospect,  it  seems  clear  that
American  advice-givers  were  insufficiently  sensitive  to  questions  about  culture  and
context;  some  of  us  acted  as  if  there  was  one  general  model  for  democratic
constitutions, and  downplayed  domestic fears  and concerns,  some  of which  called  for
an  emphatically  expressive  constitution,  and  others  of  which  called  for  unusual
provisions  and approaches.

IV.  WHAT AMERICANS  LEARNED

Americans  learned a  great deal  from these  exercises  in  constitution-making,  and
they could learn  much  more from  reflecting  on what has happened  in the last decade
and more. I offer two brief thoughts  here.

The  first clear  lesson  has  to  do with  the  dependence of rights-protection on  resources,
and the absence of a sharp distinction, along this dimension, between so-called negative rights and
so-called positive rights. In  Eastern Europe,  and South  Africa  as  well,  it was  dear to  all

lo. 'We, the people  of South Africa  ... [b]elieve  that South  Africa belongs  to all who  live in  it, united

in our diversity." S  Afr Const Preamble.

11.  With  respect to  South Africa,  I attended  a range  of diverse  meetings,  extending over  a number  of
years.  The  first  was held  in Washington  DC,  before  the fall  of apartheid, and  it was  run  by  white
judges,  in  charge  of a  constitutional  commission.  The judges  did not believe  in  apartheid-they
clearly  thought  that  it  failed,  and  was  unjust,  and  deserved  and  needed  to  go-but  they  were
extremely  interested  in  providing  means  to protect "groups as  such" via constitutional  provisions.  It
took a while  for  me to understand that the search  for these means  was basically  an effort to protect
"whites as  such"-an understanding that cast  some new light on the idea  of"group rights" in general.
(The head  of the working group, a distinguished  South Africanjudge,  seemed  obsessed with my  last
name,  which  he  used,  puzzlingly  and  somewhat  inappropriately,  on  a  number  of  occasions,
culminating in dinner one evening, when he used it three times in a row, as if it were  a song lyric, and
immediately added,  "We have a Jew  on our  Court. My  wife calls him  the Gentle Jew.")  Expressive
concerns played  a large  role  in this draft, but they were  dominated  by instrumental  goals.  It should
be needless  to say  that the drafts that emerged turned out to matter not at all to the ultimate process
of constitution-making in South Africa.

12.  See Andras Sajo, How the Rule of Law Killed Hungarian Welfare Reform,  5 E  Eur Const Rev 31  (1996).

Spring 2000

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  177 2000

ChicagoJournal of International Law

that compliance with constitutional commands  would require  money. A right to ajury
trial,  for  example,  would  commandeer  a great  deal  of local  court  budgets  in  Russia;
protection  of basic  property  rights  would  call  for  a well-organized  system  to  extract
and  deploy taxpayer  funds.  Even the most negative  of negative  rights  could not exist
without  public  support,  and  hence  negative  rights,  as  they  are  misleadingly  called,
require  the  expenditure  of public  resources.  This point was  entirely  clear in  Eastern
Europe  and South Africa,  and it draws  much of conventional  American  wisdom  into
grave doubt.3

A  second  lesson  is  the  limited importance of the  constitutional text  and  the  overriding
importance of cultural support for constitutional institutions. In retrospect, the precise  text of
constitutional provisions  could increase probabilities  of various  sorts, and reduce risks;
but, it could  do  little  more. This  is  true  in  America  as  well  as  Eastern Europe.  Our
constitution  does  not  foreordain  existing  practices  with  respect  to  either  institutions
or  rights;  a  close  reader  of the text  might well  be  shocked  to  learn  about  our  recent
institutions  and  our  recent  rights.  The  administrative  state  is  not  discussed  in  the
Constitution,  for example,  and from a  reading of the first amendment  (which  applies
only  to  Congress),  it  would  be  very  hard  to  generate  the  current  structure  of first
amendment  doctrine. This  does  not mean  that we lack a  Constitution;  it means  only
that the written words  constrain us less than we tend to think.

Of course, the institutional provisions of a Constitution-setting up a court with
the  power  of judicial  review,  separating  the  executive  and  legislative  branches-can
make  a  great  deal  of difference.  But  we  should  not  overstate  the  importance  of a
constitutional  text,  nor  should  we  underestimate  the  need  for  a  culture  that  is
committed,  first, to the rule of law and constitutional limitations, and second, to some
kind of orderly process  for ensuring that any implementation  of unclear  constitutional
provisions,  or  any  adjustment  of such  provisions,  takes  place  in  a  way  that  is  not
inconsistent with respect  for constitutional ideals.  Note in  this regard that communist
constitutions  contain  ample  rights provisions,  which  meant  nothing  in  practice;  and
that  the  right  to  equality  on  the  basis  of  sex  does  not  exist  in  Eastern  Europe,
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  most  of the  Eastern  European  constitutions  protect
such a right, expressly  or by implication.

One final point: It is now ten years after the fall  of communism, and a good time
to take stock in a way that is  empirically informed. Which constitutions  have worked
well, and which  have worked badly?  To the extent that nations are doing well  or badly,
is  the Constitution responsible?  Most important:  have we learned anything about
what sorts of provisions belong in a  constitution at all? Answering such  questions
would provide a great deal of knowledge,  and it would be quite productive  to get
started on this endeavor. For the moment, however, I conclude with  two documents
that might give a  sense of some aspects  of constitutional debate immediately after  the
fall of  communism.  -b 

-

13.  For  a  general  discussion,  see  Stephen  Holmes  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  The  Cost of Rights (Norton

1999).

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  178 2000

American Advice  and New  Constitutions

Sunstein

APPENDIX  ONE

MEMORANDUM

To:  Constitutional Working Group, Government of Ukraine

From:  Cass  R. Sunstein, Karl  N. Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  Law  School
and  Department  of  Political  Science,  University  of  Chicago;  Co-Director,
Center on Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, University  of Chicago

Re:  Ukraine's  Draft Constitution

I  am  most  grateful  to  have  the  opportunity  to  comment  on  the  new  Draft
Constitution  of Ukraine.  At  the  outset,  three  disclaimers.  (1)  The views  expressed
here  are  tentative  and provisional.  I  am sure  that with  further  discussions,  and with
additional  readings  of  the  Draft  Constitution,  some  of my  views  will  change.  (2)
There are of course severe limitations in the perspective,  on a country's  constitutional
reform  efforts,  offered  by  someone  who  does  not  know  that  country  well.  Some  of
what follows  will undoubtedly reflect  my limited perspective.  (3)  I have  been asked to
concentrate  on  human  rights  and  the  constitutional  court,  and  I  restrict  myself to
those issues here.

Having  read  and  commented  on  a  large  number  of  Eastern  European  draft
Constitutions, I might note  that this seems to me an excellent draft-in terms  of both
clarity  and  substance.  The provisions  about  ethnic  and  religious  rights  are especially
good; indeed, they could stand as a model for both the East and the West.

I do, however,  have one basic concern about this draft. The statement of liberties
looks,  in  part,  like  a  general  list  of aspirations,  rather  than  a  catalogue  of  legally
protected  rights.  It  creates  too  many promises  of what the  state will  do-rather than clear
limits on what the state can do.

The  draft  should,  I  believe,  be  changed  to  delete  the  many  promises  of state
intervention  into  the  economy,  and the  many guarantees  of positive  rights.  It should
instead restrict  itself, for  the  most part, to  negative  rights  held by individuals  against
the government.  In its current form, it sounds  too much  like the Soviet  Constitution,
which was  not worth the paper  on  which it was written.  If the various  unenforceable
promises are not to be deleted,  they should be placed in a separate  section, intended to
set forth "social aspirations" that are not for judicial enforcement.

Most of my remarks  are intended to spell out this basic  concern.

I.  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS

Let me begin with  some  brief general  observations.  For  Ukraine,  the drafting  of
the  Constitution  appears  to  be  pose  two  especially  distinctive  challenges.  The  first
challenge is to  begin the process  of creating  a legal culture  witb firm judicial protection of

Spring 2000

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  179 2000

Chicago Journal of International Law

individual rights. By  individual  rights,  I  mean,  first  and  foremost,  traditional  negative
rights  against  government:  freedom  of speech,  freedom  of religion,  private  property
and  freedom of contract,  security  against  the  criminal justice  system  (including  cruel
or unusual punishment,  official action  not  authorized by statute,  unjustified searches
and seizures, inadequate hearings).

The  second  challenge  is  to facilitate the  creation of a market  economy  and of a civil
society-that is,  a  realm  of private  action  containing  institutions  (churches,  markets,
corporations,  and  so  forth)  that  are  independent  of  the  state  and  constrained
minimally  by 
these  challenges,  a  constitution  could
simultaneously  promote  democratic goals  and help ensure economic prosperity.

it.  Through  meeting 

To  carry  out this  task,  constitution-makers  in  Ukraine  should  probably  try  to
avoid  several  strategies  that  contain  serious  risks.  One  risky  strategy  is  to  use  a
constitution  as  a  place  for  stating  very  general  social  aspirations,  or  for  imposing
positive duties  on government  (such as the provision of a social welfare  state including
leisure time, social security,  and occupational  safety and health law). To put it bluntly:
The  strategy of stating aspirations and imposing positive duties-prominent of course in  the  old
Soviet  Constitution-runs the  risk  of turning a  constitution into  something worthless.  It  is
important  to  remember  here that  a  constitution  should  not list  all things  to which  a
country  aspires;  it should  limit itself, for  the most part, to  rights  that it is  genuinely
able to enforce.

Another  strategy  posing  similar  risks  is  to  use  the  constitution  as  a  place  for
creating  "duties" as  well  as  rights.  (This  too  is,  I  believe,  a  holdover  from  Soviet
constitutionalism.)  These duties are not likely to be enforceable  through courts. Their
statement  in  a  constitution  tends  to  weaken  the  understanding  that  the  document
creates  protected rights, with real meaning,  against the state.

Yet  another  dangerous  strategy  is  to  make  constitutional  provisions  binding
against private people and private  organizations  as well  as  against the state. In almost
all Western  systems, the Constitution  generally  applies  to the government,  not to the
people  in  general.  This  is  extremely  important,  because  it recognizes  and helps  create a
private spbere-a civil society that operates independently of the state. It also  frees up  private
organizations-employers,  religious  organizations,  and  so  forth-to  act  as  they
choose.

If the  people  of Ukraine  want  to  apply  particular  constitutional  provisions  to
particular private organizations,  of course  they can  do so, through ordinary legislation.
But it is probably  a mistake to  apply such provisions  through  the constitution  itself.
Above all,  this  strategy works  to  erase the  distinction  between  the private and  public
spheres, in a way that may tend to defeat  Ukraine's  current aspirations.

II.  CHANGES TO CREATE A CONSTITUTION  RELIABLY
PROTECTING NEGATIVE  RIGHTS

In  this  section  I  make  suggestions  for  changes  in  the  human  rights  provisions.
These  suggestions  are in line with my general  remarks.  The goal is  to ensure  reliable
protection  of individual rights,  through legal  organs, and to help  facilitate  the creation

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  180 2000

Vo li  o.i

American Advice and New Constitutions

Sunstein

of a private sphere and a  market economy.

(a) Most important:  I  would  either (1) delete  the provisions  that create  positive
rights (e.g.,  to rest  and leisure, a maximum work week,  adequate  payment)  or (2) put
those  provisions  in  separate chapters,  making it clear that such  provisions  are  not for
judicial  enforcement.

There are many problems  with these positive rights. They appear to apply to the
private  sphere  as  well  as  government-a  genuine  disaster.  They  also  appear  to
threaten  the  new  market  economy,  by  requiring  governmental  involvement  in  areas
that  Ukraine  now  hopes  to  give  to  private  people  and  to  decentralized  economic
decisions.

For  example,  the  statement "all who  work conscientiously  have  the  right to  fair
and satisfactory remuneration,"  or that "Every person, without any discrimination, has
the right to equal pay for the same amount of work" (Article 49),  is,  in my view, a large
mistake. It is inconsistent  with a market economy, in which the government  does  not
supervise wages  to make sure that they are "fair." Wages are set by the market,  not by
government.

In any  case:  What  could  these  provisions  possibly mean,  in court,  or anywhere
else?  They sound like a general  aspiration  signifying nothing. So  too, there should not
be  a right to safe  working conditions  and protection  against unemployment-at  least
not  in the  Constitution  (see  above).  These  are  matters  for  ordinary legislation.  Not
everything  desirable  belongs  in  the  Constitution.  Much  of Articles  49  through  57
should therefore be deleted.

(b)  Along the same lines,  I would delete the right to rest; the right to an adequate
living standard;  the  right  to  medical  assistance;  and  the  right to  a  safe  environment.
Environmental  questions,  for  example,  involve  extremely  difficult  trade-offs  among
competing  social  goods:  environmental  quality,  economic  growth,  employment,
poverty,  and inflation.  Constitutional  protection of a "safe environment" might be (a)
too  vague to  mean  anything, (b)  impossible for  courts  to enforce,  or  (c)  an invitation
for judicial  involvement  in an  area  in which  they  cannot  be  helpful.  Here  as  well  as
elsewhere,  recognition  of a  constitutional right is  reminiscent  of the old Soviet model.
Also  a good  candidate  for deletion: Article  75, second to last sentence:  "Ownership is
socially oriented and must serve the interests of society."

(c)  Much  of Chapters  8  and  11  unnecessarily  puts  aspects  of the  "welfare state"
into the Constitution. Article  84, specifying what enterprises  are obliged to do, should
be  deleted.  (It's  a  duty, not a  right; this  Constitution  should  restrict  itself to  rights.)
Article  85  should  also  be deleted;  it belongs in  ordinary  legislation.  Article  87  states
broad  generalities  that  could  not  conceivably  have  meaning  in  court.  It  should  be
deleted.  I would delete Chapter 11  entirely.

As  an alternative,  there could  be a  different  section, entitled  "social  aspirations,"
containing  some  version  of these  chapters.  If this  were  done,  everyone  would  know

Spring 2000

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  181 2000

Chicago Journal of International Law

that aspirations  belong in  a separate  category from  rights. My  fear  is that the  current
version  of  the  Constitution-by  including  so  much  which 
is  not  plausibly
enforceable-could  damage all rights, including those that are otherwise  enforceable.

(d) If there is  to be a  section  on ecological  safety, it should consist, I believe,  of a
few  summary paragraphs.  Article  89  should be  deleted;  article  93,  by contrast,  seems
to be a good idea.

(e)  Article 97 contains  sex discrimination! It assumes that women will  always and
forever  be the  primary care-takers  of children.  This is  inconsistent  with Article  96.  I
would  encourage  you  to  change  the  word  "motherhood" to  the word  "parenthood,"
and change the word "mother" to the word "parent."

Sex  discrimination  is,  I  fear,  a  serious  threat  in  the  new  Eastern  European
democracies.  The  Constitution  should  not allow  it, must less  contain  it. I hope  that
we will be able to discuss this matter  in some detail.

(0 All provisions  that impose  "duties" on citizens  should, I think, be deleted (see
Articles  71  through  74).  What good do  these provisions  do?  These  duties,  as  stated,
are  legally  unenforceable.  Any  genuine  legal  duties  should  be  imposed  through
ordinary  law.  The  Constitution  is  the  place  to  guarantee  and  protect  rights,  not to
impose duties.

(g) Much  of the draft Constitution is written as if many of its provisions apply  to
all  private  and public  entities.  Some such  provisions  do  not refer  to  the  state  or  the
government  at  all,  thus  implying  that  they  apply  to  private  as  well  as  official
institutions.  See,  for  example,  the  right  to  rest, or  the  right  to  adequate  payment.  I
would  recommend  that  the Constitution  be  redrafted  to  make  it clear that the  basic
rights are guaranteed against government, not against private institutions. As it stands,
the Constitution, perversely, would require constant government  interference with the
market. At the present juncture, the Ukrainian  Constitution should not do this.

(h) The section on "enterprise"-an  excellent general idea!-should  probably  be
rewritten  to  carry  out, more  clearly  than  it now  does,  the  central  goal  of protecting
rights  of private  property  and  freedom  of contract. As  it stands,  this  section  is  a  bit
thin  on this point. There is  no  constitutional provision  at all for  freedom of contract.
Such  a section  might say:  'No  law shall impair  the obligations  of contracts." It might
include  some  of the  existing provisions  that are designed  to create "market freedoms."
This  is  a  separate  idea  from  (for  example)  political  liberties  of speech;  it  might  be
placed in this separate section. Such a section might include  a clear right to free choice
of occupation  and  to  a general  freedom  to  travel.  (Article  38  might  be insufficiently
protective.)

(i)  Some  of  the  religion  provisions  raise  hard  questions.  "No  one  may  be

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  182 2000

roof. iNo.i

American Advice  and New  Constitutions

Sunstein

exempted  from  discharging  one's  duties  toward  the  state  or  refuse  to  obey  laws  on
religious  grounds."  (Article  40).  This sounds  good,  but  in some  cases  an  exemption
might be required in the interest  of religious  liberty (e.g.,  from a Sunday  closing law).
Also,  it  is  not  clear  that  "the rousing  of hostility  and  hatred  on  religious  grounds"
should  be  "punishable  under  the  law"  (Article  40).  This  provision  might  stop  free
expression,  e.g., criticism of certain religious  theories and practices.  I hope that we will
be able to discuss this in some detail.

III.  THE CONSTITUTIONAL  COURT

The provisions relating to the constitutional court seem quite good. A few notes:

1. It  might  make  sense  to  specify  the  number  of judges  in  the  Constitution.  One
possibility  is  that  political  actors  will  manipulate  the  number  of judges  to  ensure
outcomes in accordance with prevailing political will.

2. The jurisdiction  of the Constitutional  Court  should  be spelled  out in  more  detail.
Some of this is specified  in chapter 20; but I am not entirely  clear on the matter.

(a)  Does  the  Constitutional  Court  have  advisory  duties,  or  do  its  powers

extend only to cases and controversies?  (I hope the latter.)

(b)  When  a  constitutional  issue  arises,  is  it  automatically  referred  to  the

Constitutional  Court?

(c)  Does  the Court have  discretion to refuse to hear cases raising trivial issues?

Perhaps  some of this can be specified in the Constitution.

CONCLUSION

Most generally, I suggest that the draft Constitution should  be rewritten  so as to
conform  more  closely  to  Ukraines  desire  to  create  firm  individual  rights.  The
Constitution  should  not  contain  everything  to  which  a  society  aspires.  It  should
contain  real  rights  that  real  courts  can  really  enforce.  Most  of my  comments  are
intended  to move the draft away  from the old Soviet model, which  did so little for the
people of Ukraine. Some of the draft draws too  much from that old model.

In  any case,  I am  extremely  grateful  to have an  opportunity to  comment on  the
draft  Constitution  at  such  an  extraordinary  time  in  Ukraines  history.  I  very  much
look forward to our meeting.

Spring 2000

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  183 2000

Chicago Journal of International Law

APPENDIX Two

MEMORANDUM

To:  Constitutional Working Group, Government of Ukraine

From:  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Karl N. Llewellyn  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  Law  School
and  Department  of  Political  Science,  University  of  Chicago;  Co-Director,
Center on Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, University of Chicago

Date:  March 9,  1992

Re:  Ukraine's Draft Constitution

Here  are  some  additional  comments  on  the  constitutional  draft.  I  might say  at
the outset that our meetings  were an  extraordinary  opportunity for me. It was also an
enormous  pleasure and honor to have a chance to discuss these issues  with you.

I  will  organize 

this  memorandum  by  beginning  with 

relatively  modest
suggestions  and ending with relatively  large ones. I restrict myself to the constitutional
court  and  basic  liberties  and  rights,  since  these  have  been  the  areas  on  which  I  was
asked to focus.

L  MODEST SUGGESTIONS

1.  The  human rights should  include  a separate provision  banning discrimination.  I
suggest  that Article  7,  sentence  two,  should be  inserted  in  Article  24,  after  current
sentence  1.  The  second  sentence  in  Article  24  should  be  deleted; 
it  invites
discrimination.

2.  There  should be  a distinct  provision, banning  discrimination  on the basis  of sex.
Article  55, sentences  2 and 3,  contains sex discrimination.  These provisions should be
deleted.  Article  97  also  includes  sex  discrimination.  It  would  be  best  to  say
"parenthood" rather  than "motherhood."  (This issue  may  seem  trivial  now.  It is  not
trivial.  It will not seem trivial in a generation, or even in a decade.)

3.  MOST IMPORTANT:  The various  "exceptions" and "restrictions" on rights  should
be  rewritten.  Some provisions  allow open-ended  restriction,  so long as  the restriction
occurs  through  'law." Some  provisions  do  not  contain  a  standard  for  restrictions.  I
know  that  your  intention  is  to  include  only  narrow  restrictions.  I  include  some
possible  examples for improvement in this regard.

I  would  change  Article  26  so  as  to  comply  with  the  European  Convention.  A
possible  new  Article  26  would  read:  "Any restrictions  of constitutional  rights  and
freedoms  shall  be  as  narrow  as  possible,  shall  be  proportionate,  and  shall  always  be

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  184 2000

American Advice  and New Constitutions

Sunstein

consistent  with  the  aims  of  a  democratic  order."  Some  other  wording  might  be
preferable. This is  only a suggestion,  needless to say.

Articles  34, 36,  37, and  39 should  allow invasion  only on a showing  of "probable
cause"  for  any  restriction.  This  would  be  easy  to  do;  simply  specify  that  the
government  must show "probable cause" to restrict these rights.

Article  34 should  require that the warrant be approved  by the court, not just the

procurator.

Article 41, second sentence, should read, "Any abridgement of this freedom must
be established by law, and must be necessary to avoid a clear and present danger to the
democratic  order or to the constitutional rights of other people."

Article 64, 5th sentence,  should read,  "A suspect  is under no obligation  to prove
his or her innocence and may be convicted  only after the government  has proved guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt."

4.  The  Constitution  does  not  dearly state  the  cases  in  which  the  Constitutional
Court  shall  issue  its  decisions.  This  should  be  spelled  out.  In  any  case  the  Court
should not be allowed to comment on laws before they are enacted.

5.  Part III,  chapter 4 is  an  odd mixture  of economic  FREEDOMS  (no forced  labor,
right  to  strike)  and  economic  ENTITLEMENTS  (unemployment  insurance,  medical
benefits,  safe  working  conditions).  At  the  very least,  there  should  be  one  section  on
economic  or  market  freedoms,  and  one  separate  section  on  economic  benefits  from
government.

6.  Article 44, second  sentence,  should be  deleted. There  should be  no requirement
of notice to the government  before a meeting or rally. This is potentially tyrannical.

7.  Some  constitutional  rights  should  be  explicitly  "entrenched"-that  is,  they
should  be  unamendable,  even  through  constitutional  means.  There  are  models  for
doing  this.  The  specific  unamendable  rights  might  include  freedom  of speech  and
religion,  freedom from  torture  and  cruel  punishment,  freedom  from  discrimination,
and several  others.

II.  MODERATE  SUGGESTIONS

1.  There  should be  stronger guarantees  of market freedom  or  economic liberties.  I
suggest  a separate section,  entitled "economic liberties." This would  include  what you
now  have:  general  economic  freedom  (Art. 48),  a prohibition  on  forced  labor  (Art.
52),  a  right  to  strike  (Art. 53),  a  prohibition  on  forced  appropriation  of property
without  compensation  (Art.  81),  and  freedom  of  enterprise  (Art.  82).  These
fundamental  liberties-so  crucial  to  economic  development-should  be reorganized
and put in the same section.

Sprint 2000

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  185 2000

Chicago Journal of International Law

I would add the following provisions.
(a)  Freedom of contract  is  guaranteed.  The state shall  not limit liberty  to  enter

(b)  The  government  may  not  assume  a  legal  monopoly  over  any  enterprise.  It

into contractual  arrangements.

must permit private competition.

(c)  People  have  a  right  of free  entry  into  businesses,  trades,  and  occupations.

The state shall not interfere with this right.

(d)  The  government  may  not  discriminate  against  private  enterprise.  It  must
permit private enterprise  to operate on the same  basis as public  enterprise.

2.  The Constitutional  Court  should be  available  to the individual  citizen. This is a
crucial  guarantee  of  liberty.  The  citizen  should  not  depend  on  some  government
official  to give him access  to the  Court. Thus I  suggest that an  Article 231  be  added,
saying:  "Any citizen  claiming that his  or her  constitutional  rights  have  been  violated
shall  have  access  to  the  Constitution  Court,  directly  or  by  appeal,  in  any  case  or
controversy."

3. 
I  suggest  that  the positive  rights  should  be  made  less  specific  and pared  down.
Instead  of a  right  to a 40 hour work week,  there  should be a  right to  rest and leisure.
Articles  49 and  51  are too  detailed  and specific;  they could  be reduced  to  one  or two
sentences.  Article  56,  second sentence,  should be deleted.  Articles  84  and 85  are  too
detailed  for  a  Constitution.  Article  87  is  inconsistent  with  a  market  economy,  and
should  be deleted.  Article 93  is  excellent, but  chapter  9  should  consist  of one  or two
brief, general sections.  It's  far too  detailed.  Articles  100  and  101  could consist just of
the  first sentence  of Article  100,  or perhaps  of that  sentence  plus  the first  clause  of
Article 101.

4. 
I  suggest  that  the  positive  rights  should  be  placed  in  a  separate  section  and
treated  as judicially  unenforceable  obligations  of the legislature.  If it  remains  as  is,  it
could endanger the Constitution in general, by making it less enforceable.

5.  There  should  be  a  set  of provisions  for  conditions  of emergency.  This  should
specify the rights that are at risk and the rights that are not at risk under conditions  of
emergency.

III.  LARGE  SUGGESTIONS

1.  All duties should  be deleted. The Constitution  is the place for rights, not duties.
This would entail eliminating Part III, chapter  6.

2. 
It  might  well  be  best  to  eliminate  all  positive  rights,  and  all  general  social
aspirations.  Positive  rights  and  social  aspirations  are  the  defining  characteristic  of
Soviet-style  constitutionalism.  They  tend  to  turn  a  constitution  into  something  not

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  186 2000

r.ot 1 No.  i

American Advice  and New Constitutions

$unstein

worth  the paper  on which it is written.  I realize that this is  a  controversial  matter and
have  therefore suggested more moderate  possibilities  above.

3.  The Constitutional  Court should basically  be available  to individual citizens. It is
dangerous  to  give  the  Court  the  power  to  issue  advisory  opinions  at  the  behest  of
government  or  legislative  officials-dangerous  because  this  tends  to  compromise
judicial independence.  (If the judges  are communicating  closely with the executive and
the  legislature,  they  may well  become  its  allies.)  But  if the  Court is  to  issue advisory
opinions, the circumstances  should be specifically  set out.

4.  The Constitution  should, for the most part, be a barrier to acts  of public officials,
not  to  acts  of  private  people.  Most  Western  Constitutions  are  applicable  to
government.  Private people,  including private  companies, can  do as  they wish,  subject
only  to  ordinary law.  This  is  an  important  aspect  of democratic  liberty, and  it helps
promote economic prosperity as well, by freeing civil society from legal regulation.

I  strongly  encourage  you  to go  through this  draft  and  to make  most provisions
into  barriers  to  government  action,  rather  than to private  action  as  well. This  would
be  easy  to do.  It would  simply entail  a review  of the human  rights  provisions,  and  a
minor linguistic  change to say that "public officials" may not invade certain rights.

I very much  hope that these  comments  are helpful.  And I would  be delighted to

continue  to consult with you during this extraordinary  period in Ukraine's history.

Spring 2000

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  187 2000

CJIL

i88

HeinOnline  -- 1 Chi. J. Int'l. L.  188 2000

