Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2000

Statistics, Not Experts
Cass R. Sunstein

William Meadow

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein & William Meadow, "Statistics, Not Experts" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 109,
2000).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O  

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 109 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS 

William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: 
http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Publications/Working/index.html 
 
The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 

http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=252824  
 

 
 

 

1  

Preliminary draft 11/20/00 
all rights reserved 
 

Statistics, Not Experts 
 
William Meadow* and Cass R. Sunstein** 
 
 
Abstract 

 
 
The  legal  system  should  rely  much  more  than  it  now  does  on  statistical  evidence.  It 
should be cautious about the judgments of experts, who make predictable cognitive errors. Like 
everyone else, experts have a tendency to blunder about risk, a point that has been shown to hold 
for  doctors,  whose  predictions  significantly  err  in  the  direction  of  optimism.  We  present  new 
evidence that individual   doctors' judgments about the ordinary standard of care are incorrect 
and  excessively  optimistic.  We  also  show  how  this  evidence  bears  on  legal  determinations  of 
negligence, by doctors and others.  
 
 

I. 

Introduction 

Trials  frequently  raise  questions  that  call  for  expert  intervention.  Experts  are  asked  to 
answer  a  range  of  questions  about  what  people,  or  professionals,  ordinarily  do.  If  a  doctor  is 
accused  of  negligence,  for  example,  it  is  necessary  to  know  about  the  customary  practice  of 
doctors. Of course negligence judgments depend,  at least in part, on an assessment of ordinary 
practice.1 But how is ordinary practice assessed? 
 

The  basic  answer  is  that  the  assessment  comes  via  statements  from  expert  witnesses, 
describing  the  ordinary  practice.2  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  experts  know  a  great  deal  about 
topics  on  which  ordinary  people  lack  information.  But  experts,  no  less  than  other  people,  are 
subject  to  predictable  biases.3  Their  judgments  about  probability  are  affected    by  the  same 
heuristics and biases to which most people are subject, even if (and this is a disputed question) 
expertise tends to reduce the most serious errors. Our basic proposal here is that the legal system 
should rely, much more than it now does, on statistical data about doctors’ performance, rather 
than  the  opinions  of  experts  about  doctors’  performance.  For  the  first  time,  it  is  becoming 
possible  for  law  to  rely  on  this  evidence,  precisely  because  such  evidence  is  becoming 
                                                 
* Associate Professor, Pediatrics; Associate Director, Neonatology, Assistant Director, MacLean Center for Clinical 
Medical Ethics, The University of Chicago 
** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political 
Science, University of Chicago. 
1 There is a dispute about the extent to which ordinary practice is determinative. For the classic case, see The T.J. 
Hooper, 60 F.2d 737 (2d Cir. 1932). 
2 We build on existing law here, without intending to enter into debates about the extent to which law should simply 
incorporate, or instead sometimes improve on, the existing standard of care.  On any view, the customary practice is 
relevant, and that is sufficient for our purposes here. 
3 See Jonathan Baron, Thinking and Deciding (2d ed 1994). 

 

 

1  

increasingly  available.  If our argument is convincing in the medical context, it should apply  in 
many  other  settings  in  which  experts  are  asked  to  testify  about  negligence  or  deviations  from  
ordinary  practices.    In  many  settings,  the  fallible  opinions  of  isolated  experts  should  be 
supplemented  or  replaced    with  statistical data. A step of this sort would dramatically increase 
the sense and rationality of tort law. 
 

Our proposal rests partly on the claim that the use of statistical data will greatly simplify 
litigation  and  reduce  the  role of strategic behavior in the litigation process.4 Battles of isolated 
experts should be easier to mediate when there is a large pool of evidence on which to draw. But 
our larger claim is that by using statistical data, the legal system will reach much more accurate 
results. If the law is seeking the standard of care, it should not depend on fallible memories and 
recollections  of  local  experiences;  it  should  draw  instead  on  more  global  evidence  of  the  kind 
that is now increasingly available for use in court.  
 

II. 

Excessive Optimism About Risks: In General 

 
 
It is now well-known that most normal people tend to be risk optimists, in the sense that 
they  believe  themselves  to  be  relatively immune from risks that are faced by similarly situated 
others.5  This  is  one  of  the  most  robust  findings  in  social  psychology.  For  example,  90%  of 
drivers  believe  that  they  are  safer  than  most  drivers  and  less  likely  to  be  involved  in  a  serious 
accident.6  Most  people  believe  that  they  are  distinctly  unlikely  to  be  subject  to  various  risks, 
such  as  cancer,  heart  disease,  and  divorce.7  Smokers  appear  to  know  the  statistical  risk  of 
smoking8;  but  they  believe  that  they  are  less  likely  than  most  smokers  to  fall  victim  to  the 
various  risks.  In  one  study,  less  than  half  of  smokers  believed  that  they  have  a  higher-than-
average  risk  of  cancer  or  cardiovascular  disease;  indeed,  most  heavy  smokers  (over  forty 
cigarettes per day) believe that they are not at any increased risk.9   
 
 
Only one group of people does not show a tendency to excessive optimism: the clinically 
depressed.10 It would be natural to infer that though unrealistic optimism makes for erroneous 
predictions about outcomes, it is on balance adaptive, especially insofar as an optimistic attitude 
increases  the  probability  of  a  good  outcome  and  otherwise  creates  hedonic  benefits.11 

                                                 
4 Some of the data here is discussed, from a different angle, in William Meadow et al.,  Ought 'standard care' be the 
'standard of care'?  A study of the time to administration of antibiotics in children with meningitis, 147  Am J Dis 
Child 40 (1993). 
5 Neil D. Weinstein, Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events, 39 J. Personality & Soc. Psych. 806 (1980).  
 
6 See Shelley Taylor, Positive Illusions 10 (1989). 
7 See Weinstein, supra note. 
8 See W. Kip Viscusi, Smoking (1991). 
9 John Ayanian and Paul Cleary, Perceived Risks of Cancer and Heart Disease Among Cigarette Smokers, 281 
JAMA 1019 (1999). 
10 See Taylor, supra note. 
11 This is the thesis of id.; see also the discussion of the self-fulfilling prophecy in Nicholas Christakis, Death 
Foretold: Prophecy and Prognosis in Medical Care 135-62 (2000).  

 

2  

Alternatively, it might be thought that some social settings would work against optimistic bias. In 
markets, for example, entrepreneurs might have an incentive toward realism, especially because 
market  pressures,  it  might  be  expected,  would  punish,  and  drive  out,  those  who  are 
unrealistically optimistic. Perhaps markets do move people toward realism; but entrepreneurs, no 
less than anyone else, have been shown to suffer from unrealistic optimism.12 One might intuit 
that  those  with  specialized  knowledge  are  less  prone  to  this  effect.  This  appears  not  to  be  the 
case.  It has almost universally been found that physicians, no less than others, have a substantial 
tendency to err in predicting outcomes. Most often the errors  are in the direction of optimism. 
 

"Virtually all" of the existing studies of physicians "have documented frequent and large 
errors  in  predictions."13  No  study  finds  a  high  level  of  accuracy.  And  the  errors  tend  in  a 
particular direction: "physicians are prone to an optimistic bias."14   As an example, a study in 
1972 showed that in making predictions about length of survival for cancer patients, only 47% of 
the physicians provided prognoses that were even roughly accurate, and  80-90% of the mistakes 
were  excessively  optimistic.15  A  subsequent  study, conducted in 1987, found overestimates  of 
survival  time  in  88%  of  the  cases,  by  roughly  a  factor  of  three.16  A  recent,  large-scale  study  
found  inaccurate  predictions  in  80%  of  cases,  with  63%  of  these  showing  overestimates.17 
Interestingly,  patient  characteristics  (age,  race,  sex,  illness  duration)  were  not  correlated  with 
inaccurate, optimistic estimates, but one factor was: "the better the doctor knew the patient - as 
measured, for example, by the length and intensity of their contact - the more likely the doctor 
was to err in the prognosis, most frequently by overestimating survival."18 The overall picture is 
that in cases involving cancer patients, physicians accurately predict survival only 10% to 30% 
of the time, and the rest of the time they overestimate  survival by a factor of two to five.19  

 
All of this is highly suggestive, but not decisive, with respect to the particular point that 
we  mean  to  investigate  here:  whether  experts  make  erroneous  judgments  about  the  ordinary 
standard  of  medical  care,  and  whether  the  errors  go  in  a  predictable    direction.  It  would  be 
plausible  to  think  that  the  general  tendency  toward  optimism  would  affect  those  judgments  as 
well; but it would also be possible to imagine that (a) doctors’ predictions about their patients’ 
prospects  are  systematically  overoptimistic,  but  (b)  doctors  have  an  accurate  sense  of  what  is 
ordinarily done by themselves and other doctors.  If there is no systematic error with respect to 
(b), there would be little need to substitute data for experts. We now offer the first real evidence 
on that question.  
 
 
                                                 
12 See K. MacCrimmon and D. Wehrung, Taking Risks (1986); Daniel Kahneman and Dan Lovallo, Timid 
Choicers and Bold Forecasts: A Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking, 39 Management Science 17 (1993). 
13 See Christakis, supra note, at 66. 
14 Id. 
15 Id. at 66. 
16 Id. at 66-67. 
17 Id. at 67. 
18 Id. at 67-68. 
19 Id. at 68. 

 

3  

III. Standard of Care: Experts vs. Data 

 
 
We now summarize some of our own evidence that doctors err with respect to ordinary 
conduct in their own fields. As expected, the apparent basis for the magnitude and direction of 
these errors is optimistic bias. 
 

A. Bacterial Meningitis 

Consider the problem of bacterial meningitis in children.  For the purposes of the current 
discussion, it is necessary to know only three things about that problem. Bacterial meningitis is 
an infection of the brain; it can (usually) be treated with antibiotics; as a general rule, the sooner 
the antibiotics are started, the better the outcome will be. 
 
 
In medical malpractice cases, the question often arises whether treatment of a particular 
child  was  unduly  "delayed."  Of  course  a  key  issue  is  how  a  legal  decision-maker  would  know 
what kind of delay counts as "undue." For obvious reasons, juries are assumed to be ignorant of 
the medical facts in such cases, and consequently are instructed to rely on the testimony of expert 
witnesses.  The instruction that jurors should rely on expert opinions for their knowledge about 
the  standard  of  medical  care  answers  one  question,  but  it  raises  another  --  on  what  should  the 
experts themselves rely? 
 
 
In the traditional formulation, experts themselves are instructed to rely on their personal 
"knowledge and training." But for reasons given above, such admonitions raise many problems. 
In the context at hand, it would be reasonable to predict that experts would tend to be excessively 
optimistic  –  that  their  recollections  of  the  time  that  antibiotics  are  initiated  in  children  with 
meningitis  would  be  tilted  toward  shorter  values  than  actually  occurred.    And  if  so,  experts, 
relying on their "knowledge and training," will provide inaccurate accounts of behavior.  
 
 
We  tested  this  hypothesis  directly,  by  surveying  two  groups  of  pediatric  experts  about 
their  estimates  of  timing  of  antibiotic  administration  in  children  who  present  with  bacterial 
meningitis (ABTIME), and subsequently comparing these estimates to actual data obtained from 
real cases of meningitis.  We began by identifying 54 experts in pediatric emergency medicine 
who  were  attending  a  national  meeting  of  their  subspecialty  (most  children  with  bacterial 
meningitis  present  to  the  emergency  room,  where  they  receive  their  initial  medical  care).    We 
asked each of these experts to give us their estimate of the average time that would elapse from 
arrival  of  a  child with meningitis in their emergency room to the start of antibiotic therapy  for 
that  child.  The  average  estimate  of  these  experts  was  56  minutes  --  95%  of  these  experts' 
opinions fell within the range between 20 - 120 minutes.    
 

We then posed precisely the same question to another group, consisting of 23 experts in 
the field of pediatric infectious diseases (the subspecialty with most experience in the care and 
treatment  of  meningitis  for  children  after  admission  to  the  hospital).    The  average  estimate  of 
ABTIME offered by pediatric infectious disease experts was 87 minutes, slightly more than 50% 
longer than the intuitions of the experts in emergency medicine.   
 

 

 

4  

Moreover, and most importantly, the opinions of both of these groups of potential expert 
 
witnesses were wrong, and wrong by a large margin. We compared both of these distributions of 
expert opinion to actual times, determined on the basis of a review of 93 cases of children with 
meningitis seen at two university medical centers in Chicago.  The average value of ABTIME for 
these 93 children was 120 minutes, with 95% of cases falling in the interval between 30 to 240 
minutes.  When the medical literature was reviewed in an attempt to extend these observations of 
actual  ABTIME,  200  reported  cases  of  children  with  meningitis  were  found  from  hospitals  in 
South  Carolina  and  California,  with  an  average  time  comparable  to  those  observed  at  our 
Chicago hospitals (median 114-126 minutes). The following table captures the differences: 
 

Variations between Expert Opinions and Data-based Observations for ABTIME 
 
ID Experts 
 
56 minutes 
 

 
 
ER Experts  Chicago Hospitals  SC and CA Hospitals   
 
 
 
87 minutes 
 
 

 
120 Minutes 
 

 
120 minutes 
 

 

 

 
 
Whatever "expert" opinion means in this context, it does not mean an accurate opinion. 
 
Both groups of potential pediatric experts were simply wrong in their opinions about the time to 
begin  antibiotics  in  children  with  meningitis.  The  77  expert  estimates  of  ABTIME  were 
significantly shorter than the 293 actual determinations of ABTIME to a probability of less than 
1  part  in  1000.    In  addition,  the  inaccuracy  noted  in  the  estimates  was  consistent  with  our 
hypothesis: responses were biased toward the outcome perceived to be 'desired', that is, shorter 
waiting periods. 
 
 
Others, in varying contexts, have demonstrated a similar disconnect between physicians' 
description  of  their  own  practices  and  "objective"  determinations  of  the  same  behavior.    As 
examples,  consider  patient  education  by  physicians  in  general  practice.    Physicians  are 
committed  to  the  value  of  patient  education,20  and  spend  up  to  25%  of  their  office  time 
counseling  patients.21  Clearly,  the  desired  practice  is  to  spend  this  time  explicitly  informing 
patients about health-related behaviors, such as the uncontested virtues of smoking cessation and 
preventive  oncology.    Nevertheless,  when  physicians'  reports  of  their  office  practices  are 
compared  with  taped  interviews  of  these  same  encounters,  there  is  only  a  weak,  insignificant 
correlation between the self-reported patient education activities and the actual performance .22 
Not  surprisingly,  physician's  recollection  err  in  the  predicted  direction;  that  is  more  explicit 
counseling is recalled than actually occurred. 
 
                                                 
20 H Wechsler  et al., The physician's role in health promotion -- a survey of primary-care practitioners., 308 N Engl 
J Med. 97 (1983); T.E. Kottke et al., Attributes of successful smoking cessation interventions in medical practice. A 
meta-analysis of 39 controlled trials, 259 JAMA 2883 (1988).  
21 C.T. Orleans et al., Health promotion in primary care: a survey of US family practitioners,  14 Prev Med 636 
(1985). 
22 See id; see also J.E. Davis et al, Cancer prevention and screening activities in primary care practice, 16 Prev 
Med. 277 (1987). 
 

 

5  

Once  again,  our  fears  are  confirmed  ---  we  expect  anecdotal  recall  to  be  inaccurate, 
 
biased, and inevitably, systematically imperfect, and we find it to be so. If, as the psychological 
evidence suggests, our findings here are the rule and not the exception, it is hardly clear that the 
law should continue to base a system of medical-legal jurisprudence on such a shaky foundation. 
 

B. The Proposal 

Of  course  the  evidence  that  we  have  offered  here  is  suggestive  rather    than exhaustive. 
Perhaps  there  are  contexts  in  which  doctors,  or  other  experts,  have  an  accurate  sense  of  the 
ordinary  standard  of  care.  But  we  believe  that  general  evidence  of  error,  together  with  the 
particular evidence introduced here, is sufficient to show that both error and optimism are highly 
likely  to  infect  a  wide  range  of  expert  testimony.23  This  point  operates  independently  of  the 
ordinary  incentives,  in  an  adversary  system,  to  assist  one’s  own  side,  whatever  it  may  be.24  It 
therefore  makes  sense  to  move  toward  greater  reliance  on  data,  and  less  reliance  on  the 
recollections of isolated experts, certainly in the context of malpractice suits, and probably more 
generally.  Until  recently,  the  legal  system  has  been  unable  to  rely  on  statistical  data  for  the 
simple reason that it has not existed.  But it is increasingly common to develop data sets about 
physician choices and behavior, and the legal system will have an increasingly large amount of 
information on which to draw. 

 
Our  proposal  would  have  two  large  advantages.  First,  it  would  simply  the  task  of 
discerning  the  truth. It is now exceedingly difficult for juries to decide whether one or another 
expert  has  adequately  captured  general  experience.  This  issue  may  well  turn  on  unreliable 
judgments about credibility or on sympathy, not relevant to the standard of care issue, for one or 
another  side.  Second,  and  more important, use of statistical evidence would inevitably increase 
accuracy,  reflecting  the  comparative  advantage  of  pooled  data  over  individual  recollections. 
There is no good reason for courts to continue to rely on the latter when they have access to the 
former. 
 

III. 

Problems and Counter-arguments 

 
A. Statistical Error? 

 
 
Our proposal might be criticized on the ground that statistical analysis is itself subject to 
error. Of course there can be no assurance that any particular account of relevant data is correct.  
If this is so, it might be objected, the use of statistical evidence will merely be the beginning of a 
continuing battle among imperfectly reliable experts. How much would be gained by that? 
 

This objection has a degree of truth, but rather than impeaching our proposal, it suggests 
the  need  to  develop  good  methods  for  evaluating  any  particular  claim  about  what  the  data 
establishes. There is no escaping tests of the data in the ordinary way, through the presentation of 
conflicting views, including that of experts.  Data might be met with data; it might also be met 
with a professional critique. And of course it is possible that an individual expert will be able to 

                                                 
23 See Kahneman and Lovallo, supra note. 
24 See Linda Babcock, Self-Serving Bias, in Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). 

 

 

6  

show, persuasively,  that data does not establish what it claims.  These sorts of disputes can  be 
handled in the standard fashion.  What we are suggesting here is that because individual experts 
are  distinctly  prone  to  error,  it  would  be  far  better  to  begin  the  process  with  reliable  evidence 
rather  than  particular  recollection.    If  individual  experts  can  show  that  the  statistical  data  are 
wrong, the legal system will be better off for the demonstration. But in the long run, we predict, 
these demonstrations will be the exception rather than the rule. 
 

B. Admissibility: Relevance and Hearsay 

Statistical  data  are  not  typically  used  in  negligence  cases.  In  fact  the  legal  system  is 
uncomfortable  with  the  use  of  such  data.  They  might  be  excluded,  as  inadmissible,  on  several 
grounds. 
 
It is possible to object that statistical data are not relevant, because they cannot determine 
the proper standard of care. In many states, there is a continuing dispute about the proper role of 
common  practice  in  negligence  cases.  Where  common  practice  is  not  determinative  of  the 
standard  of  care,25 the data cannot resolve the legal issue. Some courts have suggested that  in 
such  circumstances,  the  data  should  be  inadmissible  on  grounds  of  irrelevance.  But  this  is  a 
mistake.  Even  when  common  practice  is  not  determinative,  it  is  pertinent,  as  reflected    by  the 
very  fact  that  experts  frequently  are  allowed  to  testify  about  what  most  doctors  do.  Statistical 
data should be found admissible for the same reason that expert testimony is admissible. 

 
It  might  also  be  thought  that  statistical  data  should  be  seen  as  hearsay.  Perhaps  the 
witness  seeking  to  introduce  hearsay  evidence  is  attempting  to  say  what  others  have  said,  and 
perhaps  these  violate  the  prohibition  on  admitting  materials  of  that  sort.26  But  this  is  a 
misreading  of  the  hearsay  rules.  Under  federal  law,  experts  are  allowed  to  rely  on  “statements  
contained in published treatises, periodicals, or pamphlets on a  subject of history, medicine, or 
other  science  or  art,  established  by  the  testimony  or  admission  of  the  witness  or  by  other 
testimony or by judicial notice.”27 Federal rules also allow experts to base opinions on facts and 
data of the kind reasonably used by experts in the field when they form opinions or inferences.28  
Statistical data, if published, should be permitted under the first rule just quoted; if unpublished, 
they should be admissible to the extent that they are of the sort reasonably relied on by experts. 
The conclusion is that data should not be treated as inadmissible hearsay. 

 

C. Textbooks? 

 
Perhaps  there  are  alternatives,  other  than  reliance  on  statistical  data,  to  the  problem  of  
idiosyncratic  recollections  of  individual  experts.      One  possible  view  is  that  the  opinions  of 

                                                 
25 See, e.g., Advincula v. United Blood Services, 678 Need 1009 (1996);  Darling v. Charleston Community 
Memorial Hosp., 211 NE2d 253 (1965);  Roach v. Springfield Clinic, 1992 Ill. LEXIS 204 (1992). 
26 See Schrag v. Chicago City, 265 Ill. 338 *1914); People v., Anderson, 113 Il 2d 1 (1986). 
27 Fed. R. Evid. 803(18). 
28 Fed. R. Evid. 703, 705.  But see the puzzling ruling in Roach v. Springfield Clinic, 1992 Ill. LEXIS 204 (1992), 
refusing to allow references to treatises on the ground that their authors are not available for cross-examination. This 
seems to us an anachronistic and odd reading of the prohibition on hearsay. 

 

 

7  

experts, as codified in textbooks or journal publications, should define the standard of care .  By 
this view, when actual practices differ from the theoretical or recommended standards, it is the 
practitioners  who  are at  fault.  They may not know the standard, may disagree with it, or have 
misinterpreted it, but the burden of proof falls on the practitioners. 

 
 
We  believe  that  this  approach  is  oversimplified  and  misguided.    Under  the  law,  the 
ordinary practice is important for its own sake, whether or not it is decisive. Unless a textbook is 
actually based  on ordinary practice, it will not report it reliably. If courts are going to consider 
the ordinary practice, they should have an accurate understanding of what it is.  
 

Perhaps  the  textbook  or  journal  can  state  a  recommendation,  one  that  is  worth 
considering  even  if  it  does  not  capture  ordinary  practice.  This  is  not  implausible.  But 
interpretation  of  the  recommended  standards  (as  expressed,  for  example,  for  AB-TIME  in 
authoritative  texts)  is  not  always  straightforward,  and  one  can  rarely  find  authoritative 
interpretations of authoritative texts.   In the particular case of bacterial meningitis,  what, in the 
minds of a lay jury, is a reasonable interpretation of textbook recommendations that antibiotics 
should  be  administered  “promptly,”29  “immediately,”30  or  “at  the  earliest  possible  time”31  to 
children with suspected meningitis.  In such a context is 30 minutes too long, - - is one hour, six 
hours?  The recommendation in one text that antibiotics be administered “within 30 minutes after 
the  diagnosis  of  meningitis  is  established”32  does  little  to  resolve  the  question,  as  the  issue 
promptly    arises  -  -  when  exactly  is  the  diagnosis  of  meningitis  established?  If  the  question  is 
what do doctors do, it would be far better to rely on actual data about physician performance. 
 

Conclusion 

 
We  have  suggested  here  that  there  is  general  reason  to  believe  that  expert  judgments 
 
about the standard of medical care will be erroneous, and that the errors will run in a predictable 
direction.  The usual reason is optimistic bias, as people tend to believe that things can be done 
more  easily,  more  rapidly,  and  more  successfully  than  the  evidence  suggests.  To  establish  this 
claim, we have drawn on existing evidence, highly suggestive on this point, and more particular 
evidence, presented here, of mistaken reports with respect to standard of care. 
 
 
Our  principal  innovation  has  been  to  suggest  that  in  light  of  the  evident  mismatch 
between expert recollections and empirical reality, the legal system should rely, wherever it can, 
not  on  the  former  but  on  statistical  evidence  of  the  latter.  The  best  reason  for  reliance  on 
individual  recollections  has  been  an  absence  of  statistical  evidence;  but  this  is  a  gap  that  is 
rapidly being filled, and that is likely, in the next generation, to be replaced with a great deal of 
reliable  information.  Our  emphasis  has  been  on  the  question  of  medical  malpractice,  but  the 
general  implication  is  far  broader:  In  any  case  in  which  a  disputed  question  calls  for  expert 
testimony  about  ordinary  practice,  it  is  hazardous  to  rely on what particular experts recall,  and 
far more sensible to make the outcome turn on statistical evidence, at least if the goal is accuracy 
in adjudication.   

                                                 
29 See R.D. Feign et al., Textbook on Pediatric Infectious Disease (Saunders 1981). 
30 See W.E. Nelson et al., Textbook of Pediatrics (13d ed. 1987). 
31 A.M. Rudolph, Pediatrics (1977). 
32 See G.L. Mandell et al.,  Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases (1979). 

 

8  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Dr. William L. Meadow 
Department of Pediatrics 
University of Chicago Children’s Hospital  
C684, MC 6060 
5839 South Maryland Avenue 
Chicago, IL  60637 
WLM1@midway.uchicago.edu 

Cass R. Sunstein 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence 
Law School and Department of Political Science 
University of Chicago 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 

 

 
 
 
 

 

9  

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 
 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An 
Economic Approach (July 1991). 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of 
Tort (August 1991). 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991). 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992). 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992). 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992). 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992). 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992). 
William  M.  Landes  &  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Influence  of  Economics  on  Law:  A  Quantitative 
Study (August 1992). 
Alan  O.  Sykes,  The  Welfare  Economics  of  Immigration  Law:  A  Theoretical  Survey  With  An 
Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992). 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial 
Japan (March 1993). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993). 
Richard  A.  Posner,  What  Do  Judges  and  Justices  Maximize?  (The  Same  Thing  Everyone  Else 
Does) (April 1993). 
Lucian  Arye  Bebchuk  and  Randal  C.  Picker,  Bankruptcy  Rules,  Managerial  Entrenchment,  and 
Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main 
Bank System (August 1993). 
William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economics  of  Anticipatory  Adjudication 
(September 1993). 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993). 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993). 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994). 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994). 
William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994). 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994). 
Kenneth  W.  Dam,  Some  Economic  Considerations  in  the  Intellectual  Property  Protection  of 
Software (August 1994). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994). 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994). 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption 
(January 1995). 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995). 
Daniel  Kessler,  Thomas  Meites,  and  Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Explaining  Deviations  from  the  Fifty 
Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995). 

10  

1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31. 

 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 

36. 
37. 

38. 

39. 
40. 

41. 

42. 
43. 

44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

53.  

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 

59. 

 

Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 
1995). 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995). 
Kenneth  W.  Dam,  Intellectual  Property  in  an  Age  of  Software  and  Biotechnology  (November 
1995). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996). 
J.  Mark  Ramseyer  and  Eric  B.  Rasmusen,  Judicial  Independence  in  Civil  Law  Regimes: 
Econometrics from Japan (January 1996). 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  Transaction  Costs  and  Property  Rights:  Or  Do  Good  Fences  Make  Good 
Neighbors? (March 1996). 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996). 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership 
of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996). 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  and  David  B.  Mustard,  Crime,  Deterrence,  and  Right-to-Carry  Concealed 
Handguns (August 1996). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996). 
G.  Baird,  The  Hidden  Virtues  of  Chapter  11:  An  Overview  of  the  Law  and  Economics  of 
Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997). 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997). 
William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997). 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  and  Kermit  Daniel,  Term  Limits  and  Electoral  Competitiveness:  Evidence  from 
California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997). 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of 
Norms (June 1997). 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  Contracts  Small  and  Contracts  Large:  Contract  Law  through  the  Lens  of 
Laissez-Faire (August 1997).  
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  and  David  Schkade,  Assessing  Punitive  Damages  (with 
Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997).  
William  M.  Landes,  Lawrence  Lessig,  and  Michael  E.  Solimine,  Judicial  Influence:  A  Citation 
Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998).  
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  A  Simple  Explanation  for  Why  Campaign  Expenditures  are  Increasing:  The 
Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998).  
Richard  A.  Posner,  Values  and  Consequences:  An  Introduction  to  Economic  Analysis  of  Law 
(March 1998).  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better 
Citizens? (April 1998).  
Christine  Jolls,  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  and  Richard  Thaler,  A  Behavioral  Approach  to  Law  and 
Economics (May 1998). 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  Does  a  Helping  Hand  Put  Others  At  Risk?:  Affirmative  Action,  Police 
Departments, and Crime (May 1998). 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998). 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm 
Value,  and  the  Impact  of  Supreme  Court  and  Congressional  Attempts  to  Limit  Awards  (July 
1998). 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998). 

11  

60. 

61. 
62. 
63. 

64. 
65. 

66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 

70. 
71. 

72. 
73. 

74. 

75. 
76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 

81. 

82. 
83. 

84. 
85. 
86. 

87. 

88. 

 

John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  How  Dramatically  Did  Women’s  Suffrage  Change  the  Size  and  Scope  of 
Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) 
Jack  L.  Goldsmith  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  A  Theory  of  Customary  International  Law  (November 
1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Private  Broadcasters  and  the  Public  Interest:  Notes  Toward  A  “Third  Way” 
(January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) 
Gertrud  M.  Fremling  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  Status  Signaling  and  the  Law,  with  Particular 
Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan  M.  Karpoff,  John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  and  Graeme  Rankine,  Environmental  Violations,  Legal 
Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 
Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-
to-Carry  Concealed  Handgun  Laws:  Contrasting  Private  and  Public  Law  Enforcement  (April 
1999)  
Lisa  Bernstein,  The  Questionable  Empirical  Basis  of  Article  2’s  Incorporation  Strategy:  A 
Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) 
William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 
1999) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  David  Schkade,  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Do  People  Want  Optimal  Deterrence? 
(June 1999) 
Tomas  J.  Philipson  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Long-Run  Growth  in  Obesity  as  a  Function  of 
Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric  A.  Posner,  A  Theory  of  Contract  Law  under  Conditions  of  Radical  Judicial  Error  (August 
1999) 
Kahneman, 
David 
Are  Juries  Less  Erratic  than  Individuals?  Deliberation,  Polarization,  and  Punitive  Damages 
(September 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law 
and Economics (September 1999) 
Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case 
of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 
Gertrud  M.  Fremling  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  Market  Signaling  of  Personal  Characteristics 
(November 1999) 
Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are 
Distorted (November 1999) 

Sunstein, 

Schkade, 

Daniel 

Cass 

and 

R. 

12  

94. 

96. 

95. 

90. 

89. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

Richard  A.  Posner,  Orwell  versus  Huxley:  Economics,  Technology,  Privacy,  and  Satire 
(November 1999) 
David  A.  Weisbach,  Should  the  Tax  Law  Require  Current  Accrual  of  Interest  on  Derivative 
Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen  Eggleston,  Eric  A.  Posner,  and  Richard  Zeckhauser,  Simplicity  and  Complexity  in 
Contracts (January 2000)  
Douglas  G.  Baird  and  Robert  K.  Rasmussen,  Boyd’s  Legacy  and  Blackstone’s  Ghost  (February 
2000)  
David  Schkade,  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  Deliberating  about  Dollars:  The  Severity 
Shift (February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference 
to Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  

97. 
98. 
99. 
100. 
101.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 

Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  
Jack  Goldsmith  and  Alan  Sykes,    The  Dormant  Commerce  Clause  and  the  Internet  (November 
2000) 
Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
Douglas  Lichtman,  Scott  Baker,  and  Kate  Kraus,  Strategic  Disclosure  in  the  Patent  System 
(November 2000) 
Jack  L.  Goldsmith  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  Moral  and  Legal  Rhetoric  in  International  Relations:    A 
Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 

106. 
107. 

108. 

109.  William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
 

 

13  

