University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2000 

Group Dynamics 
Group Dynamics 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Group Dynamics," 12 Cardozo Studies in Law and Literature 129 (2000). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Group Dynamics

Cass  R. Sunstein

My goal here  is to  cast some  light on  a particular puzzle.  Why  did the
overwhelming  majority  of  Republicans  -
representatives  and  citizens
alike  -
support  the  impeachment  of President  Clinton?  Why  did  the
overwhelming  majority  of Democrats  -
inside  and  outside  of Congress
-
oppose  impeachment?  Consider  some  remarkable  numbers.  In  the
House  of  Representatives,  223  of 228  Republicans,  or  98%,  voted  for
impeachment  on  at  least  one  count,  whereas  five  of 206  Democrats,  or
2%,  voted  for  impeachment  on  at  least  one  count.  In  the  Senate,  51  of
55  Republicans,  or  93%,  voted  to  remove  the  President  from  office,
whereas  0  of 45  Democrats,  or 0%,  voted  to  remove  the  President  from
office.  Within  the  citizenry,  there  also  were  exceedingly  sharp  divisions,
with  the  vast majority  of Democrats  believing  that  impeachment  would
be  a  mistake,  and  the  vast  majority  of Republicans  believing  exactly  the
opposite.  (Independents  typically  opposed impeachment  and helped  pro-
duce  the large  anti-impeachment  numbers  among the public as  a whole.)
What  accounts  for  this  difference?

It is far too  simple  to say  that one group was right  and another wrong
(though I  believe  that  this  is  true').  Whatever  the  appropriate  stance  on
the impeachment  question,  it simply  defies  belief to  suggest  that  this pat-
tern  of judgments  is  what  one  would  expect  if each  person,  whether
ordinary  citizen  or  legislator,  had  been  consulting  his  own  conscience;
surely independent judgments would have led to far more defections from
the party line.  I  think that this  is particularly true  on  the Republican  side.
Did  so  many  Republicans  really  believe,  in  principle,  that  the  President
should be removed  from office?  But it is  plausibly true  on  the Democratic
side as  well. This  level  of party  solidarity is  not what one  would  expect  if
people  independently  were  consulting  their consciences.

With  respect  to  legislators,  as  opposed to  ordinary citizens,  perceived
electoral  self-interest  undoubtedly played  a role.  For  example,  a vote  by a
Republican  to  defect from  the party position  might have played well with
the  general  electorate,  which  was  averse  to  impeachment;  but  it  also

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 129 2000

might  have  increased  vulnerability  to  a  primary  challenge  within  the
party, and in  any case,  have  caused  the defector  a  series  of problems  with
party  leadership.  For  many  Republicans,  and  for  many  Democrats,  a
defection  might have  seemed  much  more trouble  than  it was worth.  But
at  least  on  a  straightforward  account  of electoral  self-interest,  it  is  not
plausible  to  attribute  all  of  these  votes  to  perceived  electoral  pressures.
Many  Republicans  and  many  Democrats  would  hardly  have  risked  the
political  wrath  of voters if they had voted otherwise  on impeachment.  At
least  some of them were  free  to vote  as  they wished.  Some of them  prob-
ably would  have been helped,  not hurt, if they had defected;  certainly this
is true  for some  Republicans,  and it  defies  belief, again,  to suggest  that  it
was  not  true for any non-defecting  Democrats.

Even  if we could  explain  the votes  of representatives  in terms  of elec-
toral  self-interest,  it  remains  necessary  to  explain  the  sharply  divergent
positions  of citizens,  with  the  dramatic  split between  people  who  identi-
fy  themselves  with  the  two  parties.  Of course,  Democrats  tend  to  like
President  Clinton much  more  than Republicans  do.  But on what  ground
would  so  many self-identified  Republicans  support  impeachment,  and  so
many  self-identified  Democrats  oppose  it?

I  believe  that much of the  answer to the otherwise  puzzling  pattern of

judgments  lies  in  certain  characteristics  of  collective  deliberations  -
characteristics  that  tend  to push  groups  in  predictable  directions.  Above
all,  the pattern seems  to have a  great deal  to  do with group polarization -
a  process  that  leads  groups  in  a  more  extreme  version  of the  direction
indicated  by their original  tendency. An  understanding  of group  polariza-
tion  helps  explain  some  alarming  behavior  by  individuals  in  social
settings.  It  also  sheds  some  new  light  on  party-line  voting. At  the  same
time,  it  raises  a  series  of questions  and  doubts  about  processes  of public
deliberation,  especially  but  not  only in the  context  of highly visible  con-
troversies  like  impeachment.

There  is  a  warning  here,  for  the  future,  about  a  political  process  in
which like-minded people  talk principally to one another. The warning  is
that this  kind of talk  can  lead  to extremism,  through  entirely  predictable
processes;  and  when  various  groups  go  in  opposite  extreme  directions,
misunderstanding,  confusion,  accusation,  and  sometimes  even  violence
may well  be  the  result.

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 130 2000

L  Group Polarization

Although  it  has  received  little  attention  in  law  and  political  theory,
group  polarization  is  one  of the  robust findings  in social  psychology?  The
central  point here  is that  the outcome  of a group  deliberation  tends  to  be
a  more  extreme  version  of the  tendency  indicated  by the  initial  predispo-
sition  of group  members.  Deliberating  groups  thus  move  not toward  the
middle,  but  toward  within-group  extremes.  For example,  a  group  of peo-
ple  who  tend  to  oppose  affirmative  action  is  likely,  after  discussion,  to
oppose  affirmative  action  with  some  vehemence.  Those  inclined  to  sup-
port gun control will, after  discussion, do so with great  enthusiasm.  People
who tend to think well of an ongoing  military build-up will  strongly  favor
a  military build-up  after  discussing  the  problem  with  one  another. Those
who believe  that  President  Clinton is  likely  a  victim of a  concerted  right-
wing  attack  are  likely,  after  talking  together,  to  think  that  this  is
undoubtedly  the  case.  Those who  fear that the President  is a  criminal  and
a  liar who  is  protected  by  an  indifferent  public  and  an  obsequious  media
are likely, after  talking together, to  believe  that this  is a  very optimistic pic-
ture  of the situation,  one  that  is far  too  favorable  to President  Clinton.

There  are  two  explanations  for group polarization,  involving two  dif-
ferent  mechanisms.  Each  of  the  mechanisms  plays  a  role  in  producing
group polarization  and,  as we  shall  see,  each  of them played  a  role  in  the
impeachment  debate. The  first  is based  on persuasive arguments. The idea
here  is  that  people  respond  to  the  arguments  made  by  others,  and  the
argument  pool,  in  a  group with  some  initial  disposition,  will be  strongly
skewed  in  the  direction  of that  disposition.  Thus,  a  group  whose  mem-
bers  tends  to  oppose  affirmative  action  will  hear  a  large  number  of
arguments  in  favor  of abolishing  affirmative  action  and  a  comparatively
fewer  number  of arguments  for  retaining  it.  If people  are  listening, they
will  have  a  stronger  conviction,  in  the  same  direction  from  which  they
began,  as  a  result  of  deliberation.  If  people  believing  that  President
Clinton's  impeachment  was  a  constitutional  atrocity  speak  to  one  anoth-
er,  they  will  be  entrenched  in  this  belief  as  a  result  of  conversation
together, simply because  they will hear a  range  of arguments  to  this effect
(and few  good arguments  the  other  way). There  is  considerable  empirical
support  for  the  view  that  the  argument  pool  has  this  kind  of effect  on
individual  views.

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 131 2000

The  second  mechanism  has  to  do  with  social influence. The  central
idea here  is  that people have  a  certain conception  of themselves  and a  cor-
responding  sense  of how  they would  like  to  be perceived  by others.  Most
people like to think of themselves  as different from others,  but only in  the
right  direction  and  to  the right extent.  If you think  of yourself as  the sort
of person  who  favors  gun control  less  than  most  people  do  (because,  let
us  say, you  think  that you  are  unusually  disposed  to  reject  liberal  homi-
lies),  you might shift your position  once you  find yourself in  a group  that
is  very  strongly in  favor  of gun  control.  If you  stay where  you were,  you
may  seem  less  favorably  disposed  toward  gun  control  than  most  group
members,  and  this  may  be  disconcerting,  thus  producing  a  shift.  Or  if
you believe  that you  have  a comparatively  favorable  attitude  toward  affir-
mative  action,  discussion  with  a  group  whose  members  are  at  least  as
favorable  as you  are might well push you in  the direction  of greater enthu-
siasm  for  it. Having  heard  group  members,  you might  move your  stated
position,  simply in  order to  maintain  a  certain  self-conception  and  repu-
tation,  as  one  who  likes  affirmative  action  a  bit  more  than  most  people
do.  If you want  to  seem  to  be unfavorably  disposed  to  President  Clinton,
and so  consider  yourself, you  may support  impeachment  in  a  group  that
does  the  same,  not  because  you  have  a  considered  judgment  in  favor  of
impeachment,  but  because  you  do  not  want  to  seem,  in  the  eyes  of the
group,  to be  a  defender  of President  Clinton. There  is  a  great  deal  of evi-
dence  that  social  influence 
is  an  independent  factor  behind  group
polarization;  consider  in  particular  the  fact  that  mere  exposure  to  the
views  of others  can have  this  effect,  even  without  any discussion  at all.

These  points raise many questions about the value of deliberation  and
about  the whole ideal of deliberative  democracy, which  lies  at the  heart of
our  constitutional  order.'  Of course, we cannot  say, from the mere  fact of
polarization,  that there  has been  a  movement  in the wrong direction;  per-
haps  the  more  extreme  tendency  is  better.  But  when  group  discussion
tends  to  lead people  to more  strongly held versions  of the same view with
which  they  began,  it  may  be  nothing  to  celebrate.  If social  influences,
rather  than  a  full  appreciation  of relevant  reasons,  incline  people  in cer-
tain  directions,  the  shifts  that  result  may  have  very  little  to  do  with  the
merits.  Those who  believe  in  deliberation  are  likely to  be  pleased to  find
that  arguments  and  reasons  have  an  impact.  But  if the  impact  is  a  prod-
uct of a skewed argument  pool,  the resulting changes  in judgment may be

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 132 2000

a  product  of happenstance  and  distortion,  rather  than  better  thinking. I
will  return  shortly to  the relationship  between  the impeachment  vote  and
group  polarization.

I  Cascades

The  empirical  findings  on  group  polarization  closely  connect  to  the-
oretical work on social  "cascades." 4 The  question here is  why social  groups
sometimes  move  quite  rapidly  in  some  direction  or  another  and  why
groups  of  like-minded  people  may  move  rapidly  toward  or  against  an
extreme  outcome,  such  as  impeachment.

A.  Information  and Informational  Cascades

A central  point  here  is  that when  individuals  lack  a great  deal  of pri-
vate  information,  often  they  rely  on  information  provided  by  the
statements  or actions  of others.  If A is  unaware  whether abandoned  toxic
waste  dumps are  hazardous,  he  may be moved in  the direction  of fear if B
seems  to  think  that  fear  is  justified.  If A  and  B  believe  that fear  is  justi-
fied,  C  may  end  up  thinking  so  too,  at  least  if she  lacks  independent
information  to  the  contrary.  If A, B,  and  C  believe  that abandoned  haz-
ardous  waste  dumps  are  hazardous,  D will  have  to  have  a  good  deal  of
confidence  to  reject their shared  conclusion. The  result of this process  can
be  to  produce  cascade  effects,  as  large  groups  of people  end  up  believing
something -
simply because  other  peo-
ple seem  to  believe  it too.

even  something  that is  false  -

The  same processes  should  be  at work  for political,  legal,  and  moral
questions; in  fact we easily can  imagine political,  legal,  and moral  cascades
-
even  pro-impeachment  and  anti-impeachment  cascades.  The  same
process may work for political  candidates, as  a fad develops  in  favor of one
or another -
a  cascade with victory-producing  or ruinous  consequences.
Sometimes  people  are  not  entirely  sure  whether  affirmative  action  is a
good  idea,  whether  capital  punishment  should  be  imposed,  whether  the
Constitution  protects  the  right  to have  an  abortion,  whether  it is wrong
to  litter  or  to  smoke,  whether  perjury  counts  as  a  high  crime  or  misde-
meanor.  Many  people,  lacking  firm  convictions  of their own,  may  end
up  believing  what  (relevant)  others  seem  to  believe.  There  is  an  obvious
analogy  here  to  the  persuasive  arguments  account  of group  polarization

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 133 2000

though  for cascade  effects,  what is  crucial  is  the very fact of the belief,

-
not  its grounds.

If the  literature on  cascades  is  correct,  the White  House  was right  to
be worried about  any small  shift in public  opposition to  impeachment.  If
(as  I  suspect)  many ordinary citizens  were  not  really  sure if the  President
should  be  removed  from  office,  the  large  percentages  who  opposed
removal  were fragile.  A small  shift  in the  direction  of pro-impeachment
sentiment -
could
have  started  a  cascade  effect,  if what  people  thought  was  dependent  on
what (they  thought) others  thought.

from  70% against  to, say, 58%  against,  and falling -

B.  Reputation  and Reputational  Cascades

Thus  far  the  discussion  has  involved  informational  pressures  and
informational  cascades.  When  information  is  at work, people  care  about
what  other  people  think because  they  do  not  know  what  to  think, and
they rely on the opinions  of others to  show what it is correct to  think. But
there  can  be  reputational  pressures  and  reputational  cascades  as  well.5
Here  people  are  influenced  by what  others  say and do,  not because  they
think  that  those  others  are  likely  to  be  correct  (that would  be  an  infor-
mational  influence),  but  because  they want  to  preserve  their reputations.
The  basic  idea  is  that  people  care  about  what  others  think of them,  and
they speak  out, or remain  silent,  partly  in  order  to cultivate  the approval
of others,  even  at the price  of failing  to  say  what  they really  think.

Suppose,  for  example,  that  A  believes  that  hazardous  waste  dumps
pose  a  serious  environmental  problem;  suppose  too  that B  is  skeptical.  B
may keep  quiet, or even  agree with A, not because  B  thinks that A is right,
but  simply  in  order  to  preserve  Xs  good  opinion.  C  may  see  that  A
believes  that  hazardous  waste  dumps  pose  a  serious  problem  and  that  B
seems  to agree with A;  C  therefore may voice agreement  even  though pri-
vately  she  is  skeptical  or  ambivalent. 
It  is  easy  to  see  how  this  kind  of
thing  might  happen  with  intense  political  debates.  People  who  believe
that President  Clinton  is  a  liar  and  a  criminal  might be  entirely  quiet  in
some  contexts  or even  agree  wholeheartedly  with  people  who  speak  out
on  President  Clinton's  behalf. People  who  believe  that impeachment  was
a terrible  idea might not say  so, and  even may endorse  impeachment, sim-
ply  to  preserve  their  reputations  in  certain  communities.  Undoubtedly

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 134 2000

this  happened  among  some  of  those  who  supported  impeachment,
including within  the House  of Representatives.

The  consequence  of all  this  can  be  cascade  effects  -

large  social
movements  in  one  direction  or  another  - when  a  number  of people
appear to support a  certain course of action simply because  others (appear
to)  do  so.  Here,  as  with  informational  forces,  what  is  true  for  publicly
stated  factual  claims  can  be  true  as  well  for  moral,  legal,  and  political
claims.  This phenomenon  is  of course  analogous  to  the  social  influence
explanation  of group  polarization.  The  only difference  is  that  the  social
influence  explanation  concerns  presentation  to self as well as  presentation
to  others.

III  The Dynamics  of Impeachment

How  does  all  this bear  on  the  impeachment  of President  Clinton?  At
first  glance  the answer  is  straightforward,  and what has  been said  thus far
should  supply the  rudiments  of a basic  account.

A. The  Basic Account

Consider  informational  forces  first. In  both Congress  and the  nation,
Republicans  were  talking  mostly with  Republicans;  Democrats  were  talk-
ing  mostly with  Democrats.  The  result of these  two  largely  independent
sets  of  deliberations  was  to  deepen  the  Republicans'  commitment  to
impeachment,  to  heighten  the  sense  that  the  President  had  indeed
committed  a  high  crime,  to  suggest  that  the  President's  arguments  were
and  at  the  same  time,  to  strengthen  the  sense,
weak  and  self-serving  -
among  Democrats,  that Judge  Starr was  an  unprincipled  zealot,  that  the
grounds  for impeachment  were  implausible,  and  that this was something
not very  far from a  coup d'etat on  the part  of the  far right.

To  be  sure,  many  diverse  arguments  were  available  to representatives
and citizens  alike;  it was  not as  if the  pro-impeachment  or anti-impeach-
ment case  was  invisible  to  those who  disagreed  with  it.  But  it does  seem
reasonable  to  think that many Republicans,  perhaps  especially  among the
citizenry, were  affected  by a distorted argument pool,  in which all or most
of the  articulated  points  had  to  do  with  the  President's  violation  of his
oath of office and failure  to  tell  the truth  under  oath.  In the  relevant  dis-
cussions,  the  best  arguments  on  the  President's  behalf  appeared

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 135 2000

infrequently, and when  they appeared,  they were likely to  have been  made
half-heartedly.  Many  discussions  among  Democrats  were  affected  by  a
similar  skewed  pool  of arguments,  in  which  the  best claims  on  behalf of
impeachment  were  not  mentioned.  No  wonder  that  both  groups  would
tend to polarize  toward a  more extreme  version  of views  originally held.
Social influences  and reputational  forces were  undoubtedly  at work as
well.  A Republican  who  rejected  impeachment  - whether  representative
or citizen - would  be  signaling  that he was  a  certain  sort:  one  who  was
willing to defect from the general  party-line  view that serious misconduct
by  the  President  warranted  removal  from  office.  Any  particular
Republican  could  be  sending  out  a  large  signal  of tolerance  for  illegality
and misconduct  by high-level  Democrats.  Indeed,  the signal  could be  far
more  dramatic  and  extreme  than  anything  the  defector  might  have
intended. And  for representatives  in  particular, the consequence  could be
severe  reputational  sanctions,  both  within  the  House  of Representatives
and at the  next  election.  If a  range  of Republicans  could be convinced  to
reject  impeachment,  the signal  would  of course  be  muffled,  and  perhaps
a  cascade  of anti-impeachment  votes  would  be  expected.  There  is  safety
in numbers.  But the  collective  action  problem  was quite serious;  without
concerted  action  by  a  nontrivial  number  of Republicans,  any  particular
defector  would  be  in potential  trouble.

The  same  dynamic  was  at  work  for  any  Democrat  who  favored
impeachment.  The  signal  would  be  one  of capitulation  to  a  Republican
witch-hunt -
a signal  that would  be all  the louder  if very few Democrats
were  defecting.  Once  defections  started,  they  could  be  hard  to  stop,
because  after  a  certain  tipping  point,  the  loud  signal  would  be  muffled.
Thus,  if a  few  Democrats  had  called  for  impeachment,  a  cascade  could
happen  here  as  well.  This  was  the  White  House's  worst  nightmare;  it
explains  why  the White  House  believed  it  indispensable  to  keep  as  many
Democrats  as possible  in  line.

Here,  then,  is my basic  account of the  extraordinary  party-line  judg-
ments  among  the  citizenry  at  large,  and  also  of  the  votes  in  both  the
House  and  the  Senate.  These  were  case  studies  in  group  polarization.
Those  who  spoke  with  one  another  fortified  their  own preexisting  views
and  made  them  all  the  more  extreme.  In this  light,  it should  be  unsur-
prising  to  find  the  change  of heart  from  Republicans,  such  as  Henry
Hyde,  who  initially  contended  that  impeachment  should  occur  only  if

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 136 2000

there  was  bipartisan  support  for  it. Once  the logic  of group  polarization
set  in,  this moderate  view  was bound  to  shift.

B.  Of Representatives  and Constituents

Of course,  there  are  some  differences  between  the  legislative  process
and  the  contexts  in which  group  polarization  has  been  studied,  above  all
because  members  of Congress  are  subject  to  external  political  sanctions.
Even  if members  are  persuaded  that a  certain course  of action  makes  best
sense, they  may vote otherwise  simply because  of what  their constituents
want.  Hence  a  limited argument  pool,  for  members  of a  particular party,
may matter  much  less  than  a  clear  signal  from  people  back  home.  This
point  may  explain  some  of  the  defections  on  both  sides;  certainly  it
explains why some  members are able  to  resist party pressures and the logic
of group  polarization.  Unambiguous  electoral  signals  can  be  a  powerful
buffer  against  that  logic  (though  for  reasons  I  have  given,  the  signals
themselves  may be a function  of group polarization  within the  electorate).
The  same  point  bears  on  the  relevance  of social  influence.  Members
of  the  Republican  Party  are  likely  to  care  a  great  deal  what  fellow
Republicans  think of them;  but they  probably  care  still more about  what
local voters  think of them. To  be sure,  the  two are  not independent  of one
another. If a  certain  Republican  seems  like  an  outlier  among  Republicans
for  example,  if he  seems  less  sympathetic  to  impeachment
generally  -
his  electoral prospects  might be  damaged simply by
than  his  colleagues  -
virtue  of this  signal.  But  analytically  the  two  are  different.  Here  too  the
votes  of constituents  may matter  more  than  group  deliberations  (taking
members  of the  same  party as  the  relevant  group).

Because of the differences  between representatives  and constituents,  it
is  even  reasonable  to  think that  polarization  is  likely  to  be  more  serious
among the  latter rather than  the former. We  can imagine  a society -
and
in which  Republicans  speak mostly with
it is  not so  far  from our  own -
each  other,  at  least  about  the  issue  of whether  President  Clinton  should
be  impeached;  we  can  imagine  a  society  in  which,  on  the  same  issue,
Democrats  speak  mostly  with  one  another  too.  If this  is  the  situation,
polarization  should  occur  within  political  camps.  Republicans  will  veer
pro-impeachment;  Democrats  will  veer  anti-impeachment.  Of course,
there  are  multiple  independent  reasons  why  this  may  be  so.  Democrats

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 137 2000

tend to like  President Clinton, and Republicans  tend not to  like him.  But
part  of  electoral  polarization,  on  the  question  of  impeachment,  is
undoubtedly  a  result  of the  social  mechanisms  discussed  here.

IV  Conclusion  andA  Warning

What  lessons  do  these  points  have  for party  dynamics,  especially  in
the context  of highly visible public  debates?  Certainly they do not explain
all  of  the  picture.  But  they  provide  part  of any  account  of why  a  vast
majority  of  Republicans  may  think  one  thing  and  a  vast  majority  of
Democrats  the  opposite,  when  independent  judgments  by  members
would seem to make  this pattern entirely  inexplicable.  For representatives,
simple  electoral  calculations  undoubtedly  play  a  role;  but  a  great  deal
depends on  the limited information  pool in the relevant  communities  and
the  particular  signal  given  by defectors  from the  party. In the  context of
impeachment,  I  do believe  that this  helps explain  an  otherwise  very puz-
zling  set  of  judgments,  perhaps  above  all  the  remarkable  solidity  of
Republican  pro-impeachment  judgments  in  circumstances  in  which  the
Constitution  and large  percentages  of the  public seemed  to  argue  in  the
other  direction.  And  if  the  explanation  contains  some  truth,  it  helps
account  for  party-line  thinking  more  generally,  within  legislatures  and
within  the  citizenry  -
and  raises  a  host  of questions  and  doubts  about
the value  and  the consequences  of group  deliberation.

Of course,  nothing  I  have  said  here  demonstrates  that  group  polar-
ization  moves  people in  bad directions.  We can imagine  many contexts  in
which  it is  entirely  appropriate  for  people  to  end up  with  a  stronger  ver-
sion  of  their  initial  position;  perhaps  discussion  clarifies  matters,  and
perhaps the  argument  pool,  limited  though  it inevitably  is,  makes  people
see  things in a  more reasonable  light. But nothing in the  mechanisms that
underlie  polarization  makes  this  inevitable.  The  most  serious  problems
are  likely  to arise  when  deliberating  groups,  insulated  from one  another,
polarize  to  more extreme  positions  partly because  of their very insulation.
In  these  circumstances,  large  groups  - with  initial  tendencies  that  are
different  but  not so very different  -
can shift  in extreme  opposite  direc-
tions,  with  little  understanding  of how  it  is  that  they  have  ended  up  in
such  different  positions.  It is in  this  setting that  group polarization  carries

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 138 2000

a  risk of balkanization,  confusion,  and  even  violence.

The nation  managed  to  avoid the  worst of these problems  in  connec-

tion with  impeachment,  though  in  my view  members  of both  parties  -
suffered  a  great  deal
the  Republicans  even  more  than  the  Democrats  -
from  their  failure  to engage  the arguments  put  forth by  the  other side.  If
there  is  a warning  here,  there is  therefore  a  lesson  as  well,  about  the need
for  deliberating  groups  to  avoid  the  forms  of  insulation  that  can  lead
them,  by the laws of social interaction,  in unjustifiably extreme directions.

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

See Cass  R.  Sunstein,  "Impeaching  the  President,"  147  University of Pennsylvania Law
Review 279  (1998).
See Cass  R. Sunstein,  "Deliberative  Trouble?  Why  Groups  Go  To  Extremes,"  Yale  Law
Journal (forthcoming  October  2000).
See  Jon  Elster,  ed.,  Deliberative Democracy  (Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press,
1998).
See Sushil  Biikhchandani  et al.,  "Learning  from  the Behavior  of Others,"  The Journal of
Economic Perspectives: a Journal of the American Economic Association  (Summer  1998),
p.  151.
See  Timur  Kuran,  Public Lives,  Private Truths  (Cambridge:  Harvard  University  Press,
1996).

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 139 2000

HeinOnline  -- 12 Cardozo Stud. L. & Literature 140 2000

