Cass R. Sunsteint B. Problems on Nonmarket Criteria: Children, Deliberative FUTURE: FINAL REPORT OF THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC INTEREST OBLIGATIONS OF DIGITAL TELEVISION BROADCASTERS (1998). Many of the arguments in this Article were framed through the opportunity to see, through work on the Advisory Committee, two groups close up. The first was a large number of broadcasters-most of them public-spirited, most of them extremely nervous about growing competition from cable and elsewhere, most of them sharply opposed to government mandates, few of them unwilling to accept governmental help. The second was the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB)-at the time an extraordinarily defensive, fearful, uncooperative, aggressive, and self-protective organization, consisting of many honorable people, but often unwilling to compromise or even to reflect. In this way, the NAB was reminiscent of the tobacco industry in, say, the 1960s, and was enthusiastic about using the First Amendment in the same way that the National Rifle Association uses the Second Amendment, that is, as an all-purpose shield against any action adverse to their interests. The author is grateful to other members of the Advisory Committee for many helpful discussions of these problems and, in particular, to the two co-chairs of the Committee, Norman Ornstein and Leslie Moonves. The Committee's final report has influenced the treatment here, not least when there are disagreements. He is also grateful, for helpful comments, to Douglas Lichtman, Eric Posner, and Richard Posner, and to participants in a conference held in honor of Jiirgen Habermas in Frankfurt, Germany in July 1999, especially Clause Offe, Bernhard Peters, and Jtlrgen Habermas. VI. Voluntary Self-Regulation: Aspirations, Trustees, and Cass R. Sunstein The communications revolution has thrown into question the value of imposing public interest obligations on television broadcasters. But the distinctive nature of this unusual market-with "winner-take-all"features, with viewers as a commodity, with pervasive externalities from private choices, and with market effects on preferences as well as the other way around-justifies a continuing role for government regulation in the public interest. At the same time, regulation best takes the form, not of anachronistic command-and-control regulation, but of (1) disclosure requirements, (2) economic incentives ("pay or play"), and (3) voluntary selfregulation through a privately administered code. Some discussion is devoted to free speech and antitrust issues, and to the different possible shapes of liability and property rules in this context, treating certain programming as a public "good" akin to pollution as a public bad. There is a large difference between the public interest and what interests the public. This is so especially in light of the character and consequences of the communications market. One of the central goals of the system of broadcasting, private as well as public, should be to promote the American aspiration to deliberative democracy.' a system in which citizens are informed about public issues and able to make judgments on the basis of reasons. Both norms and law should be enlisted in this endeavor; if one fails, the other becomes all the more important. These are the claims that I attempt to bring to bear on the so-called communications revolution. with other dramatic technological developments). Law has responded to these developments in fits and starts, largely by attempting to engraft legal requirements designed for the old environment onto an altogether new communications market. The result is a high degree of anachronism, misfit, and drift, and in the view of many observers, a series of constitutional violations.6 Most of the modem debate involves a vigorous but increasingly tired contest between those defending the old regulatory order7 and those urging rapid movement toward "simple rules" for government control of television, above all well-defined property rights and freedom of contract! Strikingly similar debates, about the value of "simple rules," the place of regulatory safeguards, and the role of television in a democracy, can be found in many nations. 9 My aim in this Article is to discuss an important part of the intersection between the emerging communications market and law: public interest obligations imposed on television broadcasters." Since the initial rise of broadcasting in the United States, government has treated the license as a kind of "grant" that is legitimately accompanied by duties." Congress and the FCC have required broadcasters to follow a range of requirements-a form of old-style "command-and-control" regulation, growing out of an My second claim is that in order to promote the relevant goals, government should decreasingly rely on command-and-control regulation, 9 and should consider instead three less intrusive and more flexible instruments, each of which is well-adapted to a period of rapid technological change. The instruments are: (1) mandatory public disclosure of information about public interest broadcasting, unaccompanied by content regulation; (2) economic incentives, above all subsidies and "play or pay"; and (3) voluntary self-regulation, as through a "code" of appropriate conduct, to be created and operated by the industry itself. These instruments have played an increasing role in regulatory policy in general, especially in the environmental arena?° But they have rarely been discussed in the area of communications, where they have a natural place;2' and despite its growing importance, the general topic of industry self-regulation has received little academic attention.22 By requiring broadcasters to disclose information about their public interest activities, the government might be able to enlist public pressure and social norms so as to create a kind of competition to do more and better. This is the simplest and least intrusive of regulatory instruments. By allowing broadcasters to buy their way out of certain public interest obligations, the government should be able to ensure that those with an Broadcast licenses have never been treated like ordinary property rights, open for sale on the free market.27 Since the initial enactment of the Communications Act of 1934, the government has awarded licenses to broadcasters in accordance with "convenience, public interest, [and] necessity."' The Federal Radio Commission early described the system as one in which broadcasters "must be operated as if owned by the public.... It is as if a community should own a station and turn it over to the best man in sight with this injunction: 'Manage this station in our interest .... ",29 Under this "public trustee" standard, the FCC has imposed a range of obligations on broadcasters-an idea that perhaps made special sense when a small number of companies dominated the television market. In its initial set of guidelines, the FCC required stations to meet the "tastes, needs, and desires of all substantial groups among the listening public... ." This required "a well-rounded program, in which Campbell, supra note 21, for detailed discussion of many relevant developments. Often this kind of guidance operated as a general plea, with little systematic enforcement. In 1960, however, the FCC went so far as to outline fourteen of the "major elements usually necessary to meet the public interest."3 2 These included: religious programming, programs for children, political broadcasts, news programs, sports programs, weather and market services, and development and use of local talent.33 The FCC eventually specified its general guidelines, which were merely indicia of the types and areas of appropriate service. The specifications included minimum amounts for news, public affairs, and other nonentertainment programming, including the controversial "fairness doctrine"' and also access rules for prime-time. 5 Substantial changes occurred in the 1980s, a period of significant deregulation. The head of the FCC, Mark Fowler, declared (in a kind of soundbite, or bumper-sticker, for the market approach to the topic) that television is "'just another appliance,' a "'toaster with pictures."'3 6 The fairness doctrine was largely eliminated, and many of the more particular public interest requirements were removed?' Nonetheless, a number of such requirements remain. For example, the FCC continues to say that if a broadcaster sells airtime to one candidate, it must sell similar time to opposing candidates as well. Congress itself has codified a right of this kind?8 A long-standing statutory provision, in the obvious self-interest of law makers, requires that if a broadcaster offers to sell time, it must do so at the "lowest unit rate of the station" during the forty-five days before a diversity of views. On the doctrine, see discussion infra Part II.A. In recent years Congress has devoted special attention to children's programming and to television access for the hearing impaired. In 1990, Congress enacted the Children's Television Act of 1990,' limiting the advertising on children's programming (twelve minutes per hour during weekdays and ten and a half minutes per hour on weekends).41 Under this statute, the FCC has further required broadcasters to provide three hours of children's programming per week. 42 The Television Decoder Circuitry Act of 1990"3 requires new television sets to have special decoder chips, allowing them to display closed-captioned television transmissions for the hearing impaired. The Telecommunications Act of 1 9 9 644 requires use of "v-chip" technology, designed to facilitate parental control over what enters the home; it also contains ancillary requirements intended to ensure "ratings" of programming content.45 Turn now to the present, or at least to the more recent past. From 1997 to 1998, a presidential advisory committee met to discuss the public interest obligation of television broadcasters.46 Several of the broadcasters on the Committee were quite skeptical about governmental mandates, but highly receptive to the idea of adopting some kind of broadcasting "code," akin to the kind approved and administered by the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) between 1928 and 1979. 41 The Committee eventually moved toward endorsing the notion of a code, and the idea received considerable attention in the trade press.4 In its annual meeting, however, the NAB signaled skepticism about the idea and came very close to saying "no" and "never." A large part of the broadcasters' objection was that any "code" would violate the antitrust laws. This was very odd because in their discussions, members of the NAB Recommendations on Digital Standards Go to White House, COMM. DAILY, Dec. 21, 1998. To evaluate particular proposals, it is necessary to have a concrete sense of why some people think that even well-functioning television markets are inadequate. Consider the following possibilities, each of which has produced public concern in the last decade:50 1. There may be insufficient educational programming for children. The existing fare may be insufficient because there is too little simply in terms of amount (for example, for people who lack cable), or because children do not watch the stations on which it is available, or because the quality is too low. 3. At least on the major networks, programming may be too homogenous, in a form of "blind-leading-the-blind" programming. Since a significant percentage of Americans do not receive 4. Some programming may be affirmatively bad for children if, for example, it contains excessive violence, or otherwise encourages behavior that is dangerous to self and others. The result of such programming may be to produce violent or otherwise dangerous behavior in the real world." 5. There may be too much violent programming in general, with adverse consequences for adults, not only children! 5 The adverse consequences may include an increase in violence (because of changes in social norms or "copycat" effects56), general demoralization and fear, or a misperception of reality. 7. There may be too little coverage of serious questions, especially during political campaigns. The relevant coverage may involve sensationalism and "sound bites," or attention to who is ahead ("horse-race issues") rather than who thinks what and why. The result may be an insufficiently informed citizenry. 8 8. Stations too rarely cover international issues or developments in other nations. The result is that people are extremely ill-informed about the global background for national events, including proposed financial assistance and possibly even war, and also about practices other than their own. This ignorance makes it difficult See discussion infra Part U.A.2. A glance at the situation shows that the physical and external means of collecting information in regard to what is happening in the world have far outrun the intellectual phase of inquiry and organization of its results. Telegraph, telephone, and now the radio, cheap and quick mails ... have attained a remarkable development. But when we ask what sort of material is recorded and how it is organized, when we ask about the intellectual form in which the material is presented, the tale to be told is very different. "News" signifies something which has just happened, and which is new just because it deviates from the old and regular... [W]e have here an explanation of the triviality and "sensational" quality of so much of what passes as news. The catastrophic, namely, crime, accidents, family rows, personal clashes and conflicts, are the most obvious forms of breaches of continuity ... they are the new par excellence .... 11. The problem may be not homogeneity but heterogeneity, which may result in a highly balkanized viewing public, in which many or most people lack shared viewing experiences, or in which people view programming that largely reinforces their own convictions and prejudices I The result can be extremism and fragmentation.62 To be sure, some of these problems cannot be corrected through regulation that is either feasible or constitutional. Moreover, these various conceptions of the relevant problem point toward diverse solutions, some of which would raise serious First Amendment problems, as discussed below.63 A particular challenge is to develop approaches that would allow a high degree of flexibility, minimize government involvement in programming content, and also do some good. It has increasingly been urged that any objections to existing television are elitist or outmoded. On one view, public interest obligations have no place in modem law, particularly because the "scarcity" rationale for There will be room enough for every sight and sound, every thought and expression that any human mind will ever wish to convey. It will be a place where young minds can wander in adventurous, irresponsible, ungenteel ways. It will contain not innocence but a sort of native gaiety, a buoyant, carefree feeling, filled with confidence in the future and an unquenchable sense of freedom and opportunity. A conceptual point first: though many people claim to argue for "deregulation," that route is not in fact an option, or at least not a reasonable one. What "deregulation" really means is a shift from the status quo to a system of different but emphatically legal regulation, more specifically one of property, tort, and contract rights, in which government does not impose specific public interest obligations but instead sets up initial endtlements and then permits trades among owners and producers. This is a regulatory system as much as any other. If it seems close to the current system for newspapers and magazines, it is no less a regulatory system for that reason; a great deal of law (inevitably) governs the rights and duties of newspapers and magazines. Such law imposes rights and duties, 65. As noted below, the rationale has not disappeared; well over one-third of American households continue to depend on free, over-the-air broadcasting. See U.S. BUREAU OF THE CENSUS, STATISTICAL ABSTRACT OF THE UNITED STATES: 1998 at 573 (118th ed. 1998) (Table No. 915, Utilization of Selected Media: 1970 to 1996). On some of the difficulties with the whole notion of scarcity, see R.H. Coase, The Federal Communications Commission, 2J.L. & ECON. 1 (1959). The defect of Coase's analysis is his (remarkable) lack of self-consciousness about the idea that consumer sovereignty is the appropriate ideal for broadcasting; it is as if that idea is so self-evidently correct that it need not even be defended. permissions and prohibitions; among other things, it ensures, via the law of property, that some people, and not others, will have access to the public sphere. The issue is thus not whether to "deregulate," but whether one or another regulatory system is better than imaginable alternatives. I therefore turn to the general question whether there remains any reason for government to regulate television in the "public interest." My concern here is both theoretical and empirical. The question is whether, in the current market, broadcasters are likely to provide viewers what they would like to see, and if so, whether that point is decisive on the question whether public interest obligations should be imposed.71 The brief answer is that the idea that broadcasters show "what viewers want" is a quite inadequate response to the argument for public interest obligations.72 The discussion most part, however, such requirements do not seem necessary. But I cannot discuss these issues in detail here. 69. According to the economic model, a well-functioning television market would promote the ideal of consumer sovereignty. On this view, the point of markets is to satisfy consumer preferences. In this system, people would satisfy their "preferences," as these are measured via the criterion of private willingness to pay. People would be able to choose from a range of options, and suppliers would cater to their tastes. To a considerable extent, of course, the existing system already approaches this ideal, and this is increasingly the case. But there are three serious problems, each suggesting that the economic ideal of consumer sovereignty is not in fact served by free markets in programming. These are market failures if it is assumed that the purpose of a well-functioning television market is to ensure that programming is well-matched to viewer preferences. In the next Part, I question the market ideal itself. The first point is the simplest. Currently television is not an ordinary product, for broadcasters do not sell programming to viewers in return for cash. A system of "pay-per-view" would indeed fit the usual commodity model; but "pay-per-view" continues to be a relatively rare practice. The difference between the existing broadcasting market and "pay-per-view" is quite important. The key problem here is that viewers do not pay a price, market or otherwise, for television. As C. Edwin Baker has shown, it is more accurate to say that viewers are a commodity, or a product, that broadcasters deliver to the people who actually pay them: advertisers.73 This phenomenon introduces some serious distortions, at least if we understand an ideal broadcasting market as one in which viewers receive what they want. From the standpoint of consumer sovereignty, the role of advertisers creates market failures. Of course broadcasters seek, other things being equal, to deliver more rather than fewer viewers because advertisers seek, other things being equal, more rather than fewer viewers. But advertisers have issues and agendas of their own, and the interests of advertisers can push broadcasters in, or away from, directions that viewers, or substantial numbers of them, would like. A second problem is that it is not clear whether broadcasters are now engaged, in anything like a systematic or scientific way, in catering to public tastes. At first glance it would seem obvious that broadcasters must be engaged in this endeavor (subject to the qualification just stated, involving the role of advertisers); if broadcasters are maximizing anything, they must be maximizing viewers (subject to the same qualification). In general, attracting viewers is their job7 But there is reason to question this judgment, at least in its simplest form. Sometimes rational people make decisions not on the basis of a full inspection of the alternatives, but on the basis of an understanding of what other people are doing.79 Because people obtain information from other people's actions, individual actions carry with them one or more "informational externalities," which potentially affect the decisions of others. Thus, rational and boundedly rational people, in business as elsewhere, rely on the signals provided by the words and deeds of others.'0 This reliance can produce cascade effects, as B follows A, and C follows B and A, and D, as a rational agent, follows the collected wisdom embodied in the actions of A, B, and C. Informational cascades often produce unfortunate outcomes, in fact outcomes far worse than those that would result if individuals accumulated information on their own. Sometimes, moreover, people use the "availability" heuristic, deeming an event more probable if an instance of its occurrence can be readily brought In theory, then, broadcasters might be building on the programming judgments of other broadcasters, often, perhaps, reacting to the "availability" of salient recent instances in which a particular program was especially popular (dealing, let us suppose, with the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal or the O.J. Simpson trial) or especially unpopular (dealing, let us suppose, with South Africa). If this is true, private decisions by broadcasters may produce both mistakes and homogeneity-mistakes, in the form of programming that is not what viewers want, and homogeneity, in the form of the "blind leading the blind."83 Recent evidence suggests that this theoretical account has considerable truth. A careful study shows that there is a good deal of simple imitation, as networks provide a certain kind of programming simply by imitating whatever other networks are doing Recently popular shows tend to create cascade effects. This imitative behavior is not in the interest of viewers. On the contrary, it creates a kind of homogeneity and uniformity in the broadcasting market, and thus makes for problems in terms of providing what viewers "want."' This is not a conventional market failure, but it suggests that existing decisions are unlikely to promote consumer sovereignty. The problem is rapidly diminishing with an increase in available programming options, but to the extent that substantial numbers of people continue to depend on a small number of broadcasters, the existence of informational cascades suggests that the market does not entirely promote consumer sovereignty. Even if broadcasters did provide each viewer with what he or she wanted, a significant problem would remain, and from the economic point of view, this is probably the most serious of all. Information is a public good, and once one person knows something (about, for example, product hazards, asthma, official misconduct, poverty, welfare reform, or abuse of Most generally, there are multiple external effects in the broadcasting area; some of these are positive, but unlikely to be generated sufficiently by individual choices, while others are negative, and likely to be excessively produced by individual choices. Consider a decision to watch vioIn short, the effects of broadcasting depend on social lent programming. interactions. Many of the resulting problems are connected with democratic ideals. A culture in which each person sees a high degree of serious programming may well lead to better political judgments; greater knowledge on the part of one person often leads to more knowledge on the part of others with whom she interacts.9' Perhaps most important, a degree of serious attention to public issues can lead to improved governance through deterring abuses and encouraging governmental response to glaring problems. In these various ways, public interest programming can produce social benefits that will not be adequately captured by the individual choices of individual citizens; the same is true for programming that produces social costs, including apathy, fear, and increased criminal activity.' Because of the collective action problem, an unregulated market will underproduce public goods and overproduce public bads. Thus far the discussion has emphasized difficulties with television markets on conventional economic grounds; but it is wrong to endorse purely market approaches to television.9 3 Television is not best understood as an ordinary commodity, subject to the forces of supply and demand. There are several reasons why this is so. The unifying theme is that the American political tradition is committed to the ideal of deliberative democracy,' an ideal that has animated much First Amendment doctrine and media regulation in general." Even if the media market were wellfunctioning from the economic point of view, there would be room for measures designed to promote a well-functioning system of democratic deliberation, especially in view of the importance of television to people's judgments about what issues are important and about what it is reasonable to think.96 Consider, by way of general orientation, John Dewey's suggestion: [W]hat is more significant is that counting of heads compels prior recourse to methods of discussion, consultation and persuasion, while the essence of appeal to force is to cut short resort to such methods. Majority rule, just as majority rule, is as foolish as its critics charge it with being. But it never is merely majority rule.... The important consideration is that opportunity be given that idea to spread and to become the possession of the multitude.... The essential need, in other words, is the improvement of the methods and conditions of debate, discussion and persuasion. That is the problem of the public.' 1. Children and the Hearing Impaired A well-functioning market may fail to serve certain categories of viewers. Of these the most obvious is children, who may be poorly served by an absence of educational programming" or adversely affected by violent programming.9 It is reasonable to treat the resulting problems as "externalities," but the more natural conclusion is that the television market is creating difficulties even in the absence of a market failure. Because television has a significant role as an educational instrument, the failure to 93. Here, too, Baker has provided very illuminating discussions, and I draw on his account. See Imagine that in a technological future, each person could devise her own preferred communications "menu"; imagine, in other words, that programming could be fully, and not just partially, individuated. On economic grounds, this would seem to be a striking advance, a guarantee of a kind of optimality, a victory for both freedom and welfare. But from the democratic standpoint, it is the stuff of science fiction, and it contains serious risks, above all because it may well result in a situation in which many or most are not exposed to diverse views, but instead hear louder and louder echoes of their own preexisting convictions."l One of the advantages of a well-functioning system of freedom of expression is that it supplies one or more genuinely public spheres, in which diverse points of view are presented and confront one another, and are exposed to people who have a willingness to learn. General-interest newspapers and magazines often do precisely this, and it is important to make provision for multiple forums of 3. Citizens, Consumers, and Precommitment Strategies The most important point is that a market system may fail to provide a system of communication that is well-adapted to a democratic social order. People are quite aware of this fact, whatever they may choose in their capacity as viewers and listeners; and they may, and often do, seek collective corrections. The problem with the economic approach is that it makes private preferences normative, or decisive, for purposes of policy. [t]he diffusion of information and points of view via effective broadcasting media is not the only thing that matters in public processes of communication, nor it is the most important.... Mhe rules of a shared practice of communication are of greater significance for structuring public opinion. Agreement on issues and contributions develops only as the result of more or less exhaustive controversy in which proposals, information, and reasons can be more or less rationally dealt with. On the market view, freedom consists in the satisfaction of viewer preferences, whatever their content. But this is an inadequate conception of freedom.' ° It is important to ensure a degree of freedom in the formation of preferences, and not only in preference satisfaction. If people's preferences are formed as a result of the existing arrangement, including limitations in available opportunities, or of exposure to a limited kind of television, then it makes no sense to say that the existing arrangement can be justified by reference to their preferences. 5. Paternalism? Elitism? It might be tempting to respond that the arguments thus far are unacceptably paternalistic, indeed elitist. If individual listeners and viewers prefer fare of a certain kind, how can there be any grou'd for legitimate complaint? Perhaps children pose a special case, but even here parental guidance is far from unusual. Why should government displace the choices of adults, including parents, and substitute choices of its own? Let us take the charge of paternalism first. Notice that insofar as the argument stresses a collective action problem faced by individual consumers, paternalism is not at work at all. Notice too that insofar as the argument centers on people's desires in their capacity as citizens, no paternalism is involved; the claim is that (a majority of) the people seek to push consumption patterns in certain directions. This form of precommitment strategy, or autopaternalism, should not be confused with paternalism of any objectionable kind." 3 To be sure, this argument depends on an empirical proposition to the effect that in their capacity as citizens, people would like a communications market of a certain kind." 4 But the proposition seems at the very least highly plausible. unemployment, and racial inequality). 114. Of course some such judgments would run afoul of the First Amendment-if, for example, they involved a form of viewpoint discrimination. This is not an Article about the First Amendment or about constitutional law; but it will be useful to conclude this Section with some brief notations on those subjects. From what has been said thus far, it should be clear that a central purpose of the First Amendment is to ensure a wellfunctioning democratic order."5 A system of free expression is designed in large part to protect the preconditions for a form of sovereignty that is suited to genuine self-governance. It is not designed to protect whatever happens to come out of the mouths, or pens, or word-processors of those who are attempting to speak. This view receives support on both historical and philosophical grounds."1 6 One implication is that government may well be permitted to regulate speakers who are not contributing to democratic deliberation-for example, those who advertise cigarettes. Another implication is that government efforts to promote a well-functioning democratic order should not be invalidated even if they involve content regulation, so long as there is no discrimination against any point of view. If government seeks to ensure a certain level of educational programming, or if it allows free air time for candidates, or if it provides a right of access for those who attempt to speak on political issues, it is not violating the free speech guarantee merely by virtue of the fact that it is intruding on the discretion of those who own stations. A conclusion to the contrary would convert the First Amendment into a form of Herbert Spencer's Social Statics,"7 or at least Richard Epstein's Simple Rules for A Complex World; 8 it would tear the First Amendment from its theoretical underpinnings." 9 On this view of the First Amendment, there is no tension between constitutionalism and democracy, or between individual rights and majority rule, properly understood; robust rights of free expression are a precondition for both democracy and majority rule, properly understood. In this way, private autonomy is in no tension with, but is on the contrary inextricably intertwined with, the notion of popular sovereignty.' The point is not limited to freedom of speech. Protection of private property, for example, can be seen as a precondition of the status of citizenship; those whose holdings depend on the beneficent exercise of government EPSTEIN, supra note 8 (arguing for six simple rules of governance). These points suggest that there is good reason, in principle, for some kind of regulatory response to existing markets in television. But nothing said thus far argues for any particular governmental initiative. There is no simple "match" between the identifiable market and nonmarket failures and public interest requirements in general. For example, it is hard to imagine a legitimate governmental response to the problem of excessive homogeneity on the major networks. We have also seen that existing public interest obligations are extremely varied; each of them must be assessed on its own. A. Practice There are important pragmatic questions here. To say that a response is justified in principle is not at all to say that it will succeed in practice. Just as in the environmental area, where command-and-control regulation The arguments offered thus far have not specifically addressed the new market in communications. An especially important question is whether emerging changes in television technology should strengthen satisfaction with market outcomes. Of course the most striking feature of the emerging communications market is a dramatic increase in the number of available stations and programming options. The existing regulatory regime was designed for a system with three private broadcasting networks and PBS. In 1996, about thirty-five percent of people who had television remained dependent on broadcasters, which results in access to five or six stations.126 This means that about two-thirds of viewers had access to between fifty and one hundred stations, including the all-news stations C-SPAN and CNN, and a range of "soft news" stations such as MSNBC. By itself this is an extremely significant change, and the shift from this situation to one in which most people have access to (say) 500 stations may be only one of degree. All of the arguments offered thus far-about market and nonmarket failures-make sense for the old regime and the transitional state. They also seem to make sense for the emerging third stage of multiple options; recall that even here, a substantial segment of the public will depend on broadcasters only, and people with access to cable and other alternatives continue, statistically speaking, to watch a disproportionate amount of broadcast fare. But arguments for public interest obligations would be less sensible as applied to a market in which broadcasters occupy no special role, partly because some of the relevant problems would be diminished, partly because in such a market it seems peculiar to impose on broadcasters, and no one else, a special duty to protect public interest goals. In that market, perhaps every station should be faced with some of the requirements discussed below (in particular, the disclosure requirement). But the case for other requirements (such as uniform mandates, a broadcaster-only code, or "play or pay") would be greatly weakened, not least since it would seem arbitrary to single out broadcasters for such requirements. But some of the arguments offered above-especially those focused on democratic ideals-retain considerable force. Even in the very long term, there will continue to be substantial external benefits from public interest programming, benefits that are not adequately captured by individual viewer choices. And to the extent that citizens seek to push communications policy toward (for example) more and better programming for children, or free air time for candidates, or greater access for the hearing impaired, changes in the evolving market offer only partial answers. Heterogeneity may be an inadequate solution here. It 133. Of course these changes should not be overstated. Recall that 32 percent of American households with televisions still lack cable television, and that a substantial number of Americans are likely to depend on over-the-air programming for the not-too-distant future; hence, the increasing heterogeneity is not quite as dramatic as it might seem. There is a large issue in the background here: how to define the market from which to assess proposals for public interest requirements. Traditionally, "television broadcasting" has been viewed as the relevant category, but skeptics might well ask why the real category is not "sources of information and entertainment." If that category were the relevant one, there might seem to be no problem calling for requirements at all-not in the 1930s, not in the 1950s, not in the 1970s, not in the 1990s, and not in Consider a simple proposal: broadcasters should be required to disclose, in some detail and on a quarterly basis, all of their public service and public interest activities. The disclosure might include an accounting of any free air time provided to candidates, educational programming, charitable activities, programming designed for traditionally under-served communities, closed captioning for the hearing impaired, local programming, and public service announcements." 6 The hope, vindicated by experience with similar approaches in environmental law, 37 is that a disclosure requirement will by itself trigger improved performance, by creating a kind of competition to do better, and by enlisting various social pressures in the direction of improved performance. A requirement of this sort would be part of a general trend in federal regulation, one with considerable promise.138 A. Precursors Many statutes and regulations now require the disclosure of information. Some of these are designed to assist consumers in making informed choices; such statutes are meant to be market-enhancing. By contrast, others are designed to trigger political rather than market safeguards; such statutes are meant to enhance democratic processes. The most famous of these is the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). 139 Enacted in 1972, the principal goal of NEPA is to require the government to compile and disclose environmentally-related information before the government goes forward with any projects having a major effect on the 135. But see BOLLINGER, supra note 7, defending two competing regulatory regimes, one for television and one for the print media. Many other statutes involving health, safety, and the environment fall into the category of information disclosure measures. The Animal Welfare Act 47 is designed partly to ensure publicity about the treatment of animals; thus covered research facilities and dealers are required to file reports with the government about their conduct, with the apparent goal that the reports will deter noncompliance and also allow continuing monitoring.' In addition to its various command-and-control provisions, the Clean Air Act 149 requires companies to create and disclose "risk management plans" involving accidental releases of chemicals; the plans must include a worstcase scenario." The Safe Drinking Water Act"' was amended in 1996 to Why has information disclosure become such a popular regulatory tool? There are several answers. For various reasons, a market failure may C. The Minimal Proposal We are now in a position to discuss a disclosure requirement for public interest programming in somewhat more detail. On a quarterly basis, every broadcaster should be required to make public the full range of public interest and public service activities in which it has engaged. The relevant activities might involve free air time for candidates, educational programming, public service announcements, access for disabled viewers (as through closed captioning or video descriptions), charitable activities, emergency warnings and services, and the like. The FCC should require completion of a relatively simple form to ensure accurate and uniform accounting, and FCC staff should sanction those stations that have failed to disclose, or that have done so inaccurately. Is the hope realistic? People did not anticipate that the Toxic Release Inventory (TRI)65 would by itself spur behavioral changes; the question is whether the same forces might operate here. The answer depends on whether the mechanisms that have produced significant voluntary changes in the environmental arena will also be triggered in this setting. 167. An obvious question is whether, if the case for disclosure has been made out, similar requirements ought to be imposed on magazines and even newspapers. Indeed, the same question might be asked about economic incentives and voluntary self-regulation, as discussed below. I do not discuss these questions here. For those who believe that there is increasingly little difference between television and print media, it might seem that if requirements of this sort are not desirable for the latter, they are also undesirable for the former. The best response to this argument is in BOLLINGER, supra note 7, at 85, with the suggestion that the different regulatory regimes for the broadcast and print media are well-suited to two different images of press freedom, one image involving democratic selfgovernment, the other involving a form of economic laissez-faire. Bollinger believes that the existence of two parallel regulatory regimes makes appropriate space for each of these images, and that if one regulatory regime goes wrong (through, for example, excessive regulation of television, or an excessive "race to the bottom" in magazines), the other can serve as a corrective. See id. at 128-32. This Article is in the general spirit of Bollinger's approach, but it attempts to develop more flexible tools for implementing it, tools that are better adapted to the emerging television market. In this Part, I explore the possibility that broadcasters might meet their public interest responsibilities, not through a set of uniform requirements, but through economic incentives. As we will see, the most creative and promising approach, modeled on recent environmental reforms, involves "play or pay," in which broadcasters are given a choice between complying with public interest requirements or paying someone else to put public interest programming on the air. I begin with a discussion of "play or pay," and then move to a more ambitious treatment of the alternatives, growing out of the law of tort, and posing a debate between market-suppressing and market-supplementing approaches. Ronald Coase's work on efficiency, free trades, and transaction costs originated in the area of communications, and in particular, in an attack on the FCC; but it has been most influential in the environmental arena.' In that area, there has been a great deal of dissatisfaction with rigid governmental commands, and there has also been an unmistakable movement in the direction of more flexible economic instruments, which are likely to be far more efficient.'73 A command might say, for example, that every coalfired power plant must reduce its sulfur dioxide emissions by fifty percent, or that it must use technology of a governmentally specified kind. With respect to environmental protection, incentives typically come in two different forms: pollution fees, imposed on those who produce environmental There is a complex literature on the choice between pollution fees and tradeable emission rights. 175 The solution depends largely on an inquiry into what the government knows and does not know.'76 In general, a fee is better if the government is able to calculate the damage done per unit of pollution but has difficulty in calculating the appropriate aggregate pollution level. In those circumstances, a fee is better because the government is unlikely to err in setting it, whereas a system of tradeable permits will produce mistakes. By contrast, a tradeable permit is better if the government knows the appropriate aggregate level, but is unable to calculate the damage done per unit of pollution. In either case, the government can capitalize on the informational advantage held by private businesses participating in pollution control, so as to allow them to decide on the most effective, least expensive method of achieving any particular pollution reduction. If, under a system of pollution fees, it is extremely expensive for Company A to reduce its current level, it may choose to pay a high tax. If the system is one of tradeable pollution rights, it may simply pay someone else, capable of reducing pollution more cheaply, to produce the relevant reduction instead. For any desired level of reduction, a system of economic incentives should produce the right result at a lower cost, by allocating burdens to those most able to bear them. Although the FCC has experimented with allocating communications rights via auction, little thought has been given to the possibility of using economic incentives to promote public interest goals in the What is the relationship between economic incentives and the First Amendment? A direct tax on undesirable programming, or on the failure to provide desirable programming, would raise serious constitutional questions. This is because the tax would be a regulation of speech on the basis of content. Whether such a regulation would be unconstitutional should turn on many of the questions raised in debates over the legitimacy of the "fairness doctrine," designed to compel coverage of serious issues and an opportunity to speak for opposing views. 85 Many people have argued that with decreasing scarcity, the fairness doctrine is no longer legitimate, if it ever was.'86 If this objection is correct, an economic incentive in the form of a tax would be questionable too. D. Expanding the Viewscreen: A Glance at the Cathedral Thus far I have been exploring economic incentives by contrasting taxes and tradeable rights with command-and-control regulation. But if we wanted a more complete picture, we would widen the viewscreen a bit. In a classic article, Guido Calabresi and A. Douglas Melamed proposed four "rules" that courts might adopt for nuisance suits."9 Two of the rules come from a situation in which either the plaintiff or the defendant is given the relevant entitlement, and it is protected via a "property rule," in which case the entitlement could be reallocated only through a trade.191 The other two rules come from a situation in which either is given an entitlement protected by a "liability rule," in which case the entitlement could be reallocated through a legally forced exchange, at a price determined through the legal system (assumed to be the market price)."9 Calabresi and Melamed also discuss "inalienability rules," in which no exchanges are permitted, either voluntarily or through the legal system. 193 There is a great deal of room for exploring, through this lens, the system of public interest regulation. If public interest programming is desirable, and if certain programming is undesirable, it makes sense to think of ways of requiring broadcasters to pay "damages" or instead requiring the taxpaying public to pay for better programming. Valuation, of course, is a serious problem. Suppose that certain programming (educational or civic, for example) is a public good, producing positive externalities, and that certain programming (violent material, for example) is a public bad, producing negative externalities. How can the government assign monetary values to the desirable and undesirable effects? Is it constitutional for the government to do so? These questions are hard enough in the area of torts; As compared with Rule 1, a potential problem with this approach is that some people may avoid the stations that "play" and may not see the relevant programming at all. On the other hand, the empirical question remains whether under Rule 1 most members of the viewing audience will see and benefit from the mandated programming. the bad. The question for Rule 3 is whether it is possible to generate a "baseline production level" from which any subsidy could be calculated. communications industry, and partly because of public aspirations diverging from private consumption choices. Rule 5c. Broadcasters must buy, via auction, the right to broadcast; once they do so, they may be subject to public interest obligations, but they can pay a "damage award," to be used by some other station to support public interest programming, if they fail to fulfill their obligations themselves. status quo. In some areas, Rule 5b may well be better in the longer term, as broadcasters come to resemble general-interest magazines. Movement in the direction of selling the spectrum, rather than giving it away to preselected owners, would also be highly desirable. The immediately preceding discussion raises obvious questions about when and whether it is appropriate for the government to devote collective resources to the promotion of a better cult-are, and in particular, to promotion of a better democratic order. A "cultural policy" might, for example, involve the use of taxpayer funds to promote opera or high art, perhaps by subsidizing musicians and artists, perhaps by making it easier for poor people and children to afford to go, perhaps by creating a situation in which people can attend at vastly reduced rates or even for free. In Washington, D.C., for example, people can attend public museums, including those devoted to historical and democratic issues, for free, a practice that creates a distinctive atmosphere for people who visit the nation's capitol. Such visits would have a different tone if, for example, it were necessary to pay three dollars to attend the National Archives, which house the original Declaration of Independence, Constitution, and Bill of Rights. In this Part, I discuss the possibility of promoting public interest goals through voluntary self-regulation, as through a "code" of conduct to be issued and enforced by the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB), or A code might do a great deal of good, partly because of the likely existence of external monitors, partly because of a code's capacity to help develop a kind of internal morality likely to affect many of its signatories. A general lesson is that the antitrust laws ought not to be invoked too readily to prevent producers from undertaking cooperative action in circumstances in which competition is producing palpable social harms. In such contexts, a code can provide some of the advantages of government regulation, but do so in a more flexible and better-informed fashion. It is hazardous to invoke the antitrust laws to prevent an industry from providing the kinds of benefits that might be provided, more crudely and expensively, by direct regulation.20 Notwithstanding the qualifications described above, competitive pressures often can and do provide programming that people would like to see. In an era of cable and satellite television, and an increasingly large range of options, competitive pressures will be especially important in producing "niche" programming for people who have a particular interest in serious programming. The communications market increasingly resembles the market for magazines; recall the possibility, in a digital market, of over one thousand stations. But competitive pressures have a downside. They can lead to sensationalistic, prurient, or violent programming, and to a failure to provide sufficient attention to educational values, or to the kind of programming that is indispensable to a well-functioning democracy. °s This is so especially in light of the fact that a small relative advantage can lead to huge increases in viewers, a fact that presses television in tabloid-like directions. As Robert Frank and Philip Cook have suggested, [i]ncreasingly impoverished political debate is yet another cost of our current cultural trajectory. Complex modem societies generate complex economic and social problems, and the task of choosing the best course is difficult under the best of circumstances. And yet, as in-depth analysis and commentary give way to sound bites in which rival journalists and politicians mercilessly ravage one another, we become an increasingly ill-informed and ill-tempered electorate.2" It would be possible to respond to the harmful effects of competitive pressures in various ways. Probably the simplest response would take the form of voluntary self-regulation, through some kind of "code" of good programming; this approach is specifically designed to respond to the problems that can be introduced by market pressures. In various nations, including the United States, cooperative action has played a constructive role in situations of this kind.2" Though it has yet to receive much academic commentary,2 s voluntary self-regulation via industry agreements is emerging as a regulatory strategy of choice, especially in the environmental arena?° The EPA, for example, has encouraged companies that produce pesticides to agree on pesticide reduction strategies, and here What accounts for the increasing popularity of industry selfregulation, as part of the general project of "reinventing government"?1 3 From the industry's standpoint, self-regulation allows far more flexibility than government mandates. From the standpoint of government, a special advantage of codes is that they avoid the kind of informational overload that comes from government prescriptions.214 It is partly for this reason that voluntary agreements among companies have had good effects in the area of occupational safety and health?15 In a point of special relevance to television, codes also have been found to have the power to influence community attitudes in a way that tends to contribute to the development of a custodial ethic.216 Thus, codes have helped to develop an institutional morality that brings the behavior of industry members within a normative framework. Such cooperative action raises concerns about antitrust violations and self-interested profit-seeking under a public-spirited guise. This is of course a risk, but the antitrust law can go wrong when it prevents cooperative action that overcomes palpably adverse effects of market pressures. Indeed, the International Standards Organization is designed specifically to ensure a form of cooperation to overcome those adverse effects; 28 the question is whether that experience has communications analogues. Some of the world's biggest companies are putting their weight behind a new, verifiable code of conduct intended to answer mounting consumer criticism of the exploitative conditions under which the goods they sell are produced in poor countries.... The code, called SA8000 (Social Accountability 8000), is the brainchild of the Council on Economic Priorities, an American public interest group, which tries to improve corporate responsibility. It has been drawn up by companies, non-governmental organisations, trade unions, and other interested groups, and is due to start operating next year. The code covers the basic issues of child My emphasis here is on allowing programmers and journalists to do what, in an important sense, they would actually prefer to do. It is worth underlining this point. Many journalists in the world of broadcasting would very much like to do better;219 competitive pressures are the problem, not the solution, and a voluntary code could help them and the public as well. The question is whether it might be possible to adopt a new code for broadcasting, specifically designed for the new communications market. There have been many precursors for voluntary self-regulation via codes." A new code might update the old NAB code, and help overcome current problems, without having the degree of tepidness of the existing "standards." A code might even promote some of the goals associated with deliberative democracy. simply for the sake of illustration: 1. Each broadcaster shall provide three hours of free air time for candidates during the two-month period preceding the election. In return for free air time, candidates shall discuss substantive labour, forced labour, health and safety, trade union rights, discrimination, discipline, working hours, and pay.... As the name SA8000 suggests, it is the first to be modelled on existing and widely accepted commercial standards such as IS09000, drawn up by the International Standards Organisation in Geneva, which is used to determine whether companies have the management systems to meet required product quality. But the real strength of the new approach is commercial sanctions. A company which adopts the code also agrees to be independently inspected to see whether it is abiding by the conditions laid down. It will be able to attract customers and gain a competitive advantage by advertising the fact that its factories and suppliers meet the standard. 219. See ScsmcHmTE, supra note 50, at 455-58. See FINAL REPoRT, supra note 19, at 114-16. 220. 221. Gunningham & Rees, supra note 208, at 383. 222. These provisions are adapted but substantially revised from the more detailed code suggested by the Advisory Committee's FINAL REPORT, supra note 19. I believe that the provisions described there are too vague and tepid to be useful (I can attest that this was a quid pro quo for Committee agreement); for reasons discussed in the text, vague and tepid provisions create a high probability of futility and ineffectiveness. 2. Each broadcaster shall provide one hour of educational programming for children each day. Broadcasters shall attempt to ensure that children are not exposed to excessively violent programming or programming that is otherwise harmful to, or inappropriate for, children. Broadcasters shall avoid programming that encourages criminal or self-destructive behavior; they should also be sensitive in presenting sexual material that children might encounter. sometimes at risk of a form of disenfranchisement, or even physical danger, because steps are not taken to ensure that television broadcasting is available to them. Stations should take special steps to ensure that information about disasters and emergencies is fully accessible to those who are hearing impaired, ideally in "real time." 7. Broadcasters shall cover international as well as domestic questions and give appropriate coverage to important events in other nations. They should recognize that purely national questions are often hard to evaluate without an understanding of the practices of others, and also that many questions, including those of war and peace, cannot be well-understood without the kind of background that comes from suitable attention to developments and events abroad. Such a code would of course raise many questions. The first would involve the problem of enforcement. Without an enforcement mechanism, a code might have no effect at all, indeed it might be a form of public deception.' The enforcement question is a central part of the general inquiry into the preconditions for effective self-regulation. 4 There are several obvious possibilities. The simplest would be for the NAB to undertake enforcement on its own, just as it did under the old code. It might, for example, give a seal of approval to those who are shown to comply with its provisions and deny a seal of approval to those who have been shown not to have complied. The NAB might also give special public recognition to those stations that have compiled an excellent public service record in the past year. Such recognition might be awarded for, among other things, meeting the needs of children in a sustained and creative way; offering substantive and extended coverage of elections, including interviews, free air time, and debates; offering substantive and extended coverage of public issues; and providing opportunities for discussion of problems facing the local community. At the time of license renewal, a notation might be given to the FCC that there has been compliance or continuing or egregious noncompliance with the code. If the NAB is unwilling to enforce a code of this kind,225 perhaps a private group could take the initiative, both promulgating the code and publicizing it, and in that (modest) sense sanctioning violations. 6 A special problem here is that in light of increasing competition from nonbroadcast programming sources, a code would not be in the economic interest of broadcasters even if generally adopted, and this is an unpromising fact for a code's effectiveness? 7 Perhaps supplemental enforcement will come from rivals of those who defect from the agreement and violate the code; this is a reasonable prediction in theory, and something similar has been found in analogous areas." Any enforcement by the NAB or even a private monitoring group would be most likely to succeed if accompanied by external pressures of one sort or another. As in the case of disclosure requirements, the most promising possibilities include public interest groups able to mobilize relevant social norms and to focus media attention on derelict actors. 229 Perhaps such activity would be accompanied by market pressures of various sorts, as consumer action has had significant effects on code enforcement in related areas 3 0 A degree of FCC interest in the existence of code violations would also help. self-interest and self-regulation). D. Notes on the First Amendment and Antitrust Law A code for television broadcasters might be thought to raise issues of both constitutional and antitrust law. The constitutional issues are relatively straightforward; the antitrust issues are a bit more complex. I offer a brief discussion here. free air time for political candidates. E. Less Puzzling Puzzles We are now in a position to disentangle the two puzzles discussed in Part I.B above. Why were broadcasters pleased that the proposed NAB code would violate antitrust laws? Why did they prefer rigid government mandates to a flexible, "play or pay" approach? The broadcasters on the Committee favored a code partly because they thought it a good idea in principle and partly because they had little to lose from it. Though generally "winners," they were selected for the Committee because of their commitment, through both words and deeds, to moderating some of the adverse effects of competition. They were vulnerable to "winner-take-all" effects insofar as they were reluctant to engage in certain competitive practices. In this way, a code might even help them. But the NAB would not like a meaningful code at all. The broadcasting industry as a whole would be hurt by such a code, especially because cable television would not be bound by it. Why should broadcasters, in an intensely competitive market, give a significant edge to cable? Especially if the result would be that cable could take a lot more, of the viewing audience than it now does? It is not surprising if broadcasters who supply a large degree of public interest programming believe that they would be net winners with a codeand if the broadcasting industry as a whole believes that it would be a net loser. Such an industry, cautious about invoking its own economic interest alone, is all too likely to invoke the antitrust laws (or the First Amendment) for purely strategic and self-interested reasons. The best defense of a code of the sort I have discussed is that it would produce "winner-take-less" outcomes, in a way that would provide significant benefits for the public by diminishing some of the adverse effects of market competition and by strengthening broadcaster norms in favor of obligations to children and to democratic values. And if this is so, it provides a general lesson about how voluntary private action might sometimes handle problems usually dealt with by direct regulation-and a lesson about the reflexive use of the antitrust laws to prevent producer cooperation. A key question is whether mechanisms might be created to ensure compliance with any such code. This discussion has ranged over a number of regulatory tools, and it may be helpful, by way of summary, to discuss them all briefly and at once. We have seen that both disclosure and codes have the advantage of ensuring a minimal government role, in a way that reduces constitutional concerns and also allows a high degree of flexibility. The danger is that these remedies will have little effect; here the key question is whether there are good external monitors, able to impose reputational or other costs on those who do poorly. We have also seen that "taxes" on programming that does not serve public interest goals, and subsidies to programming that does serve such goals, can have similar effects. A principal problem with subsidies is that they create an incentive not to provide such programming voluntarily. The following table charts the basic territory: 240. With the qualification that this could involve hot spots and cold spots, discussed supra at Part a t cc t o c a a Some of these tools could serve as complements rather than as alternatives. Disclosure makes sense with or without additional strategies. It should be the least controversial item on the list; the only real question is what else should accompany it. Disclosure is likely to work especially well in tandem with voluntary self-regulation, indeed the two tools are natural allies. By contrast, mandates and economic incentives are genuine competitors, and in the current context, economic incentives generally seem best, with mandates operating as a "backstop," probably to be eliminated in the long term.24 As I have emphasized, these recommendations are designed for the current stage of telecommunications technology; they are also likely to make sense for the near term. For the next decade, the key question is whether initiatives designed for broadcasters should be applied to cable programmers as well (especially disclosure and compliance with a code). In the very long term, when broadcasters occupy no special role, it may be best to impose disclosure requirements on general-interest stations, and also to subsidize high-quality programming of various sorts. A reasonable conclusion would be that in the long-term, public interest programming will be best promoted via subsidies, not through regulation of any kind. In such an era, much will have been gained and much will also have been lost, with the fragmentation of the television market, with less in the way of common experiences, and, possibly, with less frequent exposure to serious coverage of serious issues0 2 It is too soon to know whether the very long term will come in the next decade or long thereafter.243 One final note: The discussion here has been focused on law, not on norms or culture; but the argument for a certain conception of the social role of television bears at least as much on norms and culture as on law. It is possible to think that before long, it will not make sense to impose regulatory requirements on CBS, NBC, ABC, and Fox, any more than it makes sense to impose regulatory requirements on Newsweek, Time, The New York Times, USA Today, National Review, or The New Republic. I have argued against this conclusion, but it must be taken seriously. Even if it is accepted, it is crucial to say that those who provide television, like those who produce newspapers and magazines, have a distinctive cultural responsibility, associated with the promotion of a democratic culture. Many people not subject to regulation take this responsibility seriously; many do not. If law diminishes as a constraining force, it is all the more important to speak on behalf of the basic norms-protection of children, the suggestion that the Internet may never become an important means of delivering television). Much of the discussion here has involved appropriate regulatory tools. For the most part, the policy instruments of choice should not involve rigid dictates or commands, which are expensive and potentially counterproductive, and in any case ill-suited to an era of rapidly changing technology. I have suggested a strong preference for the less intrusive options of disclosure, economic incentives, and voluntary self-regulation. Disclosure has been a surprisingly successful, low-cost strategy in other areas of regulatory law. If certain broadcasting is seen as a public good, analogous to clean air, economic incentives may be able to accomplish a good deal, and to do so at relatively low cost. Because competitive pressures are frequently the engine behind poor broadcaster performance, voluntary selfregulation may turn out to be a desirable kind of "cartel," helping to counteract short-term interests. Through this route it may be possible to develop an intermediate system of controls, responding to the market and nonmarket failures of current markets, but without introducing the rigidity and inefficiencies of command-and-control regulation. These points hold notwithstanding current and anticipated technological developments.2 Of course, the appropriate attitude toward such instruments is pragmatic, empirical, and experimental, rather than dogmatic or theological. If these instruments fail to work, it will be worthwhile to consider alternatives. A further point of some importance is that there is no single new media form or market, and there is never likely to be such uniformity. Markets remain distinct; for example there is still a clear distinction between television-type services and on-line services. Technological convergence may be imminent in the form of television Internet access (or Web TV) becoming cheaply available, but the cultures remain radically different. Indeed, in the context of television, it seems likely that, though delivery forms may change, the culture may not, and that new types of media may supplement rather than replace existing ones. Again the message is one of caution before we scrap existing regulatory arrangements.