 University of Chicago Law School Chicago Unbound Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics Solidarity in Consumption Cass R. Sunstein Edna Ullmann-Margalit Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein & Edna Ullmann-Margalit, "Solidarity in Consumption" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 98, 2000). Solidarity in Consumption Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit This paper can be downloaded without charge at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=224618 Solidarity in Consumption Cass R. Sunstein* and Edna Ullmann-Margalit** Abstract Contrary to a common picture of relationships in a market economy, people often express communal and membership-seeking impulses via consumption choices, purchasing goods and services because other people are doing so as well. Shared identities are maintained and created in this way. Solidarity goods are goods whose value increases as the number of people enjoying them increases. Exclusivity goods are goods whose value decreases as the number of people enjoying them increases. Distinctions can be drawn among diverse value functions, capturing diverse relationships between the value of goods and the value of shared or unshared consumption. Though markets spontaneously produce solidarity goods, individuals sometimes have difficulty in producing such goods on their own, or in coordinating on choosing them. Here law has a potential role. There are implications for trend setting, clubs, partnerships, national events, social cascades, and compliance without enforcement. A. Community and Consumption In the history of political thought, many people have objected to the pervasiveness of cash exchanges in capitalist economies.1 The fundamental concern often involves the potential effect of money in “flattening” social experiences and eliminating important qualitative distinctions among social goods. Perhaps the concern has been vindicated in practice; but there is another side of the picture. In many ways, social norms and practices, far from having been flattened by money, have worked to “unflatten” money. As a prominent sociological study finds, “There is no single, uniform, generalized money, but multiple monies: people earmark different currencies for many or perhaps all types of social interactions . . . . [P]eople will in fact will respond with anger, shock, or ridicule to the ‘misuse’ of monies for the wrong circumstances or social relations.”2 One of our major goals here is to describe some related phenomena – to offer an account of important, but insufficiently noticed, features of the relationship between economic markets and social practices. Many critics of market relationships have emphasized their apparently atomistic and alienating nature, and the asocial, highly * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. ** Department of Philosophy, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Special thanks to Avishai Margalit for helpful discussions and suggestions. We are also grateful to Jill Hasday, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Randy Picker and Gil Kalai for helpful comments on an earlier draft. 1 See, eg, Georg Simmel, The Philosophy of Money (Tom Bottomore and David Frisby trans., 1978, originally published 1900). 2 See Viviana Zelizer, The Social Meaning of Money 18-19 (1994). individualistic attitudes that markets seem to express and to inculcate.3 Undoubtedly this account contains truth; but here too there is another side. Daily consumption patterns reflect a range of highly social, even communal impulses. They demonstrate that in their consumption choices, consumers relate not just to products but to other customers too. For many goods, the principal motivation for consumption is to share an experience of one sort or another, with friends, acquaintances, or complete strangers. In consuming massproduced goods people often seek, and find, a sense of solidarity and belonging. The impulse toward shared experiences and toward multiple forms of solidarity – sometimes toward simultaneous inclusion and exclusion – persistently reasserts itself. are enmeshed in efforts of sellers and buyers alike to build networks of common experiences and identifications. Advertisers of goods are well aware of this point and sometimes attempt to exploit it for economic gain.4 But even when they do not, an emphatically social impulse plays a large role in consumption choices and in the practices that emerge from them. These phenomena help explain the undeniable pleasure that sometimes accompanies mass consumption. Consumers’ enjoyment in finding solidarity thus offers another perspective on mass consumption, one very different from that offered by those who emphasize the risks of alienation and fragmentation. We shall start by distinguishing among three types of goods and investigating some implications of the resulting distinctions for analyzing behavior. After refining the distinctions along several dimensions, we shall explore the potential role of law and government in creating some of the relevant goods. We paint with a broad analytical brush, in the hope of elaborating categories that may be useful for general understanding and ultimately for more detailed work, both empirical and normative. enjoying or consuming them. Call these solitary goods. The value of a cup of coffee in the morning, or of exercising on the treadmill, may be unaffected by whether others are drinking coffee of exercising (fig. 1). The value of other goods depends, at least in part, on whether or not other people are enjoying or consuming them too. Call  t  hese social goods. Social goods divide into solidarity goods and exclusivity goods. Solidarity goods have more value to the extent that other people are enjoying them; they reflect something like a communal impulse. The value of a magazine or television program focussing on a current topic (genetic engineering of food, for example) may increase significantly if many other people watch or read them (figs. 2, 3). Exclusivity goods, in contrast, diminish in value to the extent that other people are enjoying them. The value of owning an art lithograph, or of vacationing in a holiday resort, may go down, perhaps dramatically, if many others have the same lithograph or access to the same resort (fig. 4). 3 See Jon Elster’s illuminating discussion of the themes of commodity fetishism and alienation, in Making Sense of Marx 100-07 (1985). 4 For examples, see Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (2000). 5 Compare the discussion of the search for better relative position in Robert H. Frank, Choosing the Right Pond (1985); the point is related mostly to our treatment of exclusivity goods, as discussed in more detail below. can result in sub-optimal production or coordination, and here law sometimes plays a constructive role. The analysis bears on the protection of pristine areas, on environmental and communications policy, on creation of national holidays and promotion of cultural symbols, the right of privacy, and more. II. Goods and Persons A. Solidarity Goods: In General The value of many goods is a function of how many people are enjoying or consuming them. In many cases, goods become more valuable because and to the extent that they are being widely enjoyed. Consider a popular movie, the Super Bowl, a presidential debate, or a millennium celebration. These are goods that are worth less, and possibly worthless, if many others are not enjoying or “purchasing” them too. Part of what people are willing to pay for, when they enjoy or buy the good, stems from the range of benefits coming from the fact that other people are also enjoying or buying it. Some goods would not be worth consuming, or even having for free, if others did not consume them too. Sometimes the good, taken as a solitary good, has negative value. For spouses of the sports-obsessed, the Super Bowl and the World Cup probably fall in this category. Producers of goods and services are well aware of this fact; they know that the number of viewers and users will increase, sometimes exponentially, once popularity is known to exceed a certain threshold. may be taken in two ways. It may refer to the very same token of the good, e.g. the broadcast of the Super Bowl or a presidential debate. In other cases the solidarity good in question is thought of as a type, and each person enjoys a different token of this type, e.g., a drink at the end of a conference. B. Public and Private, Conformity, and Trend-Setters To qualify as solidarity goods, it is not necessary that the relevant goods be enjoyed by people who are literally in each other’s company. Some goods are public solidarity goods, whereas others are private solidarity goods. Public solidarity goods are those that people like to enjoy in the company of others. Private solidarity goods are those that people like to enjoy by themselves, but in the knowledge that others are enjoying them too. Movies in the theatre have, for many, the quality of public solidarity goods; movies rented for use on the VCR have, for many, the quality of private solidarity goods. good more if, as a result of your consuming it (i.e. owning, using, displaying, or subscribing to it), many others do so too. The point is especially pertinent for teen-age culture and teen-age consumer goods like fashion items, CDs, magazines, and so on. Trend-setting goods may be subsumed under solidarity goods, with a special causal twist: not only does the trend-setter enjoy the good more if many other people are consuming it too, but she enjoys it more if others consume it because she is consuming it. If I am known to have set the trend, part of my pleasure may have to do with fame; but even if it is not generally known that I set the trend, I may still derive pleasure from the numbers. Those who like to follow trend-setters think similarly. For them, what is important is not only the fact that many other people are consuming the good in question, but that particular, noteworthy people have started the process of widespread consumption. 6 Roger Finke and Rodney Stark, The Churching of America, 1776-1990: Winners and Losers in Our Religious Economy 252 (1992). Note, however, that the pleasure of singing along with hundreds of others is not restricted to religious hymns. activities and for more private and intimate experiences.7 This point does not hold for all religions or religious organizations. But it raises many issues, taken up below, about private and public behavior designed to encourage or to force others to join in the enjoyment of what is, for many, a solidarity good. Solidarity goods have interesting relationships to club goods and network effects, both of which have received extensive recent investigation. We offer some notations here. service but also certain common characteristics with other members12; this enjoyment has an exclusionary aspect. The preferred characteristics may include gender, geography, education, wealth, religion, or race. Thus clubs often form not only or not mostly to reduce the per-person costs of desirable goods but instead to form bonds of inclusion, based on the common characteristics. Here the sharing of club goods may well produce increasing benefits as the number of desired members increases (subject to the risk of crowding), but the benefits decline, for many or for all, if undesired members join. Thus many clubs depend on exclusion as well as inclusion; what members like is not only a set of common experiences, but the fact that other people, not defined in the same way, cannot enjoy those experiences. We generalize this phenomenon below; it bears on many social experiences, and is hardly limited to groups that have selfconsciously created clubs. phenomena; but it is much narrower than the idea of solidarity goods. What we are emphasizing is not the magnified convenience and range of applications that come from numerous adoptions (as in the case of the fax machine or telephone), but the subjective benefits, hedonic and otherwise, that come from the very fact that many people are enjoying the relevant good or activity. For network goods, the paradigmatic case has to do with actual networks – goods whose purpose is to connect people to other people.15 Because of its function, a telephone or a fax machine is obviously more valuable if many people have them. A language is a “network” in this sense. But network effects are created also by products that are not used for communication at all. Think for example of a credit card: the more popular the brand, the more businesses will accept it and even offer deals to its carriers. Conventional network effects are further created by products that are not used for communication in the strict sense, but that permit information to be exchanged more readily among people who may seek to exchange information. The value of these products, like a popular word-processing program, increases when other people are using them. 13 See Michael Katz and Carl Shapiro, Network Externalities, Competition, and Compatibility, 75 Am Econ Rev 424 (1985); Philip Dybvig and Chester Spatt, Adoption Extenalities as Public Goods, 20 J Pub con 231 (1983). Mark Lemley and David McGowan, Legal Implications of Network Economic Effects, 86 Cal. L. Re. 479 (1998). On the distinction between network effects and network externalities – terms often used interchangeably – see S.J. Liebowitz and Stephen Margolis, Network Externality: An Uncommon Tragedy, 8 J. Econ. Persp. 133, 135 (1994) (suggesting that “network effects” apply to markets with increasing returns to scale and “network externalities” should be restricted to markets in which increasing returns create suboptimal conditions). 14 Id. at 483. 15 See Katz and Shapiro, supra, at 424; Lemley and McGowan, supra, at 488. expansion of the category of network effects, with the suggestion that similar effects stem from a wide range of goods and services. Many goods are solitary goods. Their value is quite independent of whether other people enjoy them. For such goods, it does not matter whether many, few, or none are involved. Some people have this attitude toward sporting events and television programs; drinking a glass of orange juice in the morning, driving a Toyota Camry, or exercising on your treadmill are typical examples for many people. Exclusivity goods are valued to the extent that can be enjoyed in small groups or alone. The fact that others are enjoying them makes them worth less and perhaps much less. This is true for certain status-related goods, sometimes described as positional goods,16 and it is also true for goods that allow or create solitude -- a beach house, for example, in a remote area. Often exclusive or near-exclusive enjoyment is a large part of value. In the extreme case, an exclusivity good has the value it has because only one person is able to enjoy it. (Consider: you are a Hollywood actress, and the good in question is a dress for the Oscar night. Small disasters have been known to occur when two actresses turned up with the very same dress.) Of course producers exploit this property of some goods, by emphasizing their rare or unique character; scarcity may be intentionally manufactured for this purpose, as in the case of the “rare commemorative coin,” printed in limited editions. F. Demi-Solidarity Goods There is an interesting class of goods that do not quite fit any of the three categories; call these demi-solidarity goods. For such goods, it is undesirable to see either increases in use above a certain point or    decreases below a certain point. You might choose to attend a seminar only if it is neither very large nor very small. You may want to go to a restaurant, but you will not go either if it is very crowded or if you will be almost alone there. Something similar is often true for decisions about clothing. Many people do not want simply to follow the crowd, but they also do not want to stand out too much. The goods should be popular, but not too popular. For demi-solidarity goods the number of users matters and may be crucial to choice. But value neither increases nor decreases continuously as a function of that number (fig. 6). combination of solidarity and exclusivity. Many clubs thus provide a special set of demisolidarity goods. Such clubs are valued partly because they allow a certain group, defined in specified terms, to enjoy goods and activities in common, while at the same time excluding others, also defined in specified terms. Here the solidarity good depends on a degree of exclusivity, and vice versa. In fact group identity often depends on the right mix of solidarity and exclusivity. A. The Relational Character of Goods Thus far we have been writing as if goods qualify or fail to qualify as one of the various types because of what they “are.” But this is an oversimplification. The nature of a good, for any particular person, depends not only on its innate qualities but also on how particular people relate to it. Here people differ from one another, often dramatically. It is not possible to “read” the nature of the good, along the dimension that we are discussing, off the good itself; it is necessary to know how people react to it, and people, groups, and even cultures typically vary along relevant dimensions. is crowded. But it may be a solitary good for others, who go for the coffee, and who do not care how many people are there. And it may be an exclusivity good for others, who like it best or perhaps only when it is empty. A Super Bowl may be a solidarity good for many people, who organize parties around the event, but a solitary good for others, who most like to watch it alone. A Jane Austen novel may be a solitary good for some, but for the members of a Jane Austen Society, it may be a solidarity (or a demi-solidarity) good instead. Those who market a certain good – sneakers, for example – might try to convert it into a solidarity good for many or most; they may or may not succeed. good may be a solidarity good to me, or to you, but not a solidarity good as such. Still, in spite of possible idiosyncrasies, many goods are solidarity goods to many or to most people. These are typical cases, and we may talk of the typical cases as solidarity goods tout court. If a good is said to be a solidarity good, the understanding is that there exist many to whom the value of this good increases to the extent that others are consuming it too. social conventions. Groups and cultures as well as individuals can differ along these dimensions. These are of course brief remarks on a wider subject. There can also be complex value functions with respect to both solidarity goods and exclusivity goods. These functions include both discontinuities and sudden shifts in direction. We can imagine solidarity goods for which value steadily increases with the number of people who consume or enjoy them (fig. 2). We can imagine goods for which value increases up to a certain number of consumers, but does not increase after that point (fig. 3). Perhaps those who watch a presidential debate need to know that millions of people are watching, but the number of millions is not important. We can imagine an exclusivity good for which value decreases with the increase in the number of consumers, but from a certain point it stays constant (fig.7). Perhaps a beach is an example: once it is crowded, it does not much matter, to the privacy lover, how much more crowded it gets. As we have noted, it is possible to imagine goods whose value decreases when the number of consumers increases above a certain point, and also when the number falls below a certain point (fig. 6). What matters with these demi-solidarity goods is that the number of participants remains between the two points. There are many possible variations here. Sometimes people care not only about the sheer number of consumers but also and perhaps more importantly about their identity. Six relevant people may be the critical ones for you; the fact that those people, in particular, are enjoying the relevant good (or not enjoying it) is what makes you especially like it. A (pro tanto) solidarity good may increase in value to you as the six relevant people simultaneously enjoy it; but others are irrelevant. Call these partnership goods. In the limiting case, consider a close friendship or a marriage, where the fact of joint consumption may be crucial to the underlying choice (of restaurants, or movies, or vacation resorts). In such relationships, value can be greatly increased by virtue of the fact that the two people involved are enjoying the good, which has in that respect the features of a partnership good. Indeed, the fact that two particular people are enjoying it may be what gives it all or almost all of its value. If more than the two people are also enjoying it, consumption by others may be irrelevant and value may stay constant. valuable is that it is restricted to a number of particular people? An important feature of some goods is that value increases when a certain number of relevant people enjoy them, but consumption by others reduces value. As we have seen, this is true for some clubs; it can also be true in friendships and fraternities, and also in neighborhoods, teams, clubs, ethnic groups, and nations. People may like a good more when it is enjoyed by a large number of people thought to be relevantly like them; advertisers often try to exploit this fact and consumers may react accordingly whether or not they do. But once people in another category start enjoying the good, value decreases, sometimes dramatically. and in the case of partnership goods people care about their particular identity. But now we recognize an additional class of goods, call them fraternity goods, where people care about fellow consumers falling under a certain description or belonging to a particular category (e.g. students, Catholics, athletes, gays). Fraternity goods have an excluding, discriminatory element: not only do you enjoy the party more to the extent that more Catholics come, but your enjoyment decreases if non-Catholics participate too. Here we are generalizing the idea of discriminatory clubs -- groups self-consciously formed to create club goods that include the local public good of exclusion. Ordinary consumer products can have the same feature, with more informal rules of inclusion and exclusion, as, for example, when people of a certain type wear certain clothing, perhaps displaying signals that outsiders do not understand. solidarity, solitary, or exclusivity goods, but that the value of a good is a function of its solidarity value, solitary value, and exclusivity value. These values can be combined in different ways, both for different people and in the social aggregate. For some people in relation to some goods, solidarity value may be real and thus positive, but it is the solitary value of the good that drives consumption. For some people and some goods, exclusivity value is crucial and makes consumption likely, while for others the exclusivity value of the good may be positive but of trivial importance. It is easy to imagine a continuum of values and many possible variations. Why do some goods increase in value when others are enjoying them? People care about their reputations, and if other people are doing something, it is People may be able to participate in valuable social interactions, and other activities, The fact that a good is widely enjoyed may relieve people’s anxiety about whether it • because of their consumption of certain goods. Part of what they get from those goods is the relevant social interactions. For example, those who watch sports event or a popular situation comedy may be able to have a range of conversations by the water-cooler at work. Those who visit national parks may be able to talk about the visit with their friends (whether this creates or reduces value for the friends is another question). People who follow a presidential campaign may be able to understand and enjoy a range of newspaper articles and television programs that would otherwise be unintelligible. • is reasonable or legitimate to enjoy that good. People may not know whether it is appropriate or proper to enjoy a football game or a situation comedy or a cigar; the fact that other people enjoy it removes a potential sense of shame. Or people may feel proud that they are enjoying something on which others have placed a kind of stamp of approval. Here the enjoyment of others creates an informational externality (see E below). • often reasonable to infer that other people will think well of those who do the same thing, and possibly less well of those who do something different. The value of a certain activity or purchase may increase as its popularity increases, not because of the information provided by popularity, but because of the desirable reputational effects of joining the crowd (or the undesirable reputational effects of not joining the crowd). We can imagine cases in which reputational effects are the most important consideration in consumption choices. The phenomena of cascade effects and tipping points can sometimes be understood in the light of perceived reputational factors; when a critical mass is reached, a very large number of people may end up doing the same thing.18 A closely related point is that people may engage in certain activity in order to signal their “type,” and if large numbers of people will be listening, the signal might be amplified.19 • For some people in relation to some goods, enjoyment is heightened even if social interactions will not ensue, apparently because the social quality of the good is enjoyable for its own sake. This may seem less an explanation than a re-description; but the phenomenon is real. There is comfort in numbers. Many people would be happier to watch a sports event knowing that others are doing so, even if they do not plan to discuss it with others, and even if the fact that others are watching does not convey information about whether it is a good thing to watch. At a comedy club, holding the quality of the jokes constant, people are likely to laugh more, and thus to have a better time, when others are laughing too. there are several possibilities. • positional goods.20 Their value comes precisely from the fact that they are not widely accessible, and people like them because ownership provides a signal about the owner’s status. Ownership or enjoyment of certain goods can impose “positional externalities”21 on those who do not have or enjoy them. Competition for status goods can create a kind of positional arms race,22 in which one-time exclusivity goods become popular and then less exclusive, and new and more expensive exclusivity goods are sought, and they too become popular and less exclusive, and so on, to the eventual detriment of all. • The preceding point emphasizes how the actor or owner wants to appear in the eyes of others; but sometimes more important is the person’s self conception. People may value sole possession even if the good in question is not a luxury item or particularly rare. Sole possession, say of a certain fashion item or of a kilim rug from Turkey, may heighten value in the eyes of the owner not because it is a signal about monetary value, but because it says something to the owner about the sort of person that the owner is. It may enable the owner to think of herself as original, or as a person of refined taste; mass consumption of the good will make it seem vulgar. • Sometimes people value solitude and often people hate crowds. Some exclusivity goods help to ensure solitude or relative solitude, and to prevent congestion or intrusion. This is true for a house in a secluded area, of course; but the point holds too in less dramatic and more mundane settings. People might enjoy going to a nature preserve, a museum, or a beach most when few others are there; and they might be willing to pay a premium to be able to do so. We have referred to the informational and reputational effects produced by the actions and statements of other people. It will be worthwhile to say a bit more about these effects, to see how they connect to the notion of solidarity goods. behavior of relevant others. If so many people are supporting candidate X, or concerned about global warning, or viewing a certain television show, shouldn’t we assume that they’re right? Whenever someone says or does something, she may well create an informational externality  .  23 If a friend goes to a new restaurant, or invests in a new stock, or supports a particular political candidate, she provides you with a signal, carrying with it certain information, one that may turn out to be an important influence on behavior.24 Note, however, that informational externalities may lead people to choose certain goods, without converting those goods into solidarity goods. You may go to a certain restaurant because other people do, in the sense that the actions of others suggest that the restaurant is a good one; but you might hope that on the night that you chose to go, few others will be there. In any case informational effects are a crucial part of mass consumption; producers are well aware of this fact, and they engage in pricing and other policies designed to increase the likelihood that people will learn from the apparent enthusiasm of others.25 From certain actions, there is also a possibility of a reputational effect. If people who matter to you disapprove of those who oppose affirmative action, or of those who enjoy fast-food restaurants and Star Trek, you may be unlikely to oppose affirmative action or to speak favorably of fast-food restaurants and Star Trek. You may change your views and tastes or at least keep them to yourself. Some people may watch an opera on television, or visit the Vietnam War memorial, because other people will think less of them if they do not do so. Reputational effects may thus contribute to enjoyment or consumption of solitary or solidarity goods. IV. The Role of Markets and States A. Subjective Solidarity Value, Third Party Effects, and Objective Solidarity Value Solidarity goods are defined as such because of the value that is created by joint or simultaneous enjoyment by many. Our emphasis here has been on the increase in subjective value that comes from a shared experience. But that increase in value can take many forms; it is not merely hedonic. To the extent that solidarity goods help unify diverse people around common symbols and experiences, they can be an ingredient in social peace. Often they provide a kind of social glue; consider national celebrations, which can help members of a heterogeneous nation create, and benefit from, a shared identity and shared experiences. In this way, solidarity goods can even help contribute to a situation in which people see the needs of others and assist in meeting them. An important possibility, therefore, is that the existence of a range of solidarity goods that are widely consumed helps to make for desirable social cohesion. When such solidarity goods are salient and numerous, people are more likely to exhibit solidarity: they can come to see one another more distinctly and more directly as fellow citizens with common interests and experiences, rather than as depersonalized others whose experiences and internal lives seem remote and obscure. effects limited to those that enjoy them; consider partnership goods. Some solidarity goods will have effects on third parties, both positive and negative. Positive third party effects should be expected when, for example, people are motivated to engage in altruistic or other-regarding activities by virtue of shared experiences. Negative third party effects can be expected in the case of value functions that have a discriminatory feature, as with some fraternity goods, or that, in the extreme cases, embody or produce attitudes that lead to violence. For those who believe that social states should be evaluated in something other than purely subjective terms, it will also be important to distinguish between subjective solidarity goods and objective solidarity goods. Suppose, for example, that we are not utilitarians, and that we believe that evaluation of social well-being does not depend solely on aggregated pains and pleasures. If so, we might think that there is objective solidarity value to programs on educational television, or to visits to pristine areas and cultural institutions, and that this objective value outruns their subjective solidarity value, especially if the latter is seen as hedonic only. If we think that the good effects of these experiences cannot be measured solely by reference to private preferences, objective solidarity value may be higher than the aggregate of subjective solidarity values. It may be lower as well; suppose that people derive subjective solidarity value from knowing that many people are enjoying a movie that is at once silly and very violent. It seems clear that a good society provides a wide range of solidarity goods, whether objectively or subjectively defined. A society that contains few such goods is likely to have a wide range of problems. Without the social glue that solidarity goods provide, a society might become fragmented; it might not even qualify as a society at all. Shared experiences and memories are not merely pleasant (they may in fact be traumatic) but they can be important to social stability and a range of important social values. sense that government is not involved (except insofar as it creates rights of private property and freedom of contract). We have emphasized that in ordinary product markets, companies will greatly profit from selling products as solidarity goods. A sneaker company, for example, may emphasize the large number of people who are wearing its product; a television broadcaster might emphasize that its program is a kind of civic event, the kind of thing that “everyone will be talking about” on the next day. It is reasonable to speculate that a nontrivial amount of commercial success comes through this route. their own, groups of consumers sometimes turn certain products into solidarity goods. Sometimes producers are quite surprised by this process.27 Outside of the ordinary marketplace, associations and clubs form voluntarily, and one of their central functions is to generate solidarity, demi-solidarity, or fraternity goods. Indeed, associations can increase as a result of a kind of cascade, and an understanding of solidarity goods thus casts some new light on the phenomenon of social cascades.28 26 For varying views, see John Rawls, Political Liberalism (1993); Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (1985); Ronald Dworkin, A Matter of Principle (1985). 27 See Gladwell, supra note. 28 Suppose, for example, that in a society of 3000, 400 would not consume a good unless at least 100 other people are consuming it; 1000 people would not consume it unless at least 500 people are consuming it; and 1500 people would not consume it unless 1500 people are consuming it. For those eager to start a cascade, the trick is to Of course cascades occur spontaneously without solidarity goods. If people are learning from the signals of others, a cascade can arise over a fully solitary good. People may like a Toyota Camry whether or not other people are driving Toyota Camrys; but they may have bought their Toyota Camrys because so many other people have done so. Especially interesting cascades occur when increasing numbers of people, with different thresholds for consuming the good, end up joining the process as the solidarity value continues to increase. Note that the value of the Camry qua solidarity good may be instrumental: the more popular the brand of car, the higher its value in the second-hand market, and it is also the cheaper and easier to find spare parts. noted, some religions construe their practices as solidarity goods. Assume, for example, that members of a church believe that an increase in membership greatly increases the value of membership. Perhaps this is so because such increases allow for more enjoyable activities, perhaps because such increases are important to the deity (and may therefore promote the wellbeing of members in this world or the next), perhaps because such increases fit with the ambition of prominent members of the church. These beliefs will create a large incentive to convert more people to the faith, and thus proselytizing is a product of the solidarity value of the religious practice.30 Along the same line and in much the same terms, it is possible to think of the political activity of an ideological political movement or party as a solidarity good. These are tales of the spontaneous production and consumption of solidarity goods. create a collective action problem, which is a particular version of a problem of get 100 initial consumers (perhaps people who consider this a solitary good); once they are in place, the whole society will follow. See Sushil Biikhchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others, J. Econ. Persp., Summer 1998, at 151; David Hirschleifer, The Blind Leading the Blind, in The New Economics of Human Behavior. 29 See Finke and Stark, supra, at 237-275. 30 See id. for discussion of this process in action. 31 See id. at 253-55; Iannaccone, supra, coordination.32 To see this, imagine a simple two-person society. On plausible assumptions, such a society will fail to produce a solidarity good – say, a shared viewing of a full moon – unless a collective action problem can be overcome. Assume that the benefit of individual viewing of the moon is 3; that the benefit of sleep, at the relevant time, is 4; and that the benefit of joint viewing of the moon is 5. The pay-off structure will look like this: Moon watch Sleep Note that the best cell overall is obviously the upper left. It also provides a stable equilibrium, in the sense that once both parties are there, there is no incentive to deviate; this is not a prisoner’s dilemma. It may, however, be a problem for the participants to get to the right place in the first instance. Row-chooser, not knowing what column-chooser will choose, will think this: If I choose M, the worst I can get is 3 (when I’m a lone moonwatcher, while column-chooser sleeps). If I choose S, I get 4 no matter what columnchooser does. If row-chooser has no idea what column-chooser will do, and if he seeks to be on the safe side and to maximize his worst-case scenario, he will choose S. Since the situation is symmetrical, column-chooser thinks the same way. The result may well be that the two will end up at (4, 4), which is also a stable equilibrium. What they need is a method that will bring them to (5, 5) instead.33 Two people, or small groups, can usually solve this kind of problem on their own. government says (or people believe that the government accurately reveals people’s preferences), then everyone will moon watch. As a real world example, consider the widespread phenomenon of “compliance without enforcement” – private compliance with laws that are enforced rarely or not at all, compliance often reflecting a solution to a problem of coordination,35 and sometimes involving the production of solidarity goods. sometimes solidarity goods produce external benefits that are not adequately captured by individual choices. Assume, for example, that the benefits of educational programming, or public affairs television, are not captured by individual viewers; much of the benefit is obtained by others, who learn from those who watch. This is a conventional third-party benefit, and such benefits can come from solidarity goods as from all other kinds. But there are also distinctive externalities associated with solidarity goods - above all, the externalities that follow from various forms of social glue. existence of solidarity goods, they themselves will certainly benefit; and third parties will benefit as well. The inculcation of group identity, or patriotism, and a general interest in public affairs, are cases in point. When people are generally interested in ensuring a wellfunctioning democracy, a range of benefits is likely to be received by the citizenry. (This is not to deny the potential bad effects of patriotism and citizen engagement.) The problem here is generating a sufficient number and density of solidarity goods of the socially desirable kind. If an unregulated market under-produces solidarity goods, government and law might help. Consider the following possibilities, simply for purposes of illustration: entertainment programming has the quality of a solidarity good. For many people, the value of such programming dramatically increases when many people are watching. There is a no mystery why this should be so. Part of the reason is undoubtedly the social benefits that come after the show has been watched; various interactions are made possible through this route. Sometimes such programming provides desirable third party effects; sometimes it generates objective solidarity goods, together with a range of external social benefits. In these circumstances, it makes sense for government to consider policies (for example, through public subsidies) that would ensure high-quality programming, and also to provide incentives (for example, through advertising) to let people know about it and to encourage them to watch. The point bears directly on communications policy, where a democratic government, responsive to citizen aspirations, might attempt not only to allow consumers to satisfy their preferences, but to develop preferences and values of a desirable kind.36 from the fact that the celebration becomes a public event, enjoyed by large numbers of people at the same time. A national holiday is emphatically a solidarity good in both the subjective and objective sense. When the government devotes a day to celebrate national independence, or to honor the memory of a person of significance, it is not fairly subject to criticism on the ground that it is acting in an illegitimately paternalistic way. On plausible assumptions, it is ensuring a form of coordination that private persons cannot easily provide on their own. National holidays, so deemed by law and accompanied by taxpayer funds, can be justified on this ground. value they do because they have been enjoyed by many people over time, and will be enjoyed by many people in the future. When law protects a historic site, and immunizes it from development, part of the reason may be to ensure the solidarity value that comes from its continued existence. The same is true for protection of pristine areas, enjoyed by many people as such. Wildlife refuges, operating as focal points that are also solidarity goods, can be defended partly on this ground. We have been speaking thus far as if solidarity goods are desirable to provide and as if society has an interest in encouraging their existence. This is not exactly false, but things are more complicated. First, the existence of a wide range of solitary and even exclusivity goods has its value too. These help insure and protect pluralism, diversity and autonomy, and they may encourage a wide range of experiments, even experiments in living. Legal rights of privacy are reasonably defended on this ground. Second, the use of public power to increase the enjoyment of solidarity goods may well represent an illegitimate interference with freedom, properly conceived. For many people, religious practices are solidarity goods, and efforts to pressure or force people to participate in the preferred religious activity might well seem attractive to powerful social groups. In cases of this sort, a rights-based constraint should prohibit any governmental effort to increase the enjoyment of what is, for many, a solidarity good. It is necessary to develop an independent account of rights to see when this sort of prohibition should apply. problems. Consider the following possible solidarity goods: criminal conduct, including conspiracy; use of illegal drugs; use of guns; dangerous driving; smoking; discriminating on the basis of race and sex. Many people are more likely to engage in the relevant conduct, and to purchase the relevant goods, if other people are doing so, not simply because of informational and reputational effects, but also because the relevant experiences are genuine solidarity goods, providing increased enjoyment and reduced risk. There is safety in numbers. The individual interest in engaging in activity that is harmful, to self and to others, may well increase if other people are doing the same thing. If certain social bads are solidarity goods, preventive strategies immediately suggest themselves; the goal should be to reduce signals of large social involvement to the point where the numbers begin to “tip” in the opposite direction. Indeed, a whole approach to the problem of crime – the “fixing broken windows” idea – depends on the notion that crime is contagious, with epidemic-like qualities.38 Solidarity goods might also cause undesirable conflict. Suppose two groups compete for new members in order to enhance the solidarity value of what they provide to existing members. One way to compete for members is to make the competing group less attractive, for example by slandering it or by discriminating in one’s own private business or social dealings against members of that group. Religion and ethnicity are often pretexts, or focal points, around which solidarity goods are created; they become the rallying cry when groups come into conflict. A strand of the liberal tradition is indeed suspicious of intermediary groups that come between citizen and state, and this may be part of the reason. Note, however, that the bad effects here are not strictly attributable to solidarity goods, but rather to what we have called fraternity goods, where people care about the goods’ being consumed only by people belonging to a particular category. We have sought to draw attention to an important characteristic of certain goods, or more precisely a characteristic of people’s relations to those goods: an increase or decrease in value as a result of the number of people who are consuming or enjoying them. Some goods significantly increase in value with the increase in the number of people consuming or enjoying them, whereas other goods decrease in value for exactly the same reason. This is a central feature of human relationships, in the marketplace as everywhere else. Frequently people make consumption choices precisely in order to signal or to ensure shared experiences of one sort or another. in more or less diluted forms -- continually reasserts itself in ordinary consumption choices. Advertisers and producers are well-aware of this fact and sometimes attempt to exploit it for their own benefit. But sometimes consumers, operating on their own, make unexpected choices and linkages, and solidarity goods emerge even when producers do not attempt self-consciously to promote them.41 The increase or decrease in value might be limited to consumers or users, and indeed that is what most of our discussion has assumed. But as we have noted, solidarity goods can produce positive or negative third-party effects. Some of them count as objective solidarity goods as well or instead; environmental and communications policies can be understood in this light. l l l l number of consumers number of consumers number of consumers number of consumers l l l number of consumers number of consumers number of consumers Readers with comments should address them to: Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics (Second Series) 1. William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 4. Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of 8. William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An 13. J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 14. Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 18. William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993). 21. Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle 22. Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the 23. William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995). American Business Enterprise (April 1995). and Biotechnology (November 1995). Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996). Autobiographical Essay (March 1997). Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) 61. Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of 62. David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in 63. Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) 64. John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 65. Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: 66. Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of 67. Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) 68. Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic 69. Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 70. Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? 71. Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 72. Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost 73. John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 74. Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 75. Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It 76. William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) 77. Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 78. Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) 81. David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 82. Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 83. Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) 84. Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at 85. Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis 86. Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 87. Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) 88. Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing CostBenefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) 89. Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) 90. David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 91. Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 92. Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 93. Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) 94. Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 2000) 95. David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) 96. Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 97. Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform 98. Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in