Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift Empirical Study Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift Empirical Study University of Chicago Law School University of Chicago Law School Chicago Unbound Chicago Unbound Journal Articles Cass R. Sunstein Daniel Kahneman David Schkade Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman & David Schkade, "Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift Empirical Study," 100 Columbia Law Review 1139 (2000). David Schkade, * Cass R- Sunstein,** and Daniel Kahneman*** How does juy deliberation affect the predeliberation judgments of individualjurors? In this paper we make progress on that question by reporting the results of a study of over 500 mock juries composed of over 3000 juy eligible citizens. Our principalfinding is that with respect to dollars, deliberation produces a "severity shift," in which the jury's dollar verdict is systematically higher than that of the median of its jurors' predeliberation judgments. A "deliberation shift analysis" is introduced to measure the effect of deliberation. The severity shift is attributed to a "rhetorical asymmetry," in which arguments for higher awards are more persuasive than arguments for lower awards. When judgments are measured not in terms of dollars but on a rating scale of punishment severity, deliberation increased high ratings and decreased low ratings. We also find that deliberation does not alleviate the problem of erratic and unpredictable individual dollar awards, but in fact exacerbates it. Implications for punitive damage awards and deliberation generally are discussed. How, if at all, is the outcome of group deliberation different from a statistical aggregation of individual predeliberation judgments? How might jury deliberations depart from the median or mean of individual judgments? Speculation is not difficult. Perhaps juries converge toward the midpoint of individual judgments; perhaps juries move away from, or toward, the high or low of individual extremes. Perhaps juries produce an outcome that is more just or more accurate; perhaps juries generate more predictable and less erratic judgments, so that unpredictability at the individual level, or at the level of the mean or median of (six or twelve) individual judgments, is further reduced by deliberation at the * Herbert D. Kelleher/MCorp Professor of Business, Graduate School of Business, University of Texas, Austin. and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. jury level. A pervasive question is whether a deliberating jury has the effect of producing outcomes that treat the similarly situated similarlyperhaps in terms of civil or criminal liability (do people who have engaged in the same conduct receive the same verdict?), perhaps in the determination of appropriate damage awards, either compensatory or punitive (do similarly situated people receive the same awards?).' In this Empirical Study, we attempt to make some progress on these questions. We do so principally by reporting the results of an extensive study of mock juries (over 3000 people and 500 juries in total). Six-person juries were asked to deliberate about the appropriate punishment in civil cases involving personal injury in two ways, by setting punitive awards in dollars and by indicating, on a rating scale, the severity of the punishment they wished to inflict on the defendant. Our most important and general finding is that with respect to dollar awards, deliberation produces a severity shift: Thejury's dollar verdict is typically higher, and often far higher, than the median judgment of the same jury's individual members before deliberation began. 2 To compress a long story, our specific findings are these: " Jurors followed a simple principle of majority rule in deciding whether to impose punitive damages at all; the decision to award damages was largely a function of the majority of individual predeliberation votes. 1. For concerns along this line, see BMW of North America, Inc. v. Gore, 517 U.S. 559, 587 (1996) (Breyer, J., concurring) ("Requiring the application of law, rather than a decisionmaker's caprice, does more than simply provide citizens notice of what actions may subject them to punishment; it also helps to assure the uniform general treatment of similarly situated persons that is the essence of law itself."). 3. See, e.g., Daniel J. Isenberg, Group Polarization: A Critical Review and MetaAnalysis, 50 J. Personality & Soc. Psychol. 1141 (1986); Craig McGarty et al., Group Polarization as Conformity to the Prototypical Group Member, 31 Brit. J. Soc. Psychol. 1, 3 (1992); David G. Myers & Helmut Lamm, The Group Polarization Phenomenon, 83 Psychol. Bull. 602 (1976); Russell Spears et al., De-Individuation and Group Polarization in Computer-Mediated Communication, 29 Brit. J. Soc. Psychol. 121 (1990). More particularly, our data show a choice shift. See Johannes A. Zuber et al., Choice Shift and Group Polarization: An Analysis of the Status of Arguments and Social Decision Schemes, 62J. Personality and Soc. Psychol. 50, 50 (1992) (defining "choice shift" as "the difference between the arithmetic mean of the individual first preferences before discussion... and the group decision"). unpredictability. We use the term "erratic" as a synonym for unpredictable. 6. As explained below, see infra text accompanying notes 15-16, we looked at "statistical juries" consisting of random groups of 12 individual judgments, with the mean or median judgment of each group of 12 reflecting the "verdict." See Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2100-01. infliction of emotional dis Our earlier study did not involve deliberating juries. In the absence of evidence about how deliberation would affect individual judgments, we analyzed statistical juries, by treating the median of a deliberating group as a good predictor of the ultimate judgment of the deliberating jury.15 We did so on the ground that the received wisdom seemed to support this approach. 16 In this Empirical Study, we investigate the received wisdom-and find overwhelming evidence that it is wrong. The dollar awards of deliberating groups were not close to any measure of central tendency; they were much higher. We also explore several questions of importance to those interested in damages, juries, and deliberative processes in general.1 7 The answers have implications not only for punitive awards, but also for other damage judgments (certainly when these are hard to monetize), possibly for questions of civil and criminal liability as well, and even for deliberation generally. 13. See David W. Leebron, Final Moments: Damages for Pain and Suffering Prior to Death, 64 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 256, 259 (1989) (arguing that tort awards for pain and suffering "vary significantly and that neither the specific facts of the case nor differing theoretical views on the functions of the awards can explain such variation"). Jury awards of punitive damages have become one of the most controversial topics in modem public law. 19 To take just one example, an award of $4.9 billion against General Motors attracted a great deal of national attention in July of 1999.20 It is now clear that the Due Process Clause imposes constraints on permissible awards. 21 A number of statutes, enacted and proposed, create punitive damage "caps,"22 and high awards have become a primary impetus for tort reform in general. 23 There are also controversial issues about punitive damage awards in civil rights cases, most notably in sexual harassment cases. 2 4 At the same time, the problems created by punitive awards bear on related questions in other areas of the law, involving, for example, compensatory damages for pain and suffering, libel, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. 25 Similar problems arise in the area of criminal sentencing whenever an administrative agency is asked to impose civil fines.2 6 Participants in the legal system are often asked to come up with some kind ofjudgment, factual or normative, and then to "translate" that judgment into a dollar award. In the area of punitive damages, it is necessary to make some assessment of the character of the defendant's behavior, and then to ascertain the appropriate dollar amount to be paid to the plaintiff by way of punishment. In many domains, compensatory judgments raise similar puzzles. While juries are nominally expected to find a "fact"-what amount of money would restore the plaintiff to the status quo ante?-it is often extremely difficult to monetize the relevant harm, and normative judgments undoubtedly play a significant role. 27 In the case of punitive damages, it is extremely difficult for even experts to agree on what dollar amount constitutes adequate "punishment" or produces an appropriate deterrent signal. Wis. L. Rev. 1, 5-11 (arguing that the concern over high awards is the result of exaggerations). the Runcible To understand the current study, it is necessary to understand its predecessor by way of background. Our earlier study involved a demographically diverse set of jury-eligible citizens from Travis County, Texas. 34 The relevant experiment involved twenty-eight personal injury cases, which respondents were asked to assess in one of three ways: outrageousness, on a rating scale (0 to 6); intent to punish, on a rating scale (also 0 to 6); and actual awards, on the unbounded scale of dollars. As noted, our principal findings were twofold. People's moral judgments are widely shared and predictable-in fact strikingly so-at least in the personal injury cases investigated in this study.35 But in spite of this point, and in the presence of shared moral judgments, people's judgments on a dollar scale-the scale, or "response mode," favored by the legal system-are highly unpredictable, in the sense that the median 29. See Leebron, supra note 13, at 310. 30. See Shih & Sunstein, supra note 12 (manuscript at 1-3). 31. See Karpoff & Lott, supra note 28, at 540-45. There is some dispute over the degree of unpredictability. Eisenberg et al., supra note 10, show that the logarithm of punitive awards is predicted reasonably well from a set of objective characteristics of cases in which awards were made; in particular, the authors show that the compensatory award is a fairly good predictor of the punitive award. See id. at 644. But the authors themselves note that the range of possible awards in regular (i.e., not logarithmic) dollars is still quite high even after controlling for the many factors in their regression model, including compensatory damages. For example, their data, for a case with a $500,000 in compensatory award, 5% of punitive damage awards would be $10,000 or less, but another 5% would be $6,500,000 or more. See id. at 657; see also Karpoff& Lott, supra note 28, at 540-45 (discussing the consequences of that difficulty). Note also that predictability can be understood in different ways: (a) predictability exists when case characteristics predict punitive awards; (b) predictability exists when the judgments of one group of six or twelve predicts the judgments of another group of six or twelve; (c) predictability exists when an actor can assess expected liability when something goes wrong. Our principal emphasis here is on (b); Eisenberg's emphasis is on (a); both are relevant to (c). Of course the three are closely related in practice. We offer a more detailed treatment of predictability below. See infra Part II.B.8-9. 36. See id. at 2100-03. 37. We relied on evidence suggesting that the median judgment of a group of predeliberative individuals is a good predictor of the judgment that group will reach as a result of deliberation. See id. at 2101 nn.127-28, citing James H. Davis, Group Decision Making and Quantitative Judgments: A Consensus Model, in 1 Understanding Group Behavior 35, 47 (Erich H. Witte & James H. Davis eds., 1996); Shari Diamond & Jonathan Casper, Blindfolding the jury to Verdict Consequences, 26 L. & Soc'y Rev. 513, 553 (1992). We noted, however, the possibility of effects of the sort we observed in the current study. See Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2101 n.128 (noting that deliberation may result in more extreme awards due to "amplification of bias"). Significantly, the variability in punitive damage awards does not flow so much from any inherent inability of different juries to agree on the wrongfulness of specific conduct. Rather, it results from the way courts ask juries to measure that wrongfulness.... The variability in punitive damage awards does not, therefore, reflect any inconsistency injury factfinding, merely that awards are not calibrated to a common scale. 42. See Sandra Shane-DuBow et al., U.S. Dep't of Justice, Sentencing Reform in the Jury-eligible citizens from Phoenix, Arizona were recruited by a survey firm and paid $35 for their participation. Each juror was randomly assigned to a six-person jury, and each jury was assigned to a response mode order; half of the juries judged dollar awards first and punishment ratings second, and the other half completed the tasks in the opposite order. Each jury judged only one case, which was the subject of both its punishment rating (on a scale of 0 to 8) and its dollar award. Six juries (out of a total of 480) had only five members because an insufficient number of participants showed up at a given appointment time. A pilot test of twenty-nine juries was conducted in Phoenix to test the materials and procedure. Because adjustments were very minor, these juries were added to the main sample and the combined sample was analyzed together. Therefore, a total of 3048 citizens participated in 509 juries. punishment ratings both to understand the relation between punishment ratings and dollar awards, and to see the effect of deliberation on both of these. Punishment How much should the defendant be punished because of their actions, and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that the defendant must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please circle the number that best expresses the jury's judgment of the appropriate level of punishment. Substantial 4 Severe 6 Extremely Severe 8 $ Damages What amount of punitive damages (if any) should the defendant be required to pay as punishment and to deter the defendant and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that the defendant must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please write the amount of punitive damages that the jury agreed on in the blank below. 1. Preliminaries. - Notwithstanding the half-hour time limit for deliberation, 91% of juries reached a unanimous verdict on a punishment rating (a total of 461 verdicts) and 82% of juries reached a unanimous 44. Of these, 10 were more elaborate versions of the same scenarios used in Kahneman, Schkade, & Sunstein, supra note 4, at 79-84, and five were completely new scenarios which, like the first 10, were based on real cases (Table 2). The main substantive elaboration on the original scenarios was the addition of a paragraph of closing arguments by the attorneys for each side. guard cure Williams v. National Motors Motorcycle driver injured when brakes fail Smith v. Public Entertainment Circus patron shot in arm by drunk security Douglas v. Coastal Industries Auto airbag opens unexpectedly, injuring driver Sanders v. A&G Cosmetics Man suffers skin damage from using baldness Stanley v. Gersten Productions Elderly woman suffers back injuries from using Glover v. General Assistance Child ingests large quantity of allergy medicine, Lawson v. TGI International Employee suffers anemia due to benzene exercise video needs hospital stay exposure on the job pajamas catch fire malfunctions computer monitor fails stops Newton v. Novel Clothing Small child playing with matches burned when Disabled man injured when wheelchair lift Windsor v. Int'l Computers Secretary chronically ill due to radiation from Reynolds v. Marine Sulfur Seaman injured when molten sulfur container Crandall v. C&S Railroad Train hits car at crossing, injuring driver Dulworth v. Global Elevator Shopper injured in fall when escalator suddenly Hughes v. Jardel Store employee raped in mall parking lot Nelson v. Trojan Yachts Man nearly drowns when defective boat sinks (a total of 416 verdicts). The remainder had verdict on a dollar award not reached a verdict when the time limit expired; these were treated as hung. All further analyses were conducted on the 401 juries that reached both a punishment verdict and a dollar verdict.45 Because there were no statistically significant differences between the verdicts of juries that judged dollars first and those that judged punishment first, we analyzed together the verdicts made by dollar-first juries and punishment-first juries. 45. We chose the more conservative path of focusing on juries with complete responses to ensure that comparisons between punishment and dollar verdicts, and between individuals and juries, were based on the same set of respondents. Recreating our Tables and Figures with all available responses produces the same pattern of results, with some slight differences in exact numbers. Dollar Verdicts Statistical Juies Deliberating Juries Statistical Juries Deliberating Juries Reynolds Glover Lawson Williams Smith Nelson Hughes West Douglas Crandall Sanders Windsor Stanley Dulworth Newton Mean of Top 5 Mean of Middle 5 Mean of Bottom 5 Overall Mean judgment of the individuals who composed thatjury. We will refer to the median predeliberation judgment of the individuals in a jury as the verdict of the statistical jury. To evaluate the effects of deliberation, we compare the verdicts of deliberating juies with those of statistical juries. 46. The columns labeled DSM are explained below, at Part II.B.4. 47. The Spearman rank correlation is an index of agreement between rankings that is analogous to first converting each column to ranks (from I to 15 in this case) and then computing the correlation between the two sets of ranks. Jury Verdicts Individual Predeliberation Judgments Non-Zero Punishment Ratings Majority non-zero Even split Majority zero Non-Zero $ Awards 4. Deliberation Shift Analysis. - We now turn to the severity of punishment verdicts chosen by the juries that determined that some punishment was appropriate. We wish to examine the relationship between the postdeliberation verdict of a jury and the predeliberation distribution of judgments among its members. For this purpose we introduce a deliberation shift analysis, which we will apply to both punishment ratings and dollar awards. The predeliberation judgments of jurors are first ranked, from the most lenient to the most severe; the eventual verdict of the jury is then inserted in that ordering, and its rank is computed. For example, suppose that the individual jurors had predeliberation judgments of $0, $200,000, $300,000, $500,000, $1,000,000, and $5,000,000, and that the jury verdict was $750,000. The jury verdict ranks fifth in the distribution of individual judgments of its members. In this instance, the jury was more severe than four of its original members, and less severe than two of its members, indicating that, overall, deliberation made judgments more severe. the same interpretation for, a jury of any size. Damages. - We now turn to the task of understanding the remarkable difference between the dollar awards obtained from deliberating juries and those obtained from a statistical pooling of the predeliberation opinions of jury members. The basic result is that deliberation causes awards to increase, and it causes high awards to increase a great deal. As extreme but actual illustrations of the severity shift, consider a few examples from the raw data: the DSM was 100% for thesejuries). A further 17% of verdicts were equal to the highest individual judgment (i.e., a DSM of 83%). These extreme verdicts were less common for the five low-punishment cases, in which 15% of verdicts equaled the highest individual judgment, and none exceeded this maximum. The pattern is clear: Deliberation made dollar verdicts more severe, especially for high-punishment cases. Ethnicity Hispanic Household Income Hispanic * Entries are correlations between mean responses to scenarios by respondents in the indicated demographic categories. "My best guess is that you will face ajudgment of $X. There are equal chances that it will be higher or lower than this amount. However, there is a lot of uncertainty about how much higher or lower it will be: There is a 10% chance that you will have to pay more than a times that amount, and there is a 10% chance that you will have to pay less than 1/b of that amount." Averaging across cases, the best estimates53 of a and b, respectively, are 7.74 and 6.61. On the basis of these values, a lawyer who prediits a verdict of $2 million should also estimate that there is a 10% chance that the actual verdict will be over $15.48 million, and a 10% chance that it will be less than $0.30 million. Because the range increases proportionately with the median (except for noise), the same values of a and b apply for any value of $X.5 4 Finally, these estimates assume a jury of six. The uncertainty would very likely be reduced somewhat with a larger jury.55 52. We observed a similar pattern in our previous study. See Kahneman, Schkade, & these estimates, we computed the 90th percentile/median and median/10th percentile ratios for each case, and then computed the geometric mean across cases for each ratio. The estimates reported here are for the nine cases that have neither a median of zero nor a 10th percentile of zero (see Table 6). Minimum Median Maximum Reynolds Glover Lawson Williams Smith Nelson Hughes West Crandall Douglas Sanders Windsor Newton Dulworth Stanley Mean of Top 5 Mean of Middle 5 Mean of Bottom 5 Overall Mean 9. Are Deliberating Juries More Predictable Than Statistical Juries? In the Introduction, we asked whether deliberating juries would produce dollar verdicts that are more predictable than those of statistical juries. We can now use the a and b analysis set forth above 56 to answer this question. As with the verdicts of deliberating juries, variability in the verdicts of statistical juries is roughly proportional to the median verdict.57 We can apply the same procedure as before to estimate the factors a and b, which measure the estimated relationship of the 10th and 90th percentiles for each case to the median award for that case. jury. In this case, since the jury would be twice as large, we divide a and b by the square root of 2. The resulting estimates are a = 4.67 and b = 5.47, which in the lawyer advice example would produce a predicted verdict range of $0.43 million to $10.94 million. We now turn to a discussion of these results. We emphasize three phenomena. The first is identified for the first time here, while the second and third have been studied in many previous experiments. although it is possible to have one kind of movement without the other. See id. at 59. A. The Severity Shift and Rhetorical Asymmetry 1. Rhetorical Asymmetry. - By far the most striking finding in our data is the severity shift produced by deliberation. What mechanism causes a jury to decide on an award that exceeds the initial judgment of its median member-and sometimes to exceed the highest predeliberation judgment of all its members? We hypothesize that a feature of deliberation, a rhetorical asymmetry, helps produce the one-way movement that we observe. Specifically, we hypothesize that once the jury has agreed that there will be a non-zero dollar award, the arguments for a larger award have a rhetorical advantage and are more persuasive. If this is the case, then a jury would be drawn disproportionately toward the larger predeliberation judgments of its jurors. No such asymmetry would be expected for the punishment scale, if it is hypothesized that social norms give the advantage, not to anyone arguing that the conduct of a corporate defendant was "worse" in the abstract, but to anyone arguing for a higher dollar award against a corporate defendant. The key point has to do with the translation of a punishment judgment into a dollar award; those who argue that "more" money is necessary to punish a corporation appear to have the upper hand. The unbounded dollar scale affords great latitude in the expression of what "more" means. Imagine that ajury in a civil trial is deliberating about a personal injury case in which the defendant is a large corporation (with annual profits of approximately $200 million). The jury has already (a) unanimously ordered the defendant to pay an amount of compensatory damages that fully compensates the plaintiff, and (b) unanimously concluded that while the underlying conduct was not truly horrendous, it was sufficiently reckless to justify an award of punitive damages as well (in addition to compensatory damages). The results confirmed our hypothesis: A clear majority (55%) thought that arguing for a lower award would be the more difficult rhetorical position. Further, of those who showed a preference, the margin was almost four to one that arguing for a larger award is easier. Moreover, being asked to justify a higher or lower award had no effect; both groups agreed that it is harder to argue for a lower award. Note that the University of Chicago study closely followed the jury study, in that the former, like the latter, involved a corporate defendant with $200 million in annual profits. It seems likely, then, that a rhetorical asymmetry played a substantial role in producing jury verdicts consistently above the median individual judgment, and sometimes even above the highest individual judgment. 61. For a full reproduction of the questions used in this study, see infra Appendix B. 62. See infra Part IV. 63. For punishment verdicts (for clarity, not depicted here), switching to the mean as the basis for statistical juries has little effect because of the low level of skewness in the distribution of punishment judgments. is calculated by first computing the differences between the predicted verdict (i.e., the median or average of predeliberation jurors) and the actual verdict (the jury verdict), taking the square of each difference, and then taking the square root of the average squared difference. In regression, the predicted value of the regression equation plays the same role as the mean or median do here, and the RMSE is thus analogous to the standard error of a regression (the estimate of a). The mean absolute error (MAE) is computed by taking the average of the absolute values (i.e., the magnitude, regardless of its sign) of the differences. 1. The Data and Some Central Ideas. - Our study shows what is conventionally called a "choice shift" with respect to punishment ratings, pivoting around the rating of "3."66 Choice shifts of this general sort are common consequences of deliberation, and they have been found in many diverse tasks. The result is that groups often go in more extreme directions-both higher or lower on the relevant scale-than would the typical or average individual in the group. As noted, the related phenomenon of group polarization-for which we did not test here-occurs when individuals move to a more extreme position in the direction indicated by the mean of predeliberation judgments. We offer a brief summary of relevant literature. 65. This is usually due to the presence of one or two extremely high individual judgments in a jury. 2. Risky Shifts. - Before 1961, conventional wisdom had been that as compared with the individuals who compose it, a group of decisionmakers-for example, a committee or board-would be likely to favor a compromise and thus to avoid risks. 72 But the relevant experiments, originally conducted by James Stoner, found otherwise; they identified what has become known as the "risky shift."7 3 Deliberation tended to shift individual members in the direction of greater risk-taking (group polarization); and deliberating groups, asked to reach a unanimous decision, were generally more risk-inclined-sometimes far more risk-inclined-than the mean individual member, predeliberation (choice shift). aggravation. Our punishment ratings, by contrast, lacked an obvious neutral midpoint, and of course dollar awards have no such midpoint. We do not know if our jurors were susceptible to a group polarization, because members were not polled individually afterwards. But group polarization usually occurs where choice shifts are found, and hence there is reason to suspect that this happened here as well. 79 What is most noteworthy is the finding of a choice shift for punishment ratings, and the related finding of much larger severity shifts for high dollar awards than for low dollar awards. The first explanation involves social comparison.8 2 On this view, people want to be perceived favorably by other group members (and also to perceive themselves favorably), and once they hear what others believe, they adjust their positions in the direction of the dominant position. They may want to signal, for example, that they are not cowardly or cautious, and hence they will frame their position so that they do not appear such in comparison to other group members.83 The dynamic behind the social comparison explanation is that most people may want to take a position of a certain socially preferred sort, and no one can know what such a position would be until the positions of others are revealed.8 4 Thus individuals move their judgments in order to preserve their image to others and their image to themselves. This dynamic helps explain a shift toward caution (the "cautious shift") as well as toward risk-taking (the "risky shift")85 The second explanation emphasizes the role of persuasive arguments.86 The key point here is that an individual's choice or position on an issue is a function of the number and persuasiveness of arguments presented. Because a group that is inclined in a certain direction will have a disproportionate number of arguments supporting that direction, the result of discussion will be to move individuals further in the direction of their initial inclinations. Thus it is suggested that "[t]he important thing that happens in discussion is that individual arguments are expressed and become fully shared." 87 Once the set of individual arguments is exposed to all individual members, there will be a movement toward a more extreme point in the direction of initial inclinations, simply because arguments in that direction have been pressed and repeated more frequently than opposing arguments. 88 These two mechanisms help account for severity shifts as well; they help explain rhetorical asymmetry. As our University of Chicago study suggests, arguments for higher awards are more persuasive, other things being equal, than arguments for lower awards. This is exactly what is meant by rhetorical asymmetry, in the sense that certain arguments (for "sending a stronger signal") are, we hypothesize, more convincing than others (for "ensuring against overdeterrence"). In addition, social influences, given existing norms, are likely to push people toward higher awards, simply because a concern for reputation, and for self-conception, generally argues in favor of supporting higher awards in the face of conflict. People who argue for higher awards seem to want to give appropriate punishment to wrongdoing (a good thing to seem to want), whereas those who argue for lower awards seem, other things being equal, to be lenient toward wrongdoing by corporations, or solicitous to them (not a good thing to seem to be). We emphasize that these are simply descriptive points, and that social norms could be otherwise, as they apparently are in the context of criminal conviction, where leniency shifts have been observed.8 9 To know whether the dollar awards of deliberating juries are better than the dollar awards of statistical juries, it seems necessary to have a theory of appropriate punitive damage awards, and it is not our purpose willing to say they think). Note that it is implicit in these findings that people seem to want not to conform, but to be different from others in a desirable way. discussion. This unpredictability would probably be lower with larger juries (say of size twelve). But while this increase would almost certainly reduce the increases with problem somewhat-because predictability generally group size 9 1-there is little reason to hope that it would make a qualitative difference. In our current study, deliberating juries of six performed no more predictably than statistical juries of the same size when using the punishment scale, and were less predictable when using the dollar scale. The statistical juries in our previous study (which were the primary basis for our conclusions about unpredictable awards) contained twelve jurors. Thus, if the relationship between deliberating and statistical juries we found here holds, it is likely that deliberating juries of twelve would show less predictability for dollar awards than our statistical juries of twelve; and those juries showed an extremely high degree of unpredictability. With respect to damage awards, compensatory as well as punitive, many proposals have been motivated by a desire to decrease unpredictability. This goal has, for example, played a role in proposals for damage caps, for simple multipliers (relating punitive awards to compensatory awards), and for informing the jury of average awards or of intervals.9 2 It has also played a role in constitutional limitations. 93 But many of these proposals would do nothing about the problem of scaling without a modulus; damage caps, for example, would reduce unduly high awards, but would not inform the jury of the meaning of various possible awards. effects). The findings here do not lead directly to any particular reform proposal, but they add several points to the existing literature. First, they demonstrate that juries can use a punishment rating scale quite reliably. Juries are able to answer the normative question directly, and they are also able to use a rating scale far more reliably than the familiar dollar scale. And if deliberating juries are thought to have advantages over other, less populist institutions-as many people clearly believe 97 -then there is reason to consider a reform proposal that would involve directly eliciting the jury's moral judgment. As noted, this judgment might be converted into a dollar award by some kind of calibration formula, defined by expert judgments about what different dollar awards would mean or do to particular defendants, or instead by population-wide data relating normative judgments to dollar awards. Either route could greatly diminish unpredictability. 98 The data here, along with previous data, show that a calibration formula is also feasible to develop and use. 99 In such a reform, juries might be asked to perform two simple tasks: decide whether punitive damages should be awarded at all, and produce a "punishment rating" on a scale that has verbal descriptions to accompany the numbers. It is easy 94. See Jennifer K. Robbenolt & Christina A. Studebaker, Anchoring the Courtroom: The Effects of Caps on Punitive Damages, 23 Law & Hum. Behav. 353, 367 (1999) ("[W]hen the cap was high, the size and variability of the punitive damage awards were higher than awards in a control condition in which the cap was absent."). But see Linda Babcock & Greg Pogarsky, Damage Caps and Settlement: A Behavioral Approach, 28J. Legal Stud. 341, 368 (1999) (finding "strong evidence that a cap reduces uncertainty about the trial outcome"). especially suited to send the community's 'message' through the medium of damages"). An additional point stems from the finding that deliberating juries do not reduce but actually increase erratic awards. We have seen as well that deliberation can produce juries in which group discussion yields awards much higher than those of even the highest of predeliberation judgments. Without saying whether the resulting judgments are good or bad, our findings fortify the suggestion that difficulties with the dollar scale make it hazardous to continue to rely on the current system, in which juries must map their moral judgments onto that scale without being given any guidance about the meaning of the various "points" on the scale. 101 The most radical reform would be to dispense with the jury entirely and to move toward judicial judgments or even to develop a kind of penalty schedule, based on the judgments of some combination of representative and expert institutions. 10 2 We cannot evaluate these alternatives here. Of course the radical reform might be rejected if the relevant institutions would be unreliable, perhaps because bureaucracies might be vulnerable to the influence of politically powerful private groups. The question is one of comparative institutional competence. What we have added here is that the process of deliberation will increase awards generally and high awards dramatically, a result that cannot be comforting in light of the resulting unpredictability. concurring in the result) (citation omitted): U[lury determinations of punitive damages are likely to contain an element of arbitrariness as long as the awards remain uncalibrated. To assure basic fairness, courts must consider ways of calibrating punitive damage awards. We must ask what anchoring variable will make an award of punitive damages an appropriate measure of punishment rather than a test of a jury's ability to imagine big numbers. 102. The idea has received considerable attention in the analogous area of contingent valuation. See Murray B. Rutherford et al., Assessing Environmental Losses: Judgments of Importance and Damage Schedules, 22 Harv. Envtl. L. Rev. 51, 51-56 (1998); Richard B. Stewart, Liability for Natural Resource Injury: Beyond Tort, in Analyzing Superfund 219, 241-44 (Richard L. Revesz & Richard B. Stewart eds., 1995). In the area of compensatory damages, see the plea for damages schedules in Bovbjerg et al., supra note 25, at 922, 937. In the punitive damage context, see Sunstein, Kahneman, & Schkade, supra note 4, at 2121-25; Viscusi, supra note 18, at 589-90. For problems with the current damages regime generally, see Atiyah, supra note 27, at 66-71. If social influence and persuasive arguments are at work, there is a tendency to move to a more extreme point in the direction of the group's initial inclination; but do these mechanisms produce improvements? It seems hard to know without evaluating the initial positions that produce social influence, and without knowing whether the arguments found to be persuasive are actually right. The finding of severity shifts, apparently rooted in rhetorical asymmetry, also raises troubling questions. The argument that "a stronger signal needs to be given to other wrongdoers," or that "we need to get the attention of this defendant," seems to be far more powerful than the argument, "wait, there is a threat of overdeter 103. See, e.g., Deliberative Democracy (Jon Elster ed., 1998) (collecting theories of democracy revolving around "the transformation rather than simply the aggregation of preferences"); Gutmann & Thompson, supra note 17 (developing "a conception of democracy that secures a central place for moral discussion in political life"). We have found that as compared with the median of individual judgments, deliberation makes low punishment judgments decrease and high punishment judgments increase. It also makes-and this is our most important finding-dollar awards generally increase, while making high dollar awards substantially increase, in a general severity shift. We have also found, somewhat to our surprise, that deliberating juries produce more unpredictability than would be found by taking the median of jurors' predeliberation judgments. median of predeliberative individual judgments. But five points seem clear. First, moral judgments about personal injury cases are very widely shared over diverse communities and demographic categories. Second, those shared moral judgments do not produce predictable dollar awards. Third, choice shifts occur in the context of punishment ratings; hence group judgments go to more extreme points in the direction of the inclination originally indicated by the median of predeliberation judgments. Fourth, dollar awards reflect a systematic severity shift, apparently a result of a rhetorical asymmetry in which arguments for higher awards have a general advantage over arguments for lower awards. Fifth, the problem of unpredictable and erratic dollar verdicts is increased, not alleviated, by the fact that juries are deliberative bodies. Closing Argument by Glovers' Attorney. - The attorney for the Glovers argued that General Assistance's disregard for children's safety and for the law was abhorrent and represented exactly the kind of reckless corporate greed deserving of a high award of punitive damages. He concluded that General Assistance's shocking profit-mongering should be punished so that the company would not feel itself at liberty to put children at risk in the future. Imagine that a jury in a civil trial is deliberating about a personal injury case in which the defendant is a large corporation (with annual profits of approximately $200 million). The jury has already (a) unanimously ordered the defendant to pay an amount of compensatory damages that fully compensates the plaintiff, and (b) unanimously concluded that while the underlying conduct was not truly horrendous, it was sufficiently reckless to justify an award of punitive damages as well (in addition to compensatory damages). amount of punitive damages, prior to deliberating as a group. liberation has begun. Juror A states an amount of punitive damages. Juror B states an amount that is much higher, three times A's amount. (You are not expected to know the exact amounts stated by A and B.) What arguments would you expect to hear from Juror B, to support an award that is higher than Juror A's proposal? On the lines below, please write down a list of the arguments that you might expect to hear from Juror B in support of a higher award. Write as many distinct arguments as you can, briefly summarizing each idea in a short phrase or sentence. Please write only one distinct idea per line. In general, which position would you expect to be harder for ajuror (please circle the letter of your answer) to argue for in a deliberation? a) it is harder to argue that damages should be higher b) it is harder to argue that damages should be lower c) the positions are equally hard to argue for Very briefly, please write down the reason for your answer in the space below.