 T he early 1990s were among the most extraordinary periods for constitution making in the history of the world. Several people at the University of Chicago Law School played a role in this period, mostly as observers, to some small degree as participants. The editors of this Journal have asked me for some brief reflections on this remarkable time; I am grateful to have been asked and happy to oblige. After the downfall of the Soviet Union, a large number of nations were embarking on a remarkable enterprise in self-definition and constitutional reform. At the time it was clear that several quite different transitions were involved. Four are easy to identify. The first involved a shift from a command economy to some form of capitalism, or at least a system in which private property was acceptable. The second was a shift from party rule to some form of democracy. The third, of particular interest to law professors and lawyers, involved a shift from rampant official lawlessness, and meaningless constitutions, to some version of constitutionalism and the rule of law. "Constitutions did not play an important role under communism."' One of the principal goals of the transition from communism was to produce a system of meaningful constitutions; ten years later this goal has been largely achieved, to one degree or another. The fourth transition involved a shift to domestic rule from more than occasional control by the Soviet Union. This shift-from Soviet domination to •Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political 1. See Jon Elster, Claus Offe and Ulrich K. Preuss, Institutional Design in Post-Communist Societies 63 Science, University of Chicago. national self-government-turned out to be extremely important to the early 1990s, and often it seemed foremost in the minds of the reformers. My informal impression was that the South African constitution-makers had an extraordinary degree of sophistication about constitution-making and constitutions, including encyclopedic knowledge of other nations' constitutions. Indeed, this encyclopedic knowledge put their American counterparts to considerable shame; Americans tend to know little or nothing about constitutionalism elsewhere. For example, I well remember a debate in South Africa about whether (and how) the new constitution should include guarantees of minimal economic well-being. The participants had full knowledge of actual and possible approaches to the topic. In addition, all of the concerns voiced by American observers were well-understood by the South Africans, and the South African debate went far beyond the American one in its appreciation of possible rejoinders (partly having to do with desirable effects on the legislature, whose responsibility would be made clear in the founding document). 3. The original plan was for a five-year center, compiling information and producing the East European Constitutional Review. The center and the Review were eventually moved to New York University. Sunstein basic ideas seemed unfamiliar. Sometimes there was little thought about the nature of judicial review or about the pragmatic consequences of one or another approach. Law itself seemed in disrepute, a point that might have contributed to the enthusiasm for expressive understandings of constitutions. I remember, for example, an exchange with Ukrainian constitution-makers (during a meeting held in Prague) true heroes, by the way, who had helped to break apart the Soviet Union, with a range of activities on behalf of freedom and democracy. In that exchange, the Ukrainians asked whether the Constitution ought not to have a provision requiring the press and the media to be "objective." It was responded that a free country recognized that what was "objective" was itself disputed, and that a newspaper should be permitted to say what it liked however "subjective." To this response, the Ukrainian constitution-makers replied with uneasy stares. It is noteworthy in this connection that in both Eastern Europe and South Africa, constitution-making was often made possible only by virtue of agreement on abstractions amidst uncertainty or disagreement about what those abstractions might specifically entail. General principles of free speech, religious liberty, and equality under the law could be accepted amidst sharp social contests about the concise substance of those principles. There is a large lesson about law, I think, in the possibility of obtaining, amidst considerable social heterogeneity, incompletely theorized agreements about abstractions!5 4. See, for example, S Afr Consr Art 9(4) ("National legislation must be enacted to prevent or prohibit unfair discrimination."); Art 3(3) ("National legislation must provide for the acquisition, loss and restoration of citizenship."). For similar provision requiring legislative action, see also Art 6(4) (national languages); Art 26(2) (housing); Art 27(2) (health care, food, water and social security); Art 32(2) (access to information); Art 33 (3) (just administrative action). 1996); I learned the lesson from experience in Eastern Europe. Chicago Journal of International Law One impression, however, lingers above all others, and this has to do with a large difference between the process of constitution-making that we witnessed and the more distinctly American understanding of constitutionalism. In brief, Americans, or at least American lawyers, tend to think that constitutions are largely pragmatic instruments, to be evaluated for what they do, not merely what they say. For us, a successful constitution accomplishes a great deal in the real world; it is far more than a set of statements of basic commitments. (This is not to say that the American Constitution is fuly implemented in the world; for example, there are violations of the fourth amendment every day.) In Eastern Europe, by contrast, one of the central points of constitution-making was emphatically expressive-to make a statement about what was being accomplished and to articulate national commitments or goals.6 It is easy to overlook what was entirely visible at the time: the struggle, on the part of many nations, to reassert national identity, or more simply nationhood, in the aftermath of what had been seen by many as a form of Soviet occupation. Discussions with constitution-makers at the time made quite clear that casting off Soviet rule was a widely shared goal, and a key part of what the new constitutions were to claim. Whether the consequence was to produce liberal democracy, and if so of what kind, was a much harder question. 6. For similar reflections about Italy, see Guido Calabresi, Two Functions of Formalism, 67 U Chi L Rev Sunstein a rhetorical advantage to those arguing on behalf of certain claims in the political process. As I have noted, the South African Constitution makes a sharp distinction between judicially enforceable rights and rights whose enforcement is left to the political process. The South African Constitution also has an expressive dimension, especially in the firm commitment to national unity amidst a recognition of great pluralism."0 Thus, the South African Constitution has a great deal of sophistication about various classes of provisions: those that require judicial enforcement; those that will be implemented legislatively; and those that are designed simply to state something about national self-conception." The conflict between the expressive notion of a constitution, and the notion of a constitution as a genuine guarantee of individual rights, has created some obvious puzzles in Eastern Europe. The Constitutional Court has played a large role in welfare reform in Hungary, a role that, to say the least, has not been regarded as productive or desirable by all observers. But in retrospect, it seems clear that American advice-givers were insufficiently sensitive to questions about culture and context; some of us acted as if there was one general model for democratic constitutions, and downplayed domestic fears and concerns, some of which called for an emphatically expressive constitution, and others of which called for unusual provisions and approaches. Americans learned a great deal from these exercises in constitution-making, and they could learn much more from reflecting on what has happened in the last decade and more. I offer two brief thoughts here. lo. 'We, the people of South Africa ... [b]elieve that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity." S Afr Const Preamble. ChicagoJournal of International Law that compliance with constitutional commands would require money. A right to ajury trial, for example, would commandeer a great deal of local court budgets in Russia; protection of basic property rights would call for a well-organized system to extract and deploy taxpayer funds. Even the most negative of negative rights could not exist without public support, and hence negative rights, as they are misleadingly called, require the expenditure of public resources. This point was entirely clear in Eastern Europe and South Africa, and it draws much of conventional American wisdom into grave doubt.3 A second lesson is the limited importance of the constitutional text and the overriding importance of cultural support for constitutional institutions. In retrospect, the precise text of constitutional provisions could increase probabilities of various sorts, and reduce risks; but, it could do little more. This is true in America as well as Eastern Europe. Our constitution does not foreordain existing practices with respect to either institutions or rights; a close reader of the text might well be shocked to learn about our recent institutions and our recent rights. The administrative state is not discussed in the Constitution, for example, and from a reading of the first amendment (which applies only to Congress), it would be very hard to generate the current structure of first amendment doctrine. This does not mean that we lack a Constitution; it means only that the written words constrain us less than we tend to think. 13. For a general discussion, see Stephen Holmes and Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost of Rights (Norton Sunstein To: Constitutional Working Group, Government of Ukraine From: Cass R. Sunstein, Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago; Co-Director, Center on Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, University of Chicago Re: Ukraine's Draft Constitution I am most grateful to have the opportunity to comment on the new Draft Constitution of Ukraine. At the outset, three disclaimers. (1) The views expressed here are tentative and provisional. I am sure that with further discussions, and with additional readings of the Draft Constitution, some of my views will change. (2) There are of course severe limitations in the perspective, on a country's constitutional reform efforts, offered by someone who does not know that country well. Some of what follows will undoubtedly reflect my limited perspective. (3) I have been asked to concentrate on human rights and the constitutional court, and I restrict myself to those issues here. Let me begin with some brief general observations. For Ukraine, the drafting of the Constitution appears to be pose two especially distinctive challenges. The first challenge is to begin the process of creating a legal culture witb firm judicial protection of Chicago Journal of International Law individual rights. By individual rights, I mean, first and foremost, traditional negative rights against government: freedom of speech, freedom of religion, private property and freedom of contract, security against the criminal justice system (including cruel or unusual punishment, official action not authorized by statute, unjustified searches and seizures, inadequate hearings). To carry out this task, constitution-makers in Ukraine should probably try to avoid several strategies that contain serious risks. One risky strategy is to use a constitution as a place for stating very general social aspirations, or for imposing positive duties on government (such as the provision of a social welfare state including leisure time, social security, and occupational safety and health law). To put it bluntly: The strategy of stating aspirations and imposing positive duties-prominent of course in the old Soviet Constitution-runs the risk of turning a constitution into something worthless. It is important to remember here that a constitution should not list all things to which a country aspires; it should limit itself, for the most part, to rights that it is genuinely able to enforce. In this section I make suggestions for changes in the human rights provisions. These suggestions are in line with my general remarks. The goal is to ensure reliable protection of individual rights, through legal organs, and to help facilitate the creation American Advice and New Constitutions Sunstein of a private sphere and a market economy. (c) Much of Chapters 8 and 11 unnecessarily puts aspects of the "welfare state" into the Constitution. Article 84, specifying what enterprises are obliged to do, should be deleted. (It's a duty, not a right; this Constitution should restrict itself to rights.) Article 85 should also be deleted; it belongs in ordinary legislation. Article 87 states broad generalities that could not conceivably have meaning in court. It should be deleted. I would delete Chapter 11 entirely. Chicago Journal of International Law that aspirations belong in a separate category from rights. My fear is that the current version of the Constitution-by including so much which is not plausibly enforceable-could damage all rights, including those that are otherwise enforceable. Sex discrimination is, I fear, a serious threat in the new Eastern European democracies. The Constitution should not allow it, must less contain it. I hope that we will be able to discuss this matter in some detail. (i) Some of the religion provisions raise hard questions. "No one may be roof. iNo.i American Advice and New Constitutions Sunstein exempted from discharging one's duties toward the state or refuse to obey laws on religious grounds." (Article 40). This sounds good, but in some cases an exemption might be required in the interest of religious liberty (e.g., from a Sunday closing law). Also, it is not clear that "the rousing of hostility and hatred on religious grounds" should be "punishable under the law" (Article 40). This provision might stop free expression, e.g., criticism of certain religious theories and practices. I hope that we will be able to discuss this in some detail. The provisions relating to the constitutional court seem quite good. A few notes: 1. It might make sense to specify the number of judges in the Constitution. One possibility is that political actors will manipulate the number of judges to ensure outcomes in accordance with prevailing political will. extend only to cases and controversies? (I hope the latter.) (b) When a constitutional issue arises, is it automatically referred to the Constitutional Court? (c) Does the Court have discretion to refuse to hear cases raising trivial issues? Perhaps some of this can be specified in the Constitution. Most generally, I suggest that the draft Constitution should be rewritten so as to conform more closely to Ukraines desire to create firm individual rights. The Constitution should not contain everything to which a society aspires. It should contain real rights that real courts can really enforce. Most of my comments are intended to move the draft away from the old Soviet model, which did so little for the people of Ukraine. Some of the draft draws too much from that old model. Chicago Journal of International Law To: Constitutional Working Group, Government of Ukraine From: Cass R. Sunstein, Karl N. Llewellyn Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago; Co-Director, Center on Constitutionalism in Eastern Europe, University of Chicago Re: Ukraine's Draft Constitution Here are some additional comments on the constitutional draft. I might say at the outset that our meetings were an extraordinary opportunity for me. It was also an enormous pleasure and honor to have a chance to discuss these issues with you. this memorandum by beginning with relatively modest suggestions and ending with relatively large ones. I restrict myself to the constitutional court and basic liberties and rights, since these have been the areas on which I was asked to focus. 1. The human rights should include a separate provision banning discrimination. I suggest that Article 7, sentence two, should be inserted in Article 24, after current sentence 1. The second sentence in Article 24 should be deleted; it invites discrimination. 3. MOST IMPORTANT: The various "exceptions" and "restrictions" on rights should be rewritten. Some provisions allow open-ended restriction, so long as the restriction occurs through 'law." Some provisions do not contain a standard for restrictions. I know that your intention is to include only narrow restrictions. I include some possible examples for improvement in this regard. American Advice and New Constitutions Sunstein consistent with the aims of a democratic order." Some other wording might be preferable. This is only a suggestion, needless to say. procurator. Article 64, 5th sentence, should read, "A suspect is under no obligation to prove his or her innocence and may be convicted only after the government has proved guilt beyond a reasonable doubt." 4. The Constitution does not dearly state the cases in which the Constitutional Court shall issue its decisions. This should be spelled out. In any case the Court should not be allowed to comment on laws before they are enacted. 1. There should be stronger guarantees of market freedom or economic liberties. I suggest a separate section, entitled "economic liberties." This would include what you now have: general economic freedom (Art. 48), a prohibition on forced labor (Art. 52), a right to strike (Art. 53), a prohibition on forced appropriation of property without compensation (Art. 81), and freedom of enterprise (Art. 82). These fundamental liberties-so crucial to economic development-should be reorganized and put in the same section. Chicago Journal of International Law I would add the following provisions. (a) Freedom of contract is guaranteed. The state shall not limit liberty to enter (b) The government may not assume a legal monopoly over any enterprise. It into contractual arrangements. 3. I suggest that the positive rights should be made less specific and pared down. Instead of a right to a 40 hour work week, there should be a right to rest and leisure. Articles 49 and 51 are too detailed and specific; they could be reduced to one or two sentences. Article 56, second sentence, should be deleted. Articles 84 and 85 are too detailed for a Constitution. Article 87 is inconsistent with a market economy, and should be deleted. Article 93 is excellent, but chapter 9 should consist of one or two brief, general sections. It's far too detailed. Articles 100 and 101 could consist just of the first sentence of Article 100, or perhaps of that sentence plus the first clause of Article 101. 1. All duties should be deleted. The Constitution is the place for rights, not duties. This would entail eliminating Part III, chapter 6. American Advice and New Constitutions $unstein worth the paper on which it is written. I realize that this is a controversial matter and have therefore suggested more moderate possibilities above. continue to consult with you during this extraordinary period in Ukraine's history.