Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable
Volume 7 | Issue 1
Teresa Stanton Collett, David Orgon Coolidge, George Dent, Andrew Koppelman, Mark Strasser, and Cass Sunstein
weight, and therefore any weight at all, if they are supported by a moral theory behind it all-a theory like autonomy or more generally a theory that would come out of human agency, which could not be denied by any rational actor. Such a theory I think would say that you have to afford certain kinds of interpretations and within a range. And then more particular interpretations within that range will still be possible on various needs that a society has, as well as individuals, with relevant statistical and empirical evidence.
NUSSBAUM: Okay I think we are going to need a break, because there's another panel at four.
Yes, I want to say just a couple of things. The second panel is going to deal primarily with law, so this might be a good transition point.
I also wanted to say in defense of Dwight Duncan-who I am so thankful for, who stood here and took a sociological beating for studies which aren't his-it really demonstrates why interdisciplinary studies, as the Roundtable advocates, are so important. Lawyers on the side for same-sex marriage put these studies forward. Mr. Duncan is pointing out the various problems with them. Maybe if we as lawyers are better able to really dig through these things, we won't make those sort of blunders, and we won't take this sort of blind reliance on "well, same-sex couples will be the same vis-t-vis parenting." It seems that a much more creative approach would be to say, "we admit that differences may exist, and we're going to try to create a proactive constitutional theory to account for those." In some ways, Mr. Duncan's role keeps the advocates honest, and I appreciate that.
I also want to thank all of the panelists, especially Hannah, who has had the wherewithal to stand in front of people and really put forward what I think is a challenging point of view. She put forth a perspective that we in the ivory tower don't get, and that's for people not old enough to get into the ivory tower. [laughter] I thank you very much. I think you will see in the second panel, that the burden of proof shifts, and that the strong arm may be coming from opponents of same-sex marriage and maybe it will be time to beat up on the other side a little more.
This panel will focus on legal issues. I'll go down our list of esteemed speakers in alphabetical order.
First, Teresa Stanton Collett from South Texas College of Law, who I found out today, shares a tide with me. She was also in charge of Moot Court
Same-Sex Marriage 33
Same-Sex Marriage 35 moment yet has really focused on as far as their public remarks. The question that is posed is "Should the Government Recognize Same Sex Marriage?" And embedded in that tide is an assumption about the reality of marriage. It is that the state recognizes marriage, rather than creates marriage. And I found it very interesting that Reverend Dell opened with his statement saying that the point of the wedding where the clergy is involved is where there is a creation of a legal relationship. I think that part of the difficulty that Americans are having when we talk about this topic is the competing understandings of what marriage is and how it is created.
So let me begin by laying out my fundamental assumption. Assumption number one is that marriage is not created by the state, but in fact, is merely recognized by the state. It is my operating assumption that marriage is a lived reality that reflects a metaphysical existence, an ontological reality, if you will. And that marriage by its nature has four characteristics. The first is that it is mutually supportive-that individuals who are in a marriage relationship are mutually supportive. Now that's an ill-defined term, as you can imagine, because it can be economic support solely. It can be the commitment of the husband to be the breadwinner and the wife to be the domestic homemaker. It can be the agreement of the husband to provide the place and the wife to provide the labor, as we have seen in some cultures. It can be any number of forms of mutual support. But when you look throughout history, and when you look at the various arrangements that have been called marriage, you see at least some reciprocal support that flows from the two partners.
The second assumption is that it is permanent. Now that assumption clearly is belied by the current experience in America. And many of you can say, in light of the current divorce rate and what some authors have called serial polygamy, "How on earth, Professor, can you suggest that marriage in its ontological reality, in its metaphysical ideal, if you will, could be permanent?" But I will suggest to you that human flourishing occurs when an individual can engage in self-realization and self-giving, with another individual for an extended period of time. Although I will grant you that historically the requirement has not been permanence but merely of extended duration, it must exist beyond the one-night stand in all cultures to be called a marriageunless of course he dies that night. [laughter] There are of course those cases where the very wealthy millionaire has married the trophy wife and then drops dead immediately upon saying, "I do." Those of you who anticipate marrying for money, this should be your ideal.
The third characteristic that I would suggest to you is that it is self-giving. Notice the difference in the characterization of marriage as self-giving rather than self-satisfying, because it is a supposition of mine that human nature is
so that their will and their autonomy can be made manifest-do not require state sanction, recognition, or protection as a form of marriage.
Okay. The question was asked in the last panel whether the Constitution of the United States has anything to say about the same-sex marriage issue. In response to that question, Martha promised that I would answer it. I will try to do that.
There are basically three main arguments that get made, and two of them are so familiar, at least to an audience of law students, that I will just gesture towards them.
One is substantive due process. There are certain important personal decisions not enumerated in the Constitution that are nonetheless protected by the court under the rubric of substantive due process. It is sometimes argued that the right to marry-the right of same-sex couples to marry-is one of those. The problem with this argument is that either you buy it or you don't. There doesn't seem to be much intermediate work for argument to do. Nobody has come up with an argument persuasive to me as to how one discerns what is or is not protected by substantive due process, even if such things exist.
Another is the suspect classification argument-the argument that gay people are a discrete and insular minority, like blacks, who are entitled to protection from legislation that is the product of prejudice. The problem for me with this argument is that the question whether discrimination against gays is prejudice or not goes to the heart of the very moral disagreements that we have been talking about. The law does in fact makes lots of discriminations lots of times, and when those discriminations have an intelligent basis, then they are not the products of prejudice. So what one would like is a constitutional argument that doesn't go through the very substantive disagreements that make us ask, "well, we've reached this impasse about the normative questions, does the Constitution have anything to say about this?" The suspect classification argument takes us right back into the impasse. And it hasn't been much help.
This is to be one of the attractions of the third argument, which is the sex discrimination argument. The basic sex discrimination argument is simple. Any action that singles out homosexuals per se facially classifies on the basis of sex. If a business fires Ricky, or the state prosecutes him because of his sexual activities with Fred, while these actions are not being taken against Lucy if she did exactly the same things with Fred, then Ricky is being discriminated against on the basis of sex. You can run the same argument with marriage, obviously. Lucy is allowed to marry Fred, and Ricky is not allowed to marry Fred we have a sex-based classification. Sex-based classifications are problematic in the law. The court has held that the parties seeking to uphold a
Same-Sex Marriage 37
held that discrimination against pregnant women is not sex-based. The court noticed that the insurance scheme that the state provided that didn't cover pregnancy "divides recipients into two groups, pregnant women, and nonpregnant persons. The first is exclusively female, the second includes members of both sexes."" The trouble with this argument is that the persuasive authority of Geduldig is weak. The decision hasn't been overruled, but similar reasoning in the Title VII context has been rejected by Congress. And Geduldig's reasoning has been almost universally condemned by scholars.
That suggests a second strategy. One might conceive that the marriage laws classify on the basis of sex, but say that this discrimination is necessary for the compelling interest of promoting the realization of one of the highest goods that human beings can achieve, the good of marriage, as Teresa has described it. And you could say that a law that maps that good in a misleading way by calling same-sex relationships, marriages, when it is not in fact what they ultimately metaphysically are, would miseducate the public about the goods that are really worth pursuing. The trouble with this argument-and I think this is the deepest problem with the kind of argument that Teresa has been offering--is that it relies upon a highly contestable set of ontological claims that probably no make sense at all outside of the context of a certain flavor of conservative Christianity. Now the court has held that to be constitutional, a law has to have a secular, legislative purpose. The promotion of the metaphysical reality of one-flesh unity doesn't seem to me to be capable of being plausibly characterized as such a purpose. Remember that when a sexbased classification must be defended, the burden of justification is demanding and rests entirely on the state. That's the doctrine. It is hard to imagine how a state could meet its burden by invoking this peculiar philosophical theory of marriage. It is hard to image a court endorsing these metaphysical claims.
At least I can't imagine what the opinion would look like.
COLLET: Do I get to respond now? [laughter] No, that's okay.
SUNSTEIN: And now Mr. Coolidge.
DAVID ORGON COOLIDGE: Thank you very much to Jim and to the Roundtable for the invitation to participate in today's conversation. I have to tell you that I have the distinction of being the only person on this panel who is not a professor. You might consider that a liability or a benefit, but it's the truth.
Although we're in a debate format today, and although the stakes are high, I want to say that I do see this as an opportunity to learn. I say this because the question of marriage, or same sex marriage-however you want to formulate
Same-Sex Marriage 39
conundrum, I think. After all, intimacy flourishes in many settings, and it's generally only Americans who always confuse sex and intimacy.
Fourth, last but not least, marriage may be viewed as a social institution built around the reality that we are embodied as male or female and that together as male and female, form unique communities of difference which extend community across the generations. According to this view, same sex couples cannot marry. They cannot marry because, lacking a sexual difference, they cannot simultaneously offer themselves to one another, form a community of difference, and potentially offer the world the gift of new life. Any of these particular functions-pleasure, partnership, procreation, parenting--can be done in a variety of contexts, as has been pointed out already, and I do not know anyone who would disagree with that. But, no other community does all of these simultaneously regardless of any state regulation. The role of the state then becomes not one of enforcing purely private contracts, or of creating marriage as a useful social policy, or redefining it when it chooses to, but of recognizing it, and here I sound like Teresa. In fact, I'm repeating Teresa. Recognizing marital status, protecting it through rights and responsibilities and, as seems prudent, offering it benefits-three different areas all of which could be talked about, and be disaggregated and discussed in ways that Professor Nussbaum brought up.
So it strikes me that these are the four predominant views of marriage in play and it's hard to dialogue with the first view because it assumes that there is no there there and so it's hard to know what to talk about. There's a lot to talk about between the other three.
The second question is the question of democracy. At the present time, the official law of marriage in every country of the world is based on the fourth view. But clearly this is in flux and we are seeing experiments based on other views. The recent law passed by France is a good example. No state or country has yet legalized same sex marriage, but it may happen and it may happen very soon. In situations such as ours in the United States, public opinion is still roughly two to one in favor of the fourth view, for what that is worth, but a significant minority of Americans appear to be changing their minds. The question is whether and, if so, how these conflicts should be resolved. Among many supporters of same sex marriage I hear a rhetoric-and I'd be happy for my colleagues here to tell me that it's not their rhetoric-that suggests that the American people are not qualified to deliberate and decide this question. Somehow this very important question, which has always been and still is primarily the province of legislatures, cannot be entrusted to the authors of our state and federal constitutions or their elected representatives. In fact, the whole idea of doing so is repulsive. If we ask where this view comes from, the
Same-Sex Marriage 41
is merely an individual contract or just a means of social stability and choose to redefine it, so be it. Others will disagree, but we will have followed the rule of law. On the other, hand it might turn out differently. Either way, we might be able to live better together in peace. Thank you.
STRASSER. Good afternoon. In Baehr v Lewin, " a plurality of the Hawaii Supreme Court held that the state's same sex marriage ban implicated equal protection guarantees. That statute discriminated on the basis of sex, both facially and as applied. To talk about discrimination might mean merely classified, and that's basically what the plurality suggested, or perhaps, in addition, that it involved some kind of invidious distinction. That was left for the trial court to determine. Now the lower court's task in Hawaii was to examine the statute to see whether it was narrowly tailored to promote compelling state interests. That was just because of a particular aspect of the Hawaii Constitution imposing strict scrutiny on gender classifications. Something that wasn't unusual about the Hawaii Constitution was when gender would be viewed as implicated. So, this might have interesting implications for other courts, either when they are examining their own state statutes in light of their own state constitutions which perhaps explicitly mention gender, perhaps then making this a strict scrutiny analysis or, as well, whether federal equal protection guarantees will be implicated.
Most states, however, will use-even if they find gender discriminationthe lower standard, as you know. The challenged classification must serve important government objectives and be substantially related. Now it's clear that there are important differences between men and women. Nonetheless, they must be related to the interests asserted in so far as we're going to talk about the statute at issue as being constitutional. I'd argue they don't play the requisite role. Clearly the state has several interests in marriage, and they've been discussed: provide the setting for the production and raising of children, promote security and stability for the individuals themselves, leading to happier and more productive lives, which is a benefit for society. These, of course, are reasons to allow same sex marriage. Whether through adoption, surrogacy, artificial insemination, or perhaps just having had a child through a previous marriage, same sex couples are having and raising children. This has importance here and, had we been talking about substantive due process, I argue has importance there.
In Zablocki, the Court said "I[I]t would make little sense to recognize a right of privacy with respect to other matters of family life and not with respect to the decision to enter the relationship that is the foundation of the family in our
Same-Sex Marriage 43
agree-suppose we had the criteria-it's pretty clear the state does not say that only those who will have the optimal marriage will be allowed to marry. Perhaps the question to ask, as has been suggested here, is not better or worse but what is essential to marriage? My interest, at least, is what's essential for the civil institution. So, merely, for example, because it would not meet some religious definition should not suffice. For example, a religion might say, "A marriage with someone not of this religion is not a marriage in our eyes" or "A marriage with someone not of the right race is not a marriage in our eyes." This might be essential for the religion but that's presumably not what's at issue here. If Vermont, for example, comes to recognize same sex marriages then at least for the state, and for purposes here, I believe that suffices.
To determine whether same sex couples can fulfill the essential purposes of marriage, we should look at what the state has implicitly or explicitly stated are its purposes. If we do that, the procreation argument at best sounds a little hollow. Consider the claim, as has been offered, that marriage is for the purpose of providing a setting for the raising of the next generation. That would be one purpose rather than the only purpose. Even if it were the only purpose, that would preclude some from marrying but not same sex couples. In the previous panel, we were talking about how individuals are doing in parenting, not whether but how. Now it might be thought that there's no reason to have to figure out what the state says. Suppose you have a state that says the following: "There is a compelling interest in protecting the essential nature of marriage which involves a man and a woman." Yet at least one of the lessons of Loving is presumably that the state cannot merely announce its perceived interests and have that upheld.
Let me talk for a moment about equal protection and orientation discrimination. It might be argued that really what's going on is discrimination on the basis of orientation and not sex. To determine this is an empirical question. One question would be what would a state say if two heterosexuals of the same sex wanted to get some of the benefits that we were talking about earlier. Would the state say yes? Would the state say no? If the state allows this then presumably we have orientation discrimination although there will be some ironies in so far as procreation is so important then you're going to say no to some people who may in fact be raising children but yes to some who in fact may have no interest in raising children. It's difficult to see what purpose such a statute would promote that was legitimate but that clearly would be orientation discrimination. Were it to establish full inferior status then there will be the Romer questions alluded to and we're putting aside even the individual interests in marriage-these are the state interests. The state might be argued to have a compelling interest in morality. Arguably that would be a
Same-Sex Marriage 45
marriage focuses human energies in socially productive ways. Men are especially prone to be disruptive and self-destructive. Marriage to a woman and fatherhood tend to point men in the right direction. Many arguments for gay marriage discuss gender stereotyping and taboos against homosexuality. Those issues are interesting, but they're not relevant to the marriage issue that we're discussing here. We're not discussing criminal sodomy statutes and no law forbids, for example, an effeminate man to marry a masculine woman.
The analogy of gay marriage to interracial marriage is a textbook example of the errors that can result from formalistic thinking divorced from reasoned reality and common sense. Anti-miscegenation laws had the purpose and effect of racial subordination. Traditional marriage has the purpose and effect of providing for children and maximizing human potential, not of subordinating either sex. Andy Koppelman says sex discrimination should prevent not only subordination of women, but any imposition of gender classifications on people's free choices. He also says we can't rely on gender classifications if any individual might prove an exception to it. This is wrong. A college legally may, and I think should, separate women's and men's basketball teams because of the physical differences between men and women even though some women are bigger, stronger, and better basketball players than some men. The argument is interesting because one area in which we agree that gender differences are important is marriage. That's one thing on which we all agree, otherwise there would be no reason to argue for rights to same sex marriage any more than the right to have the same sex teller when you go to the bank. Nobody would care about that. This is one area where we agree: gender differences are important. This example also shows that gender distinctions aren't always wrong, but I agree that we shouldn't make such distinctions without good reason.
I've already said that the main reason for honoring traditional marriage is to provide the best shelter for children. Proponents of gay marriage sometimes say that even their apparent defeats, like adoption of the Defense of Marriage Act, are really victories because they provoke discussion, and inevitably discussion will lead intelligent people of good will to support gay marriage. I agree that this discussion can be beneficial, but that's because I think it can help society to recall the social importance of marriage, a fact that we seem to have forgotten. By the way, on this point I would agree with what Martha Nussbaum said earlier this afternoon: it's heterosexuals who have made a mess of marriage. The answer is not to throw in the towel. The answer is to straighten things up.
Social support for marriage is actually becoming more important for two reasons. First, the needs of children are greater. In an agricultural society,
Same-Sex Marriage 47
relationships be tolerated but not honored to the same degree that traditional marriage is honored. However, I suspect that the loud forces on both sides of the debate will reject this, or any compromise.
Those were really excellent presentations, and they were all so amazingly on time. I feel a little bad that, as the last speaker, so much has been said that has to be processed. These remarks are going to be about two puzzles. One has to do with the source of the distinction between domestic partnership and marriage-a distinction that such diverse people as Judge Posner and President Clinton believe is very important to insist upon and a question on which the last remarks were illuminating. What is that distinction about? The second puzzle, which I think is a linked puzzle, has to do with Andy Koppelman's argument that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in the context of marriage is a form of discrimination on the basis of sex. I must say I've been convinced by this argument, and I'm going to try to say why, at the same time, I don't believe that the Supreme Court should accept the argument, largely for reasons of institutional role, about which one of the speakers offered some remarks. So, this is about the difference between domestic partnerships and marriage and about the view that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is a form of discrimination on the basis of sex.
There has been a reference to Loving v Virginia,7 probably the best-named case in the history of American law. You knew who was going to win. There's a welfare rights case called King v Smith and, in America, Smith was found to win. Loving was going to win this one. But we take it for granted that that case was right, but let's puzzle a little bit about the difficulty of it at the time. The argument made by the Lovings was that this was a form of race discrimination. I can't marry someone of an opposite race, but if I was of the other race I could, so this is a form of race discrimination. The response that was made to the Lovings' claim had two parts. First, the district court insisted-with explicit theological reference, by the way-on the naturalness of racial differences, saying that these are God-made differences that legitimately drive policy. More interestingly, there was a claim that this was actually equal because whites were no more prohibited from marrying blacks than blacks were prohibited from marrying whites, so if there was any inequality it was discrimination against people who wanted to marry people of different races. It wasn't discrimination against African-Americans at all. That was the argument that the legal culture and the Supreme Court had an extremely hard time responding to: that this law isn't a form of race discrimination at all. The way
Same-Sex Marriage 49
in the United States. This is not a suggestion that everyone who opposes same sex marriages believes that gay people count as second-class citizens. It's a more general statement about the dynamic of the debate and the social meaning of the exclusion to heterosexuals and homosexuals alike. Martha Nussbaum reflected an interesting concern that marriage isn't the greatest thing in the world always and that the mere availability of marriage to same sex couples might actually undermine freedom because it would put them in the position of choosing an option which they would rather not have available because it would pressure-the word was "push" I think, offered by the philosopher Claudia Card-her into marriage when she really didn't want to be there. There's an interesting suggestion there about the extent to which an option might deny freedom because a social norm might act on the option so as to push people toward it and they might rather not have it there, but I don't think that's sufficient justification for denying same sex marriages because of the asymmetry between heterosexual and homosexual couples and because of the expression of exclusion and, socially speaking again, "contempt" I think is the right word, that the exclusion imposes on gay couples.
I've talked a bit about second-class citizenship and exclusion, but I think that's not the only expression that the content of our law currently makes. This will link the two parts of my remarks, the one about Loving v Virginia, the other about the expressive function of law. I think the deeper expression, and the sense in which we're all implicated in this, not just gay couples who want to get married, is the insistence that our marriage law as generally conceived offers: that there are two kinds of people, men and women, with accompanying social roles. That's an insistence that's damaging not only to homosexuals. It's damaging to gay men, to lesbian couples, to heterosexual women and to heterosexual men, though in quite different ways.
I think we'll go down, just like the first time, and have comments that anyone would like to make about anyone's remarks-each person gets to talk about one person's remarks! Self-criticism is perfectly appropriate.
STRASSER.L I'm starting here as well. Oh good. How about I say a little bit and put it in the form of a question at the end but it won't be too long, I promise. This is for Professor Dent.
We talked a little bit about Loving and there are lots of cases in which interracial marriage has been challenged. It's just that Loving was the first that said you can't do that. Of course, this was coming up in the state courts because it was believed the federal government didn't have a role in this. After the Civil War, various courts addressed this and said, "If we allow interracial marriage, we're going to have people bringing all of their wives-we can't prevent polygamy and we can't prevent incest. That's what is going to happen
Same-Sex Marriage 51
Same-Sex Marriage 53 It strikes me that Professor Koppelman has mistaken me for John Finnis. I'm deeply honored, but I am not John Finnis, and my argument is different from John's although I have tremendous respect and wish that I had the intellectual horsepower that that man does.
My argument is more that the state has a purpose in recognizing and regulating sexual intercourse because of its procreative potential. Regardless of the intentions of the parties who engage in it, the fact is, if we accept Gudmacher's study that we're wrong fifty percent of the time. The fact that the line is a line that is overinclusive doesn't illegitimate the state's interest in regulating sexual intercourse because of that procreative capacity which is different from the argument that John makes.
KOPPELMAN: I'll segue right in. First of all, as a matter of what actually goes on in American society, I offer the generalization that sexual intercourse is massively unregulated! Now it's not clear to me that more regulation of sexual intercourse would be a good thing. I'm not sure that I want the law to be more active in this area than it is. There is another issue about vulnerable people, and protecting vulnerable people, where again I think that we are in agreement that there are people who form relations of economic dependency, people who are called into existence in a condition of massive dependency. We want to structure the law in such a way as to be able to accommodate that.
A problem that a few of the speakers have alluded to is whether it is possible for us to arrive at some common ground given massive disagreement about whether, at the core, it is the case that the sexual relationship between a man and a woman is per se good in a way that no sexual relationship between persons of the same sex can be. I think this is why the law discriminates between the two pairs of eighty year-old people and allows the heterosexual eighty year-old couple to marry and not the homosexual eighty year-old couple to marry. It ain't procreation. It's got to be something about the nature of the relationship itself. The reason why I perhaps mistakenly conflated you with Professor John Finnis-of Oxford University, who has made an extremely philosophically sophisticated defense of the heterosexuality requirement in marriage and we published a debate about this-it seems to me that since the law discriminates between relationships on the basis of nothing else than the heterosexual relationship, you have to find some quality about just that and not just children that's a basis for this distinction. The reason that this issue is so emotionally fraught is that some people see something wonderful about heterosexual coupling that is just not possible, not evincible, not capable of being realized by homosexual coupling and then the puzzle is, after we finish glaring at each other, can we agree on any set of legal rules? This is the attraction of domestic partnership. The debate is open about honor and respect
Same-Sex Marriage 55 I have a question for Professor Collett about procreation. That obviously has become an issue for many people on both sides of this issue. In light of the fact that there is a distinction that-I think you tried to bring out-potential procreation matters, not necessarily actual procreation. I wondered if you could illuminate why that is one of the necessary-one of the essential-characteristics of marriage? From my perspective in the Divinity School-so all that metaphysical mumbo-jumbo actually is what I work withI want to know where that comes from and whether or not that is changing because of the other demographic realities of today such as overpopulation and undercare for the children who are already being born. 2000]
seven billionth person is a cause of celebration in that-I believe this is accurate-if you were to take the entire world population and place them in the state of Texas, my home state, at a density that we find in metropolitan New York, that is all it would take geographically. Malthus would have had us believe that we would be so overpopulated that we would be engaging in cannibalism to survive at this point. Quite the contrary has been proven and there are many economists, primarily in South America, who suggest that you can't develop an industrial economy, a technologically based economy, without a certain population base. A big problem that has faced a lot of the developing nations is that they have not reached the population base yet to support or sustain an industrial or technological economy. I am not persuaded by Malthusian arguments that we are in fact overpopulated.
That's a very different argument than the argument about the abandonment or neglect of children. In that respect, I would share with you a comment that I received from the principal of the very nice suburban middle school that one of my daughters goes to, when she and I were visiting. I said "You have to excuse me, I have to leave because I have a Supreme Court committee meeting and I have to get to it." She said "It's so refreshing to find a family where both parents are engaged outside of the home and yet your children are not simply being pet sat." I said "I'm not sure I know what that means," and she said "It's the sort of parenting style that says while you're a baby you're cute and cuddly and we'll play with you like a puppy but once you achieve a certain age and difficulty, we're going to put you in the backyard with your food and water and leave you to mature on your own." I'm not sure that there is not a real problem with neglect of children, and I do not think it's confined to the inner city as so often it is mischaracterized in the press. That leads to sort of a critique of what has been the underlying assumption of much of the feminist critique of the existing social order, which is that women were not fulfilled in the home. Some of the most interesting work being done in
am curious why it is in the state's compelling interest for me to be able to marry an eighty-two year old woman where there is no procreative interest whatsoever, but I cannot marry the man I consider to be my husband when the relationship might have the first three of Professor Collett's important ontological features of the marriage but neither situation can have the last.
DENT: I would give you a couple of answers to that. One is that, in many cases, to make such a determination would require invasion of privacy of the kind that our government, fortunately I think, has never undertaken. All we ask is, "Is it a man and a woman?" We're not going to require you to undergo physical examination...
AUDIENCE: I'm sorry. I don't think that there's any invasion of privacy in assuming that a woman who is eighty-two years old can't have a baby...
DENT: You get into line drawing questions especially with modern technology allowing older women to have children, where this is becoming possible. Why get into that? And the second is, if a man and a woman really can't have children and they nonetheless want to marry, they are doing they're best to follow the traditional pattern. That is an inspiration to other people. That is to say to the young man "Look, even this older couple who can't have children wants to marry because it's an honorable relationship. It is something that you should respect and something that is good for you."
AUDIENCE: And the relationship that I have with another man is thus dishonorable? Am I correct in inferring that from what you have just stated?
DENT: Certainly that is the attitude that has been traditional in most societies throughout history, yes.
AUDIENCE: And that's a reason for legislation-tradition? If people of the same race, to bring up Loving again, couldn't marry basically based on traditional reasons, there really are no logical arguments for it then.
DENT: If there's another planet with red and green-I'm dealing with human beings as they are. If human beings were other than as they are, what would we do then? I frankly don't find pursuing that type of question very fruitful.
MADIGAN: One last question...
AUDIENCE: If what's important about marriage is providing for children, why not just have really strong laws about recognizing parents or families with children as opposed to laws recognizing marriage whether or not there are any children?
COLLETT: I think in the social ordering that that's one of the sort of arrangements that Professor Nussbaum suggested might in fact be something we should consider. Then the question becomes is it going to be a matter of democratic process where you and I come together with our representatives and
Same-Sex Marriage 57
COOLIDGE: One other quick thought on your question. It's a good question, and maybe it was confusing having the rabbi and the pastor talking just to the extent that it sort of felt like it conflated the two, but I would just say that to formulate it the way that you did is to answer the question the way that you did. And, the question that remains open is: what do equal rights mean? I mean, rephrasing it in those terms doesn't solve the question. And, the other question that it doesn't solve is: what is the proper relationship, if any, between folks who are religious or folks who aren't, who are both advocates in areas of public policy, and what legitimate role they have, you know, when we're making decisions together as a society, and I certainly, I agree that whatever the United Methodist Church does with marriage is not what the state of Illinois will do with marriage necessarily, but I certainly would not deny or argue that Greg Dell doesn't have the right to not only argue his point as a pastor, but to go down and argue his point in Springfield, which he may well have done under other circumstances.
COLLETT: And one of the interesting systems that we find when we study the issue from an international perspective, is that there are in fact legal systems where the regulation of the marriage is conducted in a secular court in accordance with the religious community of which the martial partners are members. So that a secular court will allocate the rights and duties of a Roman Catholic couple in accordance with Cannonical Law, a Jewish couple in accordance with Rabbincal Law, a Calvinist couple in accordance with Calvinist Law. One of the problems, of course, with such a system is that not all people are members of religious communities, and so you'd have to have some body of secular law for the agnostics or for those who are not, and not all religious bodies, most of the ones that we are familiar with in the United States, but not all religious bodies have any clear sort of guidance about property division and the appropriate allocation of custody and those sorts of things. But there are some interesting alternatives when you start thinking in terms across the world, that address the question very differently about integration of religious beliefs in the political sphere on this topic.
MADIGAN: I have to say I'd like to thank this panel in particular. It was great. Although I have to say that the funniest thing that I've heard, and I know it wasn't meant to be funny, is when David said that there's no community of difference in the same-sex couple. And what's funny to me about that is that every time I am with friends who are straight and we see two women walking by hand in hand, the first thing they ask is, "Which one's the guy?" [laughter] I guess there are other heterosexuals who don't share the presumption that there is no community of difference.
Same-Sex Marriage 59
