The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable

Article 4

Should the Government Recognize Same-Sex
Marriage? Session Two: Legal, Equitable, and
Political Issues
Teresa Stanton Collett

Volume 7 | Issue 1

1-1-2000

David Orgon Coolidge

George Dent

Andrew Koppelman

Mark Strasser

See next page for additional authors

Follow this and additional works at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable

Recommended Citation
Collett, Teresa Stanton; Coolidge, David Orgon; Dent, George; Koppelman, Andrew; Strasser, Mark; and Sunstein, Cass (2000)
"Should the Government Recognize Same-Sex Marriage? Session Two: Legal, Equitable, and Political Issues," The University of Chicago
Law School Roundtable: Vol. 7: Iss. 1, Article 4.
Available at: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable/vol7/iss1/4

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in The University of Chicago Law
School Roundtable by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

Should the Government Recognize Same-Sex Marriage? Session Two:
Legal, Equitable, and Political Issues

Authors
Teresa Stanton Collett, David Orgon Coolidge, George Dent, Andrew Koppelman, Mark Strasser, and Cass
Sunstein

This article is available in The University of Chicago Law School Roundtable: http://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/roundtable/
vol7/iss1/4

2000] 

Same-Sex Marriage  33

weight, and therefore  any weight  at all,  if they are  supported  by a moral  theory
behind  it all-a  theory  like  autonomy  or more  generally  a  theory that  would
come out  of human agency,  which  could not be  denied  by any  rational  actor.
Such  a  theory  I  think  would  say  that  you  have  to  afford  certain  kinds  of
interpretations  and  within  a  range.  And  then  more  particular  interpretations
within  that  range  will  still  be  possible  on  various  needs  that  a  society  has,  as
well as  individuals,  with relevant statistical and  empirical  evidence.

NUSSBAUM:  Okay  I  think we  are  going  to  need  a  break,  because  there's

another panel  at four.

MADIGAN:  Yes,  I want to  say just a couple of things.  The second  panel  is

going to  deal primarily with law, so this might be a good transition point.

I  also wanted  to  say in defense  of Dwight  Duncan-who  I am  so thankful
for,  who  stood  here  and  took  a  sociological  beating  for studies  which  aren't
his-it  really  demonstrates  why  interdisciplinary  studies,  as  the  Roundtable
advocates,  are  so  important.  Lawyers  on  the  side  for  same-sex  marriage  put
these  studies  forward.  Mr.  Duncan  is  pointing out the various  problems  with
them.  Maybe if we as  lawyers  are  better  able to really  dig through these things,
we  won't  make  those  sort  of blunders,  and  we  won't  take  this  sort  of  blind
reliance  on  "well,  same-sex  couples  will  be  the  same  vis-t-vis  parenting."  It
seems  that  a  much  more  creative  approach  would  be  to  say,  "we  admit that
differences  may exist, and we're going to  try to create  a proactive  constitutional
theory  to  account  for  those."  In  some  ways,  Mr.  Duncan's  role  keeps  the
advocates  honest, and I  appreciate  that.

I  also  want  to  thank  all  of the  panelists,  especially  Hannah,  who  has had
the wherewithal  to stand  in front of people and really put forward what I think
is  a challenging  point  of view.  She  put forth  a perspective  that we in  the ivory
tower  don't  get,  and  that's  for  people  not  old  enough  to  get  into  the  ivory
tower.  [laughter] I  thank  you  very  much.  I  think  you will  see  in  the  second
panel,  that  the burden  of proof shifts,  and  that the  strong arm may be coming
from  opponents  of same-sex  marriage  and  maybe  it will  be time to  beat  up  on
the other side a little more.

SESSION  TWO:
LEGAL,  EQUITABLE,  AND  POLITICAL ISSUES

MADIGAN:  This  panel  will  focus  on  legal  issues.  I'll  go  down  our  list  of

esteemed speakers  in alphabetical  order.

First,  Teresa  Stanton  Collett  from  South  Texas  College  of  Law,  who  I
found out today, shares  a tide with me. She  was also  in charge  of Moot  Court

34  Roundtable

back  in  law  school.  So  she  understands  the  hectic  stuff I've  been  doing  lately,
so  I  appreciated  her words  of comfort.

David  Orgon  Coolidge  from  Columbus  School  of  Law  and  Catholic
University  of America.  I  want  to  say  a  special  thanks  to  Dave,  because  he  and
Professor  Nussbaum  were  the  two  people  who  really  helped  me  the  most  in
finding  other speakers  and offering  suggestions  and thoughts  about structuring
the panels.  It  turned  out to  be  a  great help.  He has  sort of done  his part  before
he even  opens  his mouth  today. He has  really done  a great  service for all of us.
George  Dent  from  Case Western  Reserve  University  School  of Law.  That
happens  to  be  my undergraduate  alma  mater.  I have  a good  friend  who  was my
teacher  there,  and  I  found  out  today was  his  student.  So  I  kind  of feel  a  little
generational  bond with George.

Andrew  Koppelman  from Northwestern  University, who  I have just gotten
to  know  through  the  Law  and  Philosophy  Workshop.  I  know  his  work.  I
actually  have friends  who  are students  of his who  are  also  big  fans of his work.
Mark  Strasser  from  Capitol  University  School  of  Law,  who  holds  the
honor  of being  the  first  person  to  tell  me  "yes,"  [laughter] that  he  would  do
this. We  had to  string him  along  for  details for  the longest  time.

Our own professor,  Cass Sunstein, who  has  graciously offered  to help  us by
moderating.  I  appreciate  your willingness  to do that. So we'll  turn it  over to  the
panel.

CASS  SUNSTEIN:  Thank you  all  for  being  here,  and thanks  to  the  panelists
who  come  from  some  place  other  than  Hyde  Park.  We're  going  to  start with
Teresa  Stanton Collett.

TERESA  STANTON  COLLETT:  Thank  you. I'd  like  to  thank  the journal for
inviting us  and  the  university  for  providing  the  support  to  have such  a forum.
When  I was  telling  my colleagues  back at South  Texas  that I  would  be coming
to  the University  of Chicago  to  speak on this  topic,  they  all  suggested  that  this
topic at  this  particular  point  in  history  more  often  than  not  generates  a  lot  of
heat  and  very little light.  I  think that the  first panel  illustrated some  of that but
more importantly  illustrated  that  there  is  in  fact  the  potential  for  light  here.  It
is  a  wonderful  opportunity  to  have  the  chance  to  meet  and  talk  with  people
whose  work  I've  read.  In  fact,  I  was  telling  Professor  Koppelman-who  it  will
become  apparent  fairly  quickly  that  we're  on  different  sides  of this  particular
issue-how  much  I  admired  one  of his  recent  books,  and  in  fact,  assigned  the
first  chapter  of it  in  one  of my classes.  So  it  is  a  marvelous  chance  to  be with
people's  whose work  is  very thoughtful,  and hopefully  this dialogue  will follow
suit.

Let  me  begin  by  saying  that  I  think  that  the  Roundtable  symposium  is
appropriately  entitled,  but  it  makes  some  assumptions  that  no  one  at  this

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  35

moment yet has  really  focused  on  as far as  their  public remarks.  The question
that  is posed  is  "Should  the Government  Recognize  Same  Sex Marriage?"  And
embedded  in that  tide is  an assumption about  the reality  of marriage.  It is that
the  state recognizes  marriage,  rather  than  creates  marriage. And  I found  it very
interesting that  Reverend  Dell opened with his  statement saying  that the  point
of the  wedding  where  the  clergy  is  involved  is  where  there  is  a  creation  of a
legal  relationship.  I  think that part  of the difficulty  that Americans  are  having
when  we  talk  about  this  topic  is  the  competing  understandings  of  what
marriage  is  and how it is  created.

So  let  me  begin  by  laying  out  my fundamental  assumption.  Assumption
number one  is  that  marriage  is  not  created  by the state,  but in  fact,  is  merely
recognized  by the state.  It is  my operating  assumption  that marriage  is  a  lived
reality  that reflects  a metaphysical  existence,  an  ontological  reality,  if you will.
And  that  marriage  by its  nature has  four  characteristics.  The  first is  that  it is
mutually  supportive-that  individuals  who  are  in  a  marriage  relationship  are
mutually  supportive.  Now  that's  an  ill-defined  term,  as  you  can  imagine,
because  it  can  be  economic  support  solely.  It can  be  the  commitment  of the
husband to  be  the breadwinner  and the wife  to  be the domestic homemaker.  It
can  be  the  agreement  of  the  husband  to  provide  the  place  and  the  wife  to
provide  the  labor,  as we  have  seen  in some  cultures.  It can  be  any  number  of
forms  of mutual  support.  But  when  you  look  throughout  history,  and  when
you look at the various  arrangements  that have  been  called marriage, you see  at
least some  reciprocal support that flows from the two partners.

The  second  assumption  is  that  it  is  permanent.  Now  that  assumption
clearly  is  belied  by the  current  experience  in  America. And  many  of you  can
say, in light of the  current divorce  rate and what some authors have  called serial
polygamy,  "How  on  earth,  Professor,  can  you  suggest  that  marriage  in  its
ontological  reality,  in its metaphysical  ideal,  if you will,  could  be  permanent?"
But I will  suggest to you that human flourishing occurs when  an  individual can
engage  in  self-realization  and  self-giving,  with  another  individual  for  an
extended  period  of  time.  Although  I  will  grant  you  that  historically  the
requirement  has  not  been  permanence  but  merely  of extended  duration,  it
must exist  beyond the one-night  stand in  all cultures  to  be called  a  marriage-
unless  of course  he  dies  that night.  [laughter] There  are  of course  those  cases
where  the very wealthy millionaire  has married the  trophy wife  and then drops
dead  immediately  upon saying,  "I do."  Those  of you who  anticipate  marrying
for money, this should be your ideal.

The third characteristic  that I would suggest  to  you is  that  it is  self-giving.
Notice  the  difference  in  the  characterization  of marriage  as  self-giving  rather
than  self-satisfying,  because  it is  a  supposition  of mine  that human  nature  is

36  Roundtable

Then 

final  characteristic 

such that we flourish  best  not when  we seek our own self-satisfaction,  but when
we  seek mutual self-giving
the 

that 
I  believe  characterizes  marriage
throughout  history  and  in  all  cultures  is  that it  calls  for  procreative  potential.
Procreative  potential.  Now  that  can  be  challenged  certainly  in  contemporary
America  today  where you  could suggest,  "But  Professor,  is  it  not  true  that the
majority  of  Americans,  who  are  heterosexual  who  enter  into  a  marriage
relationship  use  contraception  and  in  fact intentionally  thwart  the procreative
potential  within  that union?"  In response  to  that, I  could give you  the statistics
from  the  Gudmacher  Institute  that  were  published  just  this  summer,  while
good  intentions  are  only  half  done  because  in  fact  fifty  percent  of  all
pregnancies  in  America  are  unintended.  I  can  suggest  to  you  that  the  pill,
which  is often  suggested  to  be three percent  error  rate,  when actually  measured
against  user  effectiveness,  has  a  twenty  percent  failure  rate.  In  fact,  the  desire
not  to  have  a  procreative  union  certainly  does  not  define  the  biological
potential  of that  union. And  it is  that  biological  potential  that  I  believe has  led
to  the status  recognition  of marriage.

In  the  United  States,  when  we look at the  historical  existence  of marriage,
what  we  find  is  that  marriage  was  in  large  part  about  licensing  sexual
intercourse.  It was  about  licensing  sexual  intercourse  because  that  is  the  only
human  activity  that  can  give  rise  to  the  creation  of children-something  that
people  continued  to  be  surprised  by,  independent  of  the  human  experience.
Because  that  potential  resulted  in  the  vulnerability  of  the  mother  and  the
creation  of new  vulnerable  human  beings,  the  state  has  set  up  a  series  of rules
that  govern  that  relationship-rules  that  require  things  like  male  support  for
their  offspring,  rules  that  require  some  considered  reflection  before  the
dissolution  of marriage.  And  while  contemporary  marriage  laws  have  altered
some  of  these  rules,  they  have  not  totally  done  away  with  them.  The
requirement  that  males  support  their  offspring  continues  independent  of  a
woman's  right  to  discharge  the  ability  to  have  that  offspring  through
termination  of pregnancy.  And  the  period  of waiting  to  dissolve  the  marriage
continues  in  all  of the  fifty  states  independent  of autonomy-based  arguments
that might  well  suggest that  marriage  should be  terminable  at will  as  if it were
some  sort of leasehold  upon  each  other's  bodies.

Given  that,  I  would  suggest  that  the  state's  interest  in  assuring  the
protection  of women's  economic  vulnerability  during  periods  of childbearing
and  the  assurance  that  vulnerable  children  are  provided  for  by  marriage  is  a
rational  and  defensible  reason  for  the  state's  concerning  itself  only  with
heterosexual  unions  involving  sexual intercourse.  And for  that reason,  I  believe
that same-sex  unions-while  clearly entitled to  some  ability of private  ordering

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  37

so  that  their  will  and  their autonomy  can  be  made  manifest-do  not  require
state sanction, recognition,  or protection  as a form  of marriage.

ANDREW  KOPPELMAN:  Okay.  The  question  was  asked  in  the  last  panel
whether  the  Constitution  of the  United  States  has  anything  to  say  about  the
same-sex  marriage  issue.  In response  to  that  question,  Martha  promised  that I
would answer  it. I will try to do that.

There  are  basically  three main  arguments  that get  made,  and two  of them
are so  familiar,  at least  to  an  audience  of law  students,  that  I will just  gesture
towards  them.

One  is  substantive  due  process.  There  are  certain  important  personal
decisions  not enumerated  in the Constitution  that are  nonetheless  protected  by
the  court  under  the  rubric  of substantive  due  process.  It is  sometimes  argued
that  the  right  to  marry-the  right  of same-sex  couples  to  marry-is  one  of
those. The  problem with  this  argument  is  that  either you buy it or you don't.
There  doesn't  seem  to  be  much  intermediate  work  for  argument  to  do.
Nobody  has  come  up  with  an  argument  persuasive  to  me  as  to  how  one
discerns  what  is  or is  not  protected  by  substantive  due  process,  even  if such
things exist.

Another  is  the  suspect  classification  argument-the  argument  that  gay
people  are  a  discrete  and  insular  minority,  like  blacks,  who  are  entitled  to
protection  from legislation  that  is  the  product  of prejudice.  The  problem  for
me with this argument is  that the  question whether discrimination  against gays
is  prejudice  or not  goes  to  the  heart  of the very  moral  disagreements  that  we
have been  talking about. The law does in fact makes lots  of discriminations  lots
of times,  and  when  those  discriminations  have  an  intelligent  basis,  then  they
are  not  the  products  of prejudice.  So  what one  would  like  is  a  constitutional
argument that doesn't go  through the very substantive disagreements  that make
us  ask,  "well, we've  reached  this  impasse  about  the normative  questions,  does
the  Constitution  have  anything  to  say  about  this?"  The  suspect  classification
argument takes  us right back into the impasse. And  it hasn't been much help.

This  is  to  be one of the attractions  of the  third argument, which is  the sex
discrimination argument. The basic sex discrimination  argument is simple. Any
action  that singles  out homosexuals  per se facially  classifies  on the basis  of sex.
If a  business  fires  Ricky,  or  the  state  prosecutes  him  because  of his  sexual
activities with  Fred, while  these actions  are  not being taken  against Lucy  if she
did  exactly  the  same  things  with  Fred,  then  Ricky  is  being  discriminated
against  on  the  basis  of sex.  You  can  run  the  same  argument  with  marriage,
obviously.  Lucy  is  allowed  to  marry  Fred,  and  Ricky  is  not  allowed  to  marry
Fred;  we  have  a  sex-based  classification.  Sex-based  classifications  are
problematic  in the  law. The court has held that  the parties  seeking to  uphold  a

38  Roundtable

statute  that  classifies  individuals  on  the  basis  of their  gender  must  carry  the
burden  of  showing  an  "exceedingly  persuasive 
the
classification.  "The burden  of justification  is demanding  and it rests  entirely on
the state."  There  was  a lot  of talk  about  burden  of proof in  the  last panel.  I'm
not sure  how  far we  get in  the argument.  But the  law gives  you precise  answers
for  those  questions.

justification" 

for 

The  state  can't 

justify  a  sex-based  classification  on 

the  basis  of
generalizations  that  are  only  statistically  accurate,  such  as  the  generalization
that many heterosexual  couples  produce  children,  and  same-sex  couples  tend to
be  childless.  As  soon  as  you  start  getting  into  statistics,  I  think  you  need
generalizations  of  that  sort  to  make  the  claim  that  Teresa  was  just  making
about  the  purpose  of the  marriage  laws  as  protecting  vulnerable  women  and
children.  It  is  just  not  the  case  that  there  are  no  vulnerable  women  and
children  in  same-sex  relationships,  no women  or children  who  are  in danger  of
being  abandoned  by  the  more  financially  prosperous  partner  or  rendered
destitute. So  if that's  a  reason  for  the  law  to  intervene,  that  reason  obtains  for
same-sex  couples.

Again,  quoting  the  court,  "generalizations  about  the  way  women  are,
estimates  as  to what  is appropriate  for most women,  no longer justifies  denying
opportunities  to  women  whose  talents  and  capacities  lie  outside  of the  average
description."  You  can't  rely  upon  overbroad  generalizations  about  different
talents  and capacities  of males  and females.  So  it  seems  to  me the  problem  for
advocates  of  the  status  quo  in  this  area  is  to  try  and  find  some  way  of
responding  to  the sex discrimination  argument.

I've  been  wondering  all  day  what  to  do  with  my  ten  minutes.  I've  now
decided  that  one  thing I  can  do  is  to  take  on  a  response  to  the  argument  that
might  be  made  by  someone  like,  say,  Teresa  Collett.  [laughter]  One  real,
exceptionless  difference  between  men  and  women  that could  be  cited  is  what
Teresa  has  called  the  "metaphysical  reality  of  marriage."  And  this  doctrine
holds  that  marriage  is  inherently  heterosexual,  as  some  writers  put  it,  because
only a  heterosexual  couple  can  achieve  the  "two-in-one  flesh  union  that comes
from  being  an  organic  unit  of  a  procreative  kind."  This  is  a  somewhat
mysterious  doctrine.  It is  rooted in  a certain variety of natural law theory.  If the
argument  were  accepted,  it  would  be  able  to  provide  two  kinds  of answers  to
the sex-discrimination  argument

One might  say laws  that  don't allow  same-sex couples  to  marry  classify  on
the  basis  of marriage  and not on  the  basis  of gender.  Now the  most supportive
precedent  for  this  would  be  Geduldig v  Aiello"  in  which  the  Supreme  Court

46.  417  US  484  (1974).

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  39

held  that  discrimination  against  pregnant  women  is  not sex-based.  The court
noticed  that  the  insurance  scheme  that  the  state  provided  that  didn't  cover
pregnancy  "divides  recipients  into  two  groups,  pregnant  women,  and  non-
pregnant  persons.  The first is  exclusively female,  the second includes  members
of both sexes.""  The trouble with this argument  is that the persuasive authority
of Geduldig is weak. The decision  hasn't  been overruled,  but similar reasoning
in  the  Title  VII  context  has  been  rejected  by  Congress.  And  Geduldig's
reasoning has  been almost universally  condemned by scholars.

That suggests  a second strategy. One might conceive  that the marriage  laws
classify  on  the basis  of sex,  but say that  this  discrimination  is  necessary  for the
compelling  interest  of promoting  the  realization  of one  of the  highest  goods
that human  beings  can  achieve,  the  good  of marriage,  as  Teresa  has  described
it. And  you could  say  that a law  that  maps  that  good in  a misleading way by
calling  same-sex  relationships,  marriages,  when  it  is  not  in  fact  what  they
ultimately  metaphysically  are,  would  miseducate  the  public  about  the  goods
that  are  really worth  pursuing. The  trouble  with  this  argument-and  I  think
this  is  the  deepest  problem  with  the  kind  of argument  that  Teresa  has  been
offering--is  that  it  relies  upon  a  highly  contestable  set  of ontological  claims
that probably no  make  sense at  all outside of the context  of a  certain  flavor of
conservative  Christianity. Now  the court  has  held  that  to  be constitutional,  a
law  has  to  have  a  secular, 
legislative  purpose.  The  promotion  of  the
metaphysical  reality  of  one-flesh  unity  doesn't  seem  to  me  to  be  capable  of
being  plausibly  characterized  as  such  a purpose.  Remember  that  when  a sex-
based classification  must be defended,  the burden  of justification is  demanding
and rests  entirely on the state. That's  the  doctrine. It is  hard to  imagine  how a
state  could  meet  its  burden  by  invoking  this  peculiar  philosophical  theory  of
marriage. It is hard to image  a court endorsing  these metaphysical  claims.

At least I can't imagine what the opinion would look like.
COLLET:  Do I get to respond now?  [laughter] No, that's okay.
SUNSTEIN: And  now Mr. Coolidge.
DAVID  ORGON  COOLIDGE:  Thank  you  very  much  to  Jim  and  to  the
Roundtable  for  the invitation  to  participate  in today's  conversation.  I  have  to
tell you that  I  have the distinction  of being the  only person  on this  panel  who
is  not a professor.  You  might consider  that  a  liability  or a benefit,  but  it's  the
truth.

Although we're in a debate format  today, and although  the stakes  are high,
I want to  say that I  do see this as an  opportunity to learn.  I say  this because  the
question  of marriage,  or same  sex  marriage-however  you  want  to  formulate

47. 

Id at 496 n 20.

40  Roundtable

it-is in  many ways  the  question  of how  we  are  to  live  together  in  peace  when
we  deeply  disagree  about  matters,  which  all  sides  hold  dear.  Is  our  goal  to
eliminate  all  differences?  Or  is it to  insist that  differences  must  not  matter?  Or
is it to  learn  to  live with differences  even  though none  involved will  be satisfied
with  the  results?  If  I  were  to  state  this  in  more  religious-sounding  language,  I
would  say  that  the  goal  of the  struggle  over  marriage  is  not  to  annihilate  one's
opponents,  or to  pretend  that they don't exist,  but in  fact to  learn to  love them.
And  I  don't  mean  that  as  a  statement  of pure  sentimentality.  I  think  that's  at
the  heart  of civic  tolerance.  It's  based  on my  conviction  that every  person  is  a
child  of God,  and  that  every  person,  however  they  identify  themselves,  has  a
contribution  to  make to American  society.

Now,  since  I  only  have  ten  minutes  too,  I  want  to  talk  about  three  things
briefly.  First,  marriage;  second,  democracy;  and  finally,  in  proper  order,
constitutional  law. The core of my argument  I  suppose, is that  I  don't  think we
can  discuss  the  third  question  without  addressing  the  first  two.  So  the first:  it
seems  to  me  that  the  fundamental  question  if I  can  put it  that way,  is whether
one  believes  that there  is  a there  there,  and if so, what  it is.  In that regard,  I  can
think of at least four possible ways  of defining marriage.

One  is  that  marriage  is  simply  an  artifact  of power  relations  over  time.  It
may  be  benign,  it  may  be  malevolent,  but  it  has  no  core  to  it,  no  lasting
purpose  to  which  it  corresponds.  It exists  in  society  and  law,  but it  is  nothing
more  than  we  make  of it.  In  such  a  case,  the  question  of legalizing  same  sex
marriage  becomes  merely  a question  of public  policy.

Another  view  would  be  that  marriage  at  its  core-first  of all  that  it  has  a
core-is  a  contract  between  consenting  adults  who  choose  to  live  their  lives
together.  Only  the  individuals  are  the  "really  real."  In  such  a  case,  there  is  no
principled  base  that  I  can  think  of  for  limiting  marriage  to  male-female
couples,  or  to  intimate  relationships,  or  for  limiting  marriage  to  couples.  And
this  is  not just  a  point  that  was  made  in  the  first  panel  to  be  nasty  or  to  talk
about polygamy.  I've heard  this  argument  made by  people on  both sides of this
issue.  In  fact,  under  this  first view,  it's  not  clear  to  me  that there's  even a  basis
for  having  marriage  licenses  as  such,  but  perhaps  just  the  enforcement  of
contracts.

A third  approach  is  that marriage  is,  at its core,  a  legal  means  of enhancing
social  stability.  In  this  more  communitarian  approach,  people  are  viewed  as
genuinely  relational  beings who  flourish in  intimate relationships  which  benefit
from  an  added  degree  of protection.  In such  an  approach,  state  regulation  is
permissible  and,  again,  there  is no  reason that  marriage should  not  be  extended
to  same  sex couples.  The  real  question  then  becomes  why  should  marriage  be
limited  to  sexual  relationships  or  relationships  of  only  two?  It's  the  same

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  41

conundrum,  I  think.  After  all,  intimacy  flourishes  in  many  settings,  and  it's
generally only Americans who always  confuse sex and  intimacy.

Fourth,  last  but  not least,  marriage  may be  viewed  as  a  social  institution
built  around  the  reality  that  we  are  embodied  as  male  or  female  and  that
together  as  male  and  female,  form  unique  communities  of difference  which
extend  community  across  the  generations.  According  to  this  view,  same  sex
couples  cannot  marry. They cannot  marry because,  lacking a sexual difference,
they cannot  simultaneously offer themselves  to  one another, form a community
of difference,  and potentially  offer  the world  the gift  of new life. Any of these
particular  functions-pleasure,  partnership,  procreation,  parenting--can  be
done  in  a variety  of contexts,  as  has  been  pointed  out  already,  and  I  do  not
know anyone who would disagree with  that. But, no other community  does all
of these  simultaneously  regardless  of any  state regulation.  The  role of the state
then  becomes  not  one  of  enforcing  purely  private  contracts,  or  of  creating
marriage  as  a  useful  social  policy,  or  redefining  it when  it  chooses  to,  but of
recognizing  it,  and  here  I  sound  like  Teresa.  In  fact,  I'm  repeating  Teresa.
Recognizing  marital  status,  protecting  it  through  rights  and  responsibilities
and,  as  seems  prudent,  offering  it  benefits-three  different  areas  all  of which
could  be  talked  about,  and  be  disaggregated  and  discussed  in  ways  that
Professor Nussbaum  brought up.

So  it strikes  me  that  these are  the  four  predominant  views  of marriage  in
play and it's hard to  dialogue with the first view because  it assumes  that there is
no there  there and so  it's hard to  know what to  talk about. There's  a lot to  talk
about between the other three.

The second question is  the  question of democracy. At  the present time,  the
official  law  of marriage  in  every  country  of the  world  is  based  on  the  fourth
view. But  clearly  this is  in flux  and  we  are  seeing  experiments  based on  other
views.  The recent law passed  by France  is  a good example.  No  state  or country
has  yet legalized same  sex marriage,  but it may happen and it may happen very
soon.  In  situations  such  as  ours  in  the  United  States,  public  opinion  is  still
roughly two  to  one  in favor  of the  fourth view, for  what that  is  worth,  but  a
significant  minority  of Americans  appear  to  be  changing  their  minds.  The
question  is whether  and,  if so,  how  these conflicts  should  be resolved.  Among
many supporters  of same  sex  marriage  I hear  a rhetoric-and  I'd be happy for
my colleagues here  to  tell  me that it's not their rhetoric-that  suggests  that the
American  people  are  not  qualified  to  deliberate  and  decide  this  question.
Somehow  this  very  important  question,  which  has  always  been  and  still  is
primarily the  province of legislatures,  cannot be entrusted  to the authors of our
state  and  federal  constitutions  or  their  elected  representatives.  In  fact,  the
whole  idea  of doing so  is  repulsive.  If we  ask where  this view  comes  from,  the

42  Roundtable

only  answer  I  can  come up with  is  the  tendency  to view  all  contentious  issues,
including  this  one,  through  the  paradigm  of race.  According  to  this  narrative,
there  is  the  victimizing majority  represented  by the  legislatures  and  the people,
and  the victimized  minority whose defenders  are  the  courts.  In  such  a  case,  the
only  way  to  vindicate  the  victims  is  to  remove  the  issue  from  the  people.
Would  that the  issue were so  simple.

By  that logic, the  first three  views of marriage  I  described  above  are entirely
defensible  and  the  fourth  is  nothing  but  bigotry.  By that  logic,  there  seems  to
be  no  recognition  that  we  have  here  not  a  clash  between  victims  and
victimizers,  but  a  clash  between  viewpoints  about  the  definition  of marriage.  It
could  actually  be  that  all  sides  are  sincerely  putting  forth  viewpoints  that  have
every  right to  be  evaluated  in  the  rough  and tumble of American political  clash
and compromise.  It could  be that this way  of addressing  the issue is  much more
conducive  to  a  lasting  civic peace.

Finally,  a  couple  of brief thoughts  on  constitutional  law-briefer  than  the
subject  merits.  Based  on  the  above,  you  might  think  that I  would  be  dubious
about  using  privacy  or  equality  or  autonomy  to  evaluate  this  issue  in  such  a
general  way  and  you're  right.  It's  not  like  our  federal  jurisprudence  is  crystal
clear.  It's  a hodgepodge.  You  can spin  it in  a variety of directions,  I  think we all
know  that.  We  can  debate  Loving,"  we  can  debate  Zablockij' we  can  debate
Turner,5  we  can  debate  Romer, '  we can  debate  VM1.Y  How  the  right  to  marry
relates  to  rights  of privacy  or  rights  of association  doesn't  seem  clear  to  me  in
the  current  case  law.  How questions  of discrimination  addressed  in  Romer and
VMI  apply  to  questions  surrounding  marriage  is  a  cottage  industry.  I  have
nothing  profound  to  add  to  that  discussion.  It  just  seems  to  me,  from  the
perspective  of one  who  has  the  view  of marriage  that  I  do,  that  if one  is,  for
better  or worse,  going  to  litigate  these  matters,  attempts  to  resolve  them solely
by reference  to  individual  rights are  non-starters.  If we  take  the constitution  to
be  at  heart,  a  means  to  advance  individual  autonomy  over  and  against  social
institutions  and  the state,  we  are  just peddling  politics  in  the guise  of law. We
should  get out of the  courts and make our arguments  before the  court of public
opinion  and  the  people's  representatives,  not  just  as  part  of  a  litigation
strategy-which  is  always  done  anyway-but  because  we  believe  that  all  men
and  women  are  created  equal  and  that  all  deserve  an  equal  opportunity  to
decide  these  issues.  If the  people  and their  representatives  decide  that marriage

48.  Loving v  Virginia, 388  US  1 (1967).
49.  Zablocki v  Redhail, 434  US  374  (1978).
50.  Turner v  Safley, 482  US 78  (1987).
51.  Romer v Evans, 517 US  620  (1996).
52.  United States v  Virginia, 518 US  515  (1996).

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  43

is merely an  individual contract  or just a means of social stability and choose to
redefine  it, so  be it. Others  will disagree,  but we will have  followed  the rule of
law.  On the other, hand it might turn out differently. Either way, we might be
able to  live better together  in peace. Thank you.

MARK STRASSER.  Good  afternoon.  In  Baehr v  Lewin, "  a plurality  of the
Hawaii  Supreme  Court held  that  the state's same  sex  marriage  ban  implicated
equal  protection  guarantees.  That  statute  discriminated  on  the  basis  of sex,
both facially  and as  applied.  To  talk  about discrimination  might  mean  merely
classified,  and  that's  basically  what  the  plurality  suggested,  or  perhaps,  in
addition, that it involved some  kind of invidious  distinction. That was  left for
the  trial  court  to  determine.  Now  the  lower  court's  task  in  Hawaii  was  to
examine  the  statute  to  see  whether  it  was  narrowly  tailored  to  promote
compelling  state  interests.  That was  just  because  of a  particular  aspect  of the
Hawaii  Constitution 
imposing  strict  scrutiny  on  gender  classifications.
Something  that  wasn't  unusual  about  the  Hawaii  Constitution  was  when
gender  would  be  viewed  as  implicated.  So,  this  might  have  interesting
implications  for  other  courts,  either when  they  are  examining  their  own state
statutes  in  light  of  their  own  state  constitutions  which  perhaps  explicitly
mention  gender,  perhaps  then  making this a  strict scrutiny analysis  or, as well,
whether federal equal protection  guarantees will be  implicated.

Most states,  however,  will  use-even  if they find  gender  discrimination-
the  lower  standard,  as  you  know.  The  challenged  classification  must  serve
important  government  objectives  and  be  substantially  related.  Now  it's  clear
that  there  are  important  differences  between  men  and  women.  Nonetheless,
they  must  be  related  to  the  interests  asserted  in  so  far  as  we're  going to  talk
about  the statute  at issue  as  being constitutional.  I'd argue  they don't play the
requisite  role.  Clearly  the  state  has  several  interests  in  marriage,  and  they've
been  discussed:  provide the setting  for the  production  and  raising  of children,
promote security and stability for the individuals themselves,  leading to happier
and more  productive  lives,  which is  a benefit for society.  These,  of course,  are
reasons  to  allow  same  sex  marriage.  Whether  through  adoption,  surrogacy,
artificial  insemination,  or perhaps  just  having  had  a  child through  a  previous
marriage,  same  sex  couples  are  having  and  raising  children.  This  has
importance  here  and,  had  we  been  talking  about  substantive  due  process,  I
argue has importance  there.

In Zablocki, the Court said "I[I]t would make little sense to recognize  a right
of privacy  with  respect  to  other  matters  of family life  and  not with  respect  to
the decision  to enter the relationship  that is the  foundation of the family in our

53.  Baehr, 852 P2d 44.

44  Roundtable

society.""  Now same  sex parents  do have  rights-rights  to  privacy with  respect
to  their  children.  Following  Zablocki, at  least  there's  a  suggestion  that maybe
the  right to  enter  this  relationship  ought  to  be  recognized.  Nonetheless,  courts
and commentators  are  suggesting that procreation  is  a reason  not to allow same
sex  unions,  so  let's  look  at  the  argument.  Commentators  and  panelists  here
have  suggested  that  only  a  man  and  a  woman  can  have  a  child  through  their
union  yet  the  state's  interest  in  the  next  generation  is  not  only  in  children
produced  through  the  union  of the  different  members of a  married  couple  else
our  adoption  laws  would  be  much  different.  It's  unlikely,  for  example,  that
adoptive  parents  and  biological  parents  would  be  treated  the  same  in  the  eyes
of the  law.  It's  unlikely  that  Congress  would  be  trying  to  push  adoption.  It's
unlikely that legislatures  would  have created  a  step-parent  exception  to  make  it
easier  for  adults not biologically  related  to  the  children  to  adopt them.

Suppose  things  were  otherwise.  Suppose  the  state  had  no  interest  in
children  raised  either  in  single  parent  homes,  in  homes  where  there's  a  step-
parent  or  in  homes  where  there's  an  adoptive  parent.  Even  so,  more  would
need  to  be  established 
to  show  why  same  sex  marriage  should  not  be
recognized.  The  question  would be  how recognizing  this would somehow harm
important  state  interests.  Would  it  harm  existing  marriages?  It seems  unlikely
people would  divorce  because  same sex couples were allowed  to marry.  It seems
unlikely  that  people  would  refuse  to  marry  because  they  could.  Suppose  I'm
wrong:  suppose  people  would  refuse  to  enter  into  the  relationship  then.  It
might  seem  that  then  the  state  would  have  a  compelling  interest,  yet  this
argument  would  clearly  have  surprising  results.  Analogously,  if only in  Loving
people  had  thought  to  say  "If they  can  marry,  I  won't,"  that  would  have  been
enough.  You'd  get  a  heckler's  veto  for  marriage.  Perhaps  it would  be  thought
that  if same  sex marriage  was  allowed,  marriage  would crumble.  Yet,  as Justice
Blackmun  suggested  in  Bowers, there's  ample  reason  for  believing  that people
would  not  think  better  of murder,  cruelty  or  dishonesty."  Obviously,  that's  a
different  but  related  context.

Some  commentators  believe  it  important  to  establish  that  different  sex
unions  are  better  than same  sex  unions. First,  I suspect  that  this  tack is  wrong-
headed.  It seems  likely  that some  kinds  of marriages  are  better  for some,  others
for  others.  Even  were  the  project  not wrong-headed,  it  might  be  difficult  to
develop 
the  objective  criteria:  children  versus  no  children,  handicapped
children  versus  non-handicapped  children.  How  do  you  compare  marriages
with  lots  of money and no  children,  children  and  less  money. Even  if we  could

54.  Zablocki, 434  US at 386.
55.  Bowers v Hardwick, 478  US  186,  212  (1986)  (Blackmun  dissenting).

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  45

agree-suppose  we had the criteria-it's  pretty clear the  state does  not say that
only  those  who  will  have  the  optimal  marriage  will  be  allowed  to  marry.
Perhaps  the  question to  ask,  as  has been  suggested  here,  is  not better  or worse
but what is  essential to  marriage?  My interest,  at least, is what's essential  for the
civil  institution.  So,  merely,  for  example,  because  it  would  not  meet  some
religious  definition  should  not suffice.  For  example,  a religion  might  say,  "A
marriage with someone  not of this religion  is  not a marriage in our eyes"  or "A
marriage with someone not of the right race  is not a marriage  in our eyes."  This
might  be  essential  for  the  religion  but  that's  presumably  not  what's  at  issue
here.  If Vermont,  for  example,  comes  to  recognize  same sex  marriages  then  at
least for the  state, and for purposes here, I believe  that suffices.

To  determine whether same  sex couples can fulfill the essential  purposes of
marriage, we should look at what the state  has implicitly or explicitly  stated are
its  purposes.  If we  do  that,  the  procreation  argument  at  best  sounds  a  little
hollow.  Consider  the  claim,  as  has  been  offered,  that  marriage  is  for  the
purpose  of  providing  a  setting  for  the  raising  of  the  next  generation.  That
would  be  one purpose  rather  than  the  only  purpose.  Even  if it were  the  only
purpose,  that would preclude some from marrying but not same sex couples. In
the  previous  panel,  we  were  talking  about  how  individuals  are  doing  in
parenting,  not  whether  but  how.  Now  it  might  be  thought  that  there's  no
reason  to have to  figure out what  the state  says.  Suppose you have  a state  that
says  the  following:  "There  is  a  compelling  interest  in  protecting  the  essential
nature of marriage  which involves  a man  and a woman."  Yet at least  one of the
lessons  of Loving  is  presumably  that  the  state  cannot  merely  announce  its
perceived interests  and have  that upheld.

Let  me  talk  for  a  moment  about  equal  protection  and  orientation
discrimination.  It might be argued that really what's going on is  discrimination
on  the  basis  of  orientation  and  not  sex.  To  determine  this  is  an  empirical
question.  One question would be what would a state say if two heterosexuals  of
the  same  sex  wanted  to  get  some  of the  benefits  that  we  were  talking  about
earlier.  Would the state say yes?  Would the state  say no?  If the state  allows  this
then  presumably  we  have  orientation  discrimination  although  there  will  be
some ironies in so far as procreation  is so important  then you're going to say no
to  some people who  may in fact be raising children  but yes to  some who in fact
may have  no  interest in raising children.  It's difficult to  see  what purpose such
a  statute  would  promote  that  was  legitimate  but  that  clearly  would  be
orientation  discrimination.  Were  it  to  establish  full inferior  status  then  there
will  be  the  Romer  questions  alluded  to  and  we're  putting  aside  even  the
individual  interests  in marriage-these  are  the  state interests.  The state  might
be argued  to  have  a  compelling  interest  in morality. Arguably  that would  be  a

46  Roundtable

reason  to  promote  stable,  long-standing  same  sex  relationships.  Perhaps  it
should  be  thought  "no,  let's  just  let  the  state  decide  what  its  own  vision  of
morality  is  and enforce  that."  Presumably both  Loving and McLaughlin'6  would
show why  that is  not an  acceptable  option.

interest  or  even  an  important 

As  to whether  in  fact same  sex marriage  bans  involve  sex discrimination  or
orientation  discrimination,  this  is  an  empirical  question.  We  can  see  how  laws
will  be applied.  If in  fact  it's  sex discrimination,  then  we can  see whether  there
are  important  purposes  served.  I would  suggest the  following:  if the  reason that
this  is  offered,  that  same  sex  marriages  should  not be allowed,  is  that  the  state
has  a  compelling 
in  precluding
individuals  who  cannot  reproduce  through  their  union,  but  that same  interest
is  not  recognized  when,  for  example,  the  elderly  or  those  either  incapable  of
reproducing  or  who  simply  don't  want  to  have  children-won't  be  applied
there-and  further,  if  it's  also  the  case,  as  is  the  case  in  several  states,  only
certain  people  who  cannot reproduce  will  be allowed  to  marry-if you  look  at
some  of the  first  cousin  statutes-then  I  would  suggest  that  that  reason  is  not
the  real  reason.  If  it's  argued  that  the  reason  is  to  provide  a  setting  for  the
raising  of  children  but  nonetheless  those  who  are  raising  them  will  not  be
allowed  to  marry,  it  seems  that  really  can't  be  the  reason.  One  of the  benefits,
at least,  of imposing  heightened  scrutiny will  be that  either  real  reasons will  be
offered  or it will  be  clear  that there  aren't such  reasons.  Thanks.

interest 

GEORGE  DENT:  Let's  begin  by asking  why  society,  through  government,
should  single  out for  honor  this  relationship  called  marriage.  It is  important  to
remember  that  gay  marriage  is  not  singled  out  for  disfavor.  There  are  many
sexual  and/or loving relationships,  including relatives,  marriage  to  animals,  and
polygamy,  that  are  not  eligible  for  this  honor.  One  valid  reason  to  revere
traditional  marriage  is  that  it  is  intrinsically  good.  We  value  life,  liberty,  and
the  pursuit  of happiness  as  intrinsically  good  but  these  are  also  mysteries,  as
Andy  Koppelman  said,  or  as  some  others  would  say,  metaphysical  mumbo-
jumbo.  That  is  you  can't  show  empirically  that  life  is  better  than  death,  but
since  we  can't  prove  the  intrinsic  goodness  of this  claim,  I  don't  think  there's
much  point  in  dwelling  on  it  and  in  any  case  Professor  Collett  has  already
talked  about  it.

There  are,  though,  two  reasons  for  honoring  traditional  marriage  that  are
accessible  to  most  people.  First,  traditional  marriage  is  the  best  milieu  for
nurturing  children.  Gay  couples  can  adopt  children,  but  adoption  is  different
from bearing  children  and  any person  or group of people could  adopt, so this  is
no  reason  to  honor  gay  marriages  above  any  other group.  Second,  traditional

56.  McLaughlin vFlorida, 379  US  184  (1964).

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  47

marriage 
focuses  human  energies  in  socially  productive  ways.  Men  are
especially prone to  be disruptive and self-destructive.  Marriage  to  a woman and
fatherhood  tend  to  point men  in the  right  direction.  Many  arguments  for gay
marriage  discuss  gender stereotyping  and taboos  against homosexuality.  Those
issues  are  interesting,  but  they're  not  relevant  to  the  marriage  issue  that we're
discussing  here.  We're  not  discussing  criminal  sodomy  statutes  and  no  law
forbids,  for example,  an effeminate man  to  marry a masculine woman.

The analogy  of gay marriage  to interracial  marriage  is  a  textbook  example
of the  errors  that  can result  from  formalistic  thinking  divorced  from reasoned
reality and common  sense. Anti-miscegenation  laws  had the  purpose  and effect
of  racial  subordination.  Traditional  marriage  has  the  purpose  and  effect  of
providing  for children  and maximizing  human potential,  not of subordinating
either  sex.  Andy  Koppelman  says  sex  discrimination  should  prevent  not  only
subordination  of  women,  but  any  imposition  of  gender  classifications  on
people's free  choices.  He  also  says we can't  rely on gender  classifications  if any
individual might prove an  exception to  it. This is wrong. A college legally may,
and  I  think  should,  separate  women's  and  men's  basketball  teams  because  of
the physical  differences  between  men  and  women  even  though  some  women
are  bigger,  stronger,  and  better  basketball  players  than  some  men.  The
argument  is  interesting  because  one  area  in  which  we  agree  that  gender
differences  are  important  is  marriage.  That's  one  thing  on which  we  all  agree,
otherwise there would be no reason  to argue  for rights  to same sex marriage  any
more  than  the  right  to  have  the  same  sex  teller  when  you  go  to  the  bank.
Nobody  would  care  about  that.  This  is  one  area  where  we  agree:  gender
differences  are  important.  This  example  also  shows  that  gender  distinctions
aren't  always  wrong,  but  I  agree  that  we  shouldn't  make  such  distinctions
without good  reason.

I've  already  said  that the  main  reason  for honoring  traditional  marriage  is
to  provide  the  best shelter  for children.  Proponents  of gay marriage  sometimes
say  that  even  their  apparent  defeats,  like  adoption  of the  Defense  of Marriage
Act,  are  really  victories  because  they  provoke  discussion,  and  inevitably
discussion  will  lead intelligent  people  of good will  to support  gay marriage.  I
agree  that  this  discussion  can  be  beneficial,  but  that's  because  I  think  it  can
help  society to  recall  the  social importance  of marriage,  a  fact that we  seem  to
have  forgotten.  By  the  way,  on  this  point  I  would  agree  with  what  Martha
Nussbaum  said  earlier  this  afternoon:  it's heterosexuals  who have  made  a  mess
of  marriage.  The  answer  is  not  to  throw  in  the  towel.  The  answer  is  to
straighten  things  up.

Social  support for  marriage  is  actually  becoming  more  important  for two
reasons.  First,  the  needs  of  children  are  greater.  In  an  agricultural  society,

48  Roundtable

children  don't need much  education  or socialization  to  learn their roles.  Today,
children  need  lots  of  attention  and  the  best  source  of  attention  is  caring
parents.  But, and  this  is  the  second point, the  modern  world  often undermines
good  parenting.  The  anonymity  and  mobility  of modern  life  enable  parents,
especially  fathers,  to  neglect  or  abandon  their  families  without  incurring
community  condemnation.  Our resources  for  encouraging  good  parenting  are
limited.  No  one  wants  to  throw  unwed  parents  in  jail.  Perhaps  our  best
weapon,  then,  is  to  exalt  traditional  marriage  as  the  most  fertile  ground  for
good parenting.

Advocates  of gay  marriage  focus  on material  benefits  of legal marriage.  The
issue  of material  benefits  is  a legitimate  one,  but why  tie  it to  the definition  of
marriage?  Maybe  a  widower  should  be  able  to  give  medical  benefits  to  his
mother  who  quits her job  to care  for his young  children. But why would  we say
that  he  must  marry  his  mother  in  order  to  get  these  benefits?  The  answer
clearly  is  that  this  is  primarily  a  debate  about  honor  and  respect.  The  material
benefits  of  marriage  are  generally  paltry  and  often  outweighed  by  the
detriments,  like  the  marriage  penalty  tax.  Gay activists  know that the  real point
is  that  the  validation  of gay  marriage  would  be  the  most  significant  possible
acceptance  of homosexuality  as  equal  to  heterosexuality.  But why  not condone
homosexuality  if  it  makes  gays  happy  and  does  no  harm?  Recognizing  gay
marriage  would  cause  harm  by  discrediting  the  institution.  Most  people
consider  gay  marriage  a  caricature  of the  real  thing. The  concern  is  not  that
approving  gay  marriage  would  cause  people  to  become  homosexuals.  The
problem,  rather,  is that validating  gay marriage  would  make marriage  seem  less
honorable,  less  respectable,  and  thereby  make  it  less  likely  that  people  would
marry  or  stay  married.  Social  attitudes  influence  the  stability  of marriage.  If
marriage  becomes  a  less honored  institution,  it will  also become  less  stable.

Some  say  that  conservatives,  whatever  that  means,  should  favor  gay
marriage  as  good  for  gays.  How would  I  know  if marriage  is  good  for  gays?
Some  gays  praise  promiscuity  and  ridicule  gays  who  want  to  imitate  a
heterosexual  marriage.  Others  say  they  don't  personally  want  marriage,  but if
it's legally  available  for straights,  they want  it available  for them too. Of course,
they  would  then  reject  it, so  it's questionable  whether  many  gays  would  marry
or  stay  married. At  least  the  burden  of proof should  be  on  those  who  demand
approval.  This was  something  that  was  raised  in  the  first  group  session-who
bears  the  burden  of proof?  I  think the  burden  of proof should  be on those  who
demand  approval  of something  that  no  society  in  history  has  ever  legitimized
and that concerns  an  institution  for the raising of children,  the most  important
job  that  any society does.  In  other  contexts,  some people  have  asked  whether a
compromise  would  be  possible.  For  me,  it  is,  on  the  basis  that  homosexual

20001

Same-Sex Marriage  49

relationships  be tolerated  but  not honored  to  the same  degree  that  traditional
marriage  is  honored.  However,  I suspect  that  the loud  forces  on both sides  of
the  debate will  reject this,  or any compromise.

SUNSTEIN:  Those were  really excellent  presentations,  and  they were  all  so
amazingly on time.  I feel  a little bad that,  as  the last speaker,  so much has  been
said that has to  be processed.  These remarks  are going to  be about two puzzles.
One has to do with the source  of the distinction between  domestic partnership
and  marriage-a  distinction  that  such  diverse  people  as  Judge  Posner  and
President  Clinton  believe  is  very  important  to  insist  upon and  a  question  on
which the  last remarks  were  illuminating.  What  is  that distinction  about?  The
second  puzzle,  which  I  think  is  a  linked  puzzle,  has  to  do  with  Andy
Koppelman's  argument that discrimination on  the basis of sexual orientation in
the  context  of marriage  is  a  form  of discrimination  on  the  basis  of sex.  I must
say  I've been  convinced  by this  argument,  and  I'm going to  try to  say why, at
the  same  time,  I  don't  believe  that  the  Supreme  Court  should  accept  the
argument,  largely  for  reasons  of  institutional  role,  about  which  one  of  the
speakers  offered  some  remarks.  So,  this  is  about  the  difference  between
domestic partnerships  and marriage  and about  the view that  discrimination  on
the basis  of sexual  orientation is  a form of discrimination  on the  basis of sex.

There has  been  a reference  to Loving v  Virginia,57 probably the  best-named
case in the history of American law. You knew who was going to win. There's  a
welfare  rights  case  called King v  Smith  and,  in America,  Smith was  found  to
win.  Loving was  going to win this one.  But we  take it for granted that that case
was  right, but let's  puzzle  a little bit  about the difficulty of it at the  time. The
argument  made by the Lovings was that  this was a form of race  discrimination.
I  can't  marry  someone  of  an  opposite  race,  but  if I  was  of the  other  race  I
could,  so this  is  a  form of race discrimination.  The response  that was  made to
the  Lovings'  claim  had  two  parts.  First,  the  district  court  insisted-with
theological  reference,  by  the  way-on  the  naturalness  of  racial
explicit 
differences,  saying  that  these  are  God-made  differences  that  legitimately  drive
policy.  More  interestingly,  there  was  a  claim  that  this  was  actually  equal
because  whites were no  more prohibited from marrying blacks  than blacks were
prohibited  from  marrying  whites,  so  if  there  was  any  inequality  it  was
discrimination  against people who wanted  to marry people of different races.  It
wasn't discrimination  against African-Americans  at  all.  That was the argument
that  the  legal  culture  and  the  Supreme  Court  had  an  extremely  hard  time
responding  to:  that this  law  isn't a form  of race  discrimination  at  all.  The way

57.  Loving, 388  US  1.
58.  392 US 309  (1968).

50  Roundtable

the  Supreme  Court  ultimately responded  to  it was,  for  the  first  and only  time
in  it's  history, to  use  the words  "white supremacy."  What  the Court  tried to do
was  to  get in  back of the  formally discriminatory  at first glance  classification,  at
second  glance  not  really  formally  discriminatory  and 
that  the
discrimination  that  we see  before  us  stands  or falls  as  a  commitment  to  white
supremacy.

to  say 

Now the  question  to  be  asked, then,  is whether discrimination  on  the basis
of sexual  orientation  reflects  a  commitment  to male  supremacy.  I  confess  that I
believe  that  it  does  and  the  reason  that  it  does  is  it  embodies  a  judgment  that
there  are  two  kinds  of people,  men  and  women,  and  it  reflects  a  concern  that
the  institution  of  male-male  relationships  and  female-female  relationships
disrupts,  though in  quite different  ways,  the sexual  stereotypes  that  accompany
the  distinction  of humanity  into  two  kinds.  I  don't  think  the  Supreme  Court
should  accept  that  argument.  It's  too  early.  It's  a  democratic  argument,  not  a
judicial  argument  though  it  is  a  constitutional  argument.  That's  the  basic
claim.

Now  let's  shift  a  bit  to  the  distinction  between  domestic  partnership  and
marriage  and see  what  might underlie  the  distinction.  There is  a very  eloquent
suggestion  that  procreation  is  for  marriage  and  other  things  are  for  domestic
partnerships.  The difficulty for  me at least with that argument is  that too many
marriages  involve  people  who  are  old  and  infertile  or  young  and  infertile,  or
just  not  interested  in  children.  It's  not  that  interesting  that  my  mother  got
remarried  after  my father  died  but she did. She was  in  her sixties  and I'm pretty
sure  she  wasn't  fertile.  Her  procreative  potential  I  think,  technologically
speaking,  was,  if  anything,  less  than  that  of  many  gay  couples.  In  any  case,
there  are  too many counter  examples.

is 

the  distinction 

What  I  think  socially  speaking-this  is  not  a  comment  about  any
individual-but  socially  speaking  what  underlies 
the
expressive  character  of  recognizing  marriage  and  the  debate  is  one  about
nothing  material but about the expressive  character  of law. The last speaker put
his  finger  on  it  with  the  thought  that  to  allow  homosexual  marriages  is  to
legitimate  same  sex  relationships,  or  to  approve  them  in  ways  that  domestic
partnerships  don't  threaten  to  do.  I  do  believe  that's  right  and,  socially
speaking,  that  that's  the  core  of the  difference.  What  is  the  statement  that  is
being  made  by same  sex  marriages  and  why  is  there  such  contestation  about
that when  the  material  consequences  are  so  low?  We  might just isolate  the  fact
that it's  a  statement we're  concerned  about  and nothing  material,  or very  little
material,  if  the  compromise  suggested  would  go  through. 
I  think  the
underlying expression  is  that  gay people  ought  not to  be  excluded  by virtue  of
their homosexuality  and  there's  no sense  in  which  they're  second-class  citizens

2000] 

Same-Sex Marriage  51

in the  United States.  This  is  not a suggestion  that everyone who  opposes  same
sex marriages  believes that gay people count as second-class  citizens.  It's a more
general  statement  about  the  dynamic  of the  debate  and  the  social  meaning  of
the  exclusion  to  heterosexuals  and  homosexuals  alike.  Martha  Nussbaum
reflected  an  interesting  concern  that  marriage  isn't  the  greatest  thing  in  the
world  always  and  that  the  mere  availability  of marriage  to  same  sex  couples
might  actually  undermine  freedom  because  it would put them  in  the  position
of choosing  an  option which  they would  rather  not  have  available  because  it
would  pressure-the  word  was  "push"  I  think,  offered  by  the  philosopher
Claudia  Card-her  into  marriage  when  she  really  didn't  want  to  be  there.
There's  an  interesting  suggestion  there  about  the  extent  to  which  an  option
might  deny freedom  because  a  social  norm  might  act  on  the  option  so  as  to
push  people  toward  it  and  they  might  rather  not  have  it  there,  but  I  don't
think  that's sufficient  justification  for  denying same  sex  marriages  because  of
the  asymmetry  between  heterosexual  and homosexual  couples  and  because  of
the  expression  of exclusion  and, socially  speaking again,  "contempt"  I  think  is
the right word, that  the exclusion imposes  on gay couples.

I've  talked  a bit  about second-class  citizenship  and  exclusion,  but  I  think
that's not the only  expression that the content of our law currently  makes. This
will  link  the  two  parts  of my  remarks,  the  one  about  Loving  v  Virginia, the
other  about  the expressive  function  of law. I  think the deeper  expression,  and
the  sense in which  we're all  implicated  in this,  not just gay couples  who want
to  get  married,  is  the  insistence  that  our  marriage  law  as  generally  conceived
offers:  that there are two kinds of people, men and women,  with accompanying
social  roles.  That's  an insistence  that's  damaging  not only to  homosexuals.  It's
damaging  to  gay  men,  to  lesbian  couples,  to  heterosexual  women  and  to
heterosexual  men, though in quite different ways.

I  think we'll  go  down,  just  like  the  first  time,  and  have  comments  that
anyone  would like  to make  about  anyone's  remarks-each  person  gets  to  talk
about one person's remarks! Self-criticism  is perfectly appropriate.

STRASSER.L  I'm  starting here as  well.  Oh good.  How about I say  a  little bit
and  put  it  in  the  form  of a  question  at  the  end  but  it won't  be  too  long,  I
promise.  This is for Professor  Dent.

We  talked  a  little  bit  about  Loving and  there  are  lots  of  cases  in  which
interracial  marriage  has  been  challenged.  It's just  that Loving was  the first that
said  you  can't  do  that.  Of course,  this  was  coming  up  in  the  state  courts
because  it was  believed the  federal  government  didn't have a  role in  this. After
the  Civil  War,  various  courts  addressed  this  and  said,  "If we  allow  interracial
marriage,  we're  going  to  have  people  bringing  all  of  their  wives-we  can't
prevent  polygamy  and we  can't prevent  incest. That's what is  going to  happen

52  Roundtable

as  soon  as  you  open  up  the  door."  It  seems  to  me  analogous.  The  same
arguments  have  been  used  traditionally  to  say  we  don't  want  to  take  an  extra
step.  I'm  not  saying  it's  a  good  argument,  I'm  just  saying  it  might  sound
familiar.  I  believe  the  Loving Court  suggested,  although  it  talked  about  white
supremacy,  that even  if that had not been at issue,  they nonetheless  would have
held  that  way, so  I  guess  that's  my  question  for  Professor  Dent.  If this  hadn't
involved racial  subordination and if really it  could be credited  that the  state was
just  doing  what  it  said,  keeping  the  races  separate  and  allegedly  there  were
legitimate  reasons,  I'm wondering  what you  think. Would that  do it?

COOLIDGE:  This  is  sort  of  an  awkward  question  because  I  want  to  ask

Mark, and  it's going  to  be  awkward for him  and I  to wait  until  the end.

STRASSER:  And I don't  get another chance!
COOLIDGE:  I'm  chewing  a lot  on what  Professor  Sunstein was  saying and
I'm trying to  understand if the core of the argument  that he's making-but I'm
asking you,  not  him-is that if one  does  not believe  that  the sexual  dimension
of a  same  sex relationship  is  a  good  thing, does  that  mean  therefore  that I  hold
you  in  contempt?  Because  I  heard  that  as  the  implication  of his  question  and  I
want  to  know that. I'm very willing to  hear whatever  your  answer might  be.

SUNSTEIN: 

I  can  answer  that  because  I  don't  have  any  question  for
anybody.  I  did not mean  that at all  about  any particular person.  This is  really a
question  about  the  socially  understood  meaning  of the  act  on  the part  of, let's
say,  broad  segments  of the  population  confronted  with  laws  that  they  support
or  despise.  So  just like you could  have supported  a literacy  test just because  you
want  people  to  be  literate,  the  social  meaning  of a  literacy  test for  our  culture
might  be  that  you  want  to  exclude  African-Americans,  as  it  was.  So  it's  very
much  a  contextual  argument,  not  an  a  priori  argument.  Not  an  argument
about  any particular  person.

COLLETT:  I  am  intrigued  by the  clear  indication  from  the  last  comments
that  there  is  some  sort  of disrespect  of those  who  agree  with  what  Professor
Nussbaum  suggested  earlier,  which  is  that  we  should  truly  look  at  how  we
aggregate  benefits  in this  society and how we  allocate benefits.  My practice  base
is  elder  law,  and  I  represent  a  number  of elderly people  who  have  no  familial
relations  surviving.  The  reciprocal  beneficiary  law  of Hawaii  struck  me  as  a
very  sensible  way  to  accommodate  people  with  whom  I  had  had  significant
conversations  about  how  you  engage  in  this  private  ordering  of your  life  to
ensure  that you  achieve  the  objectives  that you have.  It  also  accommodates  the
material  benefits  that  you  say,  and  I  think  is  largely  true,  are  really  not  the
subject  of this  debate.  The  material benefits  include  ensuring  that the  intestate
succession  laws  reflect  the  desires  when  you  don't  have  to  go  through  the
process  of writing  a will  or a power  of attorney or all  of those sorts of things.

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  53

It strikes  me  that  Professor  Koppelman  has  mistaken  me  for John  Finnis.
I'm deeply  honored,  but I  am  not John  Finnis,  and my  argument  is  different
from  John's  although  I  have  tremendous  respect  and  wish  that  I  had  the
intellectual  horsepower that that man does.

My  argument  is  more  that  the  state  has  a  purpose  in  recognizing  and
regulating sexual  intercourse  because  of its  procreative  potential.  Regardless  of
the  intentions  of  the  parties  who  engage  in  it,  the  fact  is,  if  we  accept
Gudmacher's  study that we're wrong fifty percent  of the time. The fact that the
line  is  a  line  that  is  overinclusive  doesn't  illegitimate  the  state's  interest  in
regulating  sexual  intercourse  because  of  that  procreative  capacity  which  is
different from the argument  that John makes.

KOPPELMAN:  I'll  segue  right  in.  First  of all,  as  a  matter  of what  actually
goes  on in American society,  I offer  the generalization  that sexual intercourse  is
massively unregulated! Now it's not  clear to  me  that more  regulation  of sexual
intercourse  would be a good thing. I'm not sure that I want the law to be more
active in this area than  it is. There is another issue  about vulnerable people, and
protecting vulnerable people,  where again  I think that we are  in agreement  that
there  are people who  form  relations  of economic  dependency,  people who  are
called  into  existence  in  a  condition  of  massive  dependency.  We  want  to
structure  the law in such a way as  to be able  to  accommodate  that.

A  problem  that  a  few  of  the  speakers  have  alluded  to  is  whether  it  is
possible  for  us  to  arrive  at some  common  ground given  massive  disagreement
about whether,  at the  core,  it is  the  case  that the  sexual  relationship  between  a
man and  a  woman is  per se  good in  a way that no  sexual  relationship  between
persons  of  the  same  sex  can  be.  I  think  this  is  why  the  law  discriminates
between  the  two  pairs  of  eighty  year-old  people  and  allows  the  heterosexual
eighty year-old couple to  marry and  not the homosexual  eighty year-old couple
to marry. It ain't procreation.  It's got  to  be something about the nature  of the
relationship  itself. The  reason  why  I  perhaps  mistakenly  conflated  you with
Professor  John  Finnis-of Oxford  University,  who  has  made  an  extremely
philosophically  sophisticated  defense  of  the  heterosexuality  requirement  in
marriage  and  we  published  a  debate  about this-it seems  to  me  that since  the
law  discriminates  between  relationships  on  the  basis  of nothing  else  than  the
heterosexual  relationship,  you have  to find some  quality about just that and not
just children  that's  a  basis  for  this distinction.  The reason  that  this issue  is  so
emotionally  fraught  is  that  some  people  see  something  wonderful  about
heterosexual  coupling  that  is  just  not  possible,  not  evincible,  not  capable  of
being  realized  by  homosexual  coupling  and  then  the puzzle  is,  after  we  finish
glaring  at  each  other,  can  we  agree  on  any  set  of  legal  rules?  This  is  the
attraction  of domestic partnership.  The debate  is open about honor and respect

54  Roundtable

and  about  material  benefits.  The  material  benefits  are  not  completely
inconsequential  given  the way  that health  insurance is  structured  in the  United
States.  Part  of what  is  driving  the  domestic  partnership  debate  is  that  people
want  health  insurance.  They want some  basis for  getting it.

George  was  skeptical  about  whether  any  proponent  of same  sex  marriage
would  be able  to  live  with  that  sort of compromise.  I  can,  for  the  time  being.
And  since  in  the long run we're  all dead,  perhaps  that's  good enough.

DENT:  I'll  answer  Mark  Strasser's  question 

in  a  roundabout  way,
beginning  with  a  confession  that  I  am  a  recovering  libertarian.  There's  no
mystery what  caused  me to  change  my mind. My wife and I  had children and a
libertarian  vision  of the  world  works  very  well  if everyone  in  the  world  is  a
competent  adult  who  can  make  his  own  decisions  and fend  for  himself. When
you  throw children  into  the  equation,  it  starts  to  break  down.  Good  parenting
requires  tremendous  sacrifices  and  many  people  are  going  to  make  those
sacrifices  no  matter  what  the  state  says.  Unfortunately  as  we  know,  we  don't
have  to  look  far  to  see  many  parents  do  not.  The  question  is  how  do  we  get
parents-how  do we encourage  parents-to  make those tremendous  sacrifices?
To  put  it  another  way,  if tomorrow  morning  we  read  in  the  paper  that
some  scientist  has  created  a  robot that  does a  great job at raising  children,  then
to  my  mind  this  whole  debate  has  changed.  Maybe  then  I'm  back  to  my
libertarian  position-that  is  to  say,  why  should  the state  care  if you're married
or  not?  Gay  and  traditional  marriages  are  treated  equally  and  then  the  state
does  not care  about  either  of them.  That  brings  me  around  to  Mark's  question
about  anti-miscegenation  laws:  if  the  Court  had  been  persuaded  that  this  was
not  a matter  of white supremacy would  the  result  have  been  different?  That's  a
hard  question  for  me  to  answer  because  it's  like  an  extension  of a  world  in
which  there  are  robots  who  can  do  outstanding  parenting.  Maybe  the  best
answer  I  can  come  up  with  is  to  think  of the  rule  against  intermarriage  in
Jewish  law.  What  is the  purpose  for  that?  Some people  say that  it is a  way Jews
have  of saying  we're  better  than  everybody  else.  But  many  Jews  at  the  same
time accept  the  argument  that for  thousand of years we have  been an embattled
tribe  and  intermarriage  is  a  threat  to  the  survival  of the  tribe-certainly  to
survival  in America  today.  So  that's at  least one  circumstance  where  I  could  at
least  see  an  argument  against  intermarriage.  Of course,  it's not  a  legal  matter,
it's  a  matter  of  Jewish  law.  I  guess  I  have  a  hard  time  answering  Mark's
question,  but  I  guess  I  could  possibly  imagine  some  circumstances  somewhere
where  a  law  against,  or  a  principle  against,  intermarriage  might  make  some
sense,  as  possibly it does  in the  case  of Jewish  law.

SUNSTEIN:  Questions?  Comments?

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  55

AUDIENCE:  I have  a question for Professor  Collett about procreation.  That
obviously has  become  an  issue  for many people  on both  sides  of this issue.  In
light  of  the  fact  that  there  is  a  distinction  that-I  think  you  tried  to  bring
out-potential  procreation  matters,  not  necessarily  actual  procreation.  I
wondered  if you could illuminate  why that  is one of the necessary-one  of the
essential-characteristics  of  marriage?  From  my  perspective  in  the  Divinity
School-so  all that metaphysical  mumbo-jumbo  actually is what I work with-
I want  to  know  where  that  comes  from  and  whether  or  not that  is  changing
because  of the other demographic  realities  of today such as overpopulation  and
undercare  for the  children who  are  already  being born.

COLLETT:  Let me peel  your questions  off in reverse order. The birth  of the
seven  billionth  person  is  a  cause  of  celebration  in  that-I  believe  this  is
accurate-if you were  to  take  the  entire world  population  and  place  them  in
the  state  of Texas,  my home  state,  at  a  density  that  we  find  in  metropolitan
New York,  that is  all it would take geographically.  Malthus would  have had us
believe  that  we  would  be  so  overpopulated  that  we  would  be  engaging  in
cannibalism  to  survive  at  this  point.  Quite  the  contrary  has  been  proven  and
there are  many economists,  primarily  in South America,  who  suggest  that you
can't develop  an industrial  economy, a technologically  based economy, without
a certain population  base. A big problem that has faced  a  lot of the  developing
nations  is  that  they  have  not  reached  the  population  base  yet  to  support  or
sustain  an  industrial  or  technological  economy.  I  am  not  persuaded  by
Malthusian  arguments  that we are  in fact overpopulated.

than 

the  argument  about 

That's  a  very  different  argument 

the
abandonment  or neglect  of children.  In that  respect,  I  would  share with you  a
comment  that  I received  from  the principal  of the very  nice suburban  middle
school  that  one of my  daughters  goes  to,  when  she  and  I  were  visiting.  I said
"You  have  to  excuse  me,  I  have  to  leave  because  I  have  a  Supreme  Court
committee  meeting and I have to  get to it."  She said "It's so refreshing to  find a
family  where  both  parents  are  engaged  outside  of  the  home  and  yet  your
children  are  not  simply  being pet  sat."  I  said  "I'm  not sure  I  know  what that
means,"  and  she  said  "It's  the  sort of parenting  style  that  says  while you're  a
baby you're  cute and cuddly and we'll play with you like  a puppy but once you
achieve  a  certain  age  and  difficulty,  we're  going  to  put  you  in  the  backyard
with your food and water and leave  you to  mature on  your own."  I'm not sure
that there is  not a real  problem with neglect  of children, and  I do not think  it's
confined  to  the  inner  city  as so  often  it is  mischaracterized  in  the  press.  That
leads to  sort of a critique  of what has  been  the underlying  assumption of much
of the  feminist  critique  of the  existing  social  order, which is  that women  were
not  fulfilled  in  the  home.  Some  of the  most  interesting  work being  done  in

56  Roundtable

feminism  today  is  work  that  suggests  that  in  fact  there  are  some  underlying
values  of those  norms  that  are  not  being  well  served  and  that the  task  is  to  get
them  served  in  a  way  that  is  fair  and  allows  for  the  full  development  of both
individuals  in  that marriage.

That's  a very  long way  of then  heading to  the procreation  question,  which
is  I  truly  believe  that  the  fulfillment  of the  human  person  lies  in self-giving.  It
is not simply an  exercise  of satiation that can  come  from consuming.  Parenting,
although  tremendously  challenging-I  have  a  teenager  right  now  and  a
preadolescent  and  a  husband  who  is  wonderful  thankfully-is  something  I
would  not forego  for all the  money  in  the world,  although there  are  nights  like
the  other one  when  our  son brought  home  grades  based on  zeros  that I  would
have  foregone. 
the  essence  of  self-giving  and
contraception  is  saying  "I  give  you  everything  but  my reproductive  capacity."
That  may  be  legitimate  in  certain  limited  instances  but  I  don't  think  it's
legitimate  through  the  entire  existence  of  the  marriage.  It's  got  to  be  a  full
giving:  "I  give you  myself, my hopes,  my dreams,  and  the procreative  potential
of our marriage."

think  procreation 

is 

I 

STRASSER:  Is  it o.k.  to just  add something?  One of my interests is what  the
state  laws  actually  are  and  how marriages  are  treated.  There  is  no requirement,
not  only that you  have  children,  but  that you  have  to  have sex.  You  can have  a
marriage  voided  because  one  of  the  parties  said,  "That's  what  I  thought  we
were  going to  be doing  and we're  not," but if there's  an  agreement  beforehand,
the  state  recognizes  the  marriage.  It's  unusual,  at  least,  to  say  "not  only  no
children,  but no sex is fine,"  but here  the difficulty that you can't have children
through your  union ought to  suffice.

COLLETT:  But  Mark,  the  mirror  has  two  faces  is  a  rather  contemporary
development  in  the  law  and in  fact,  certainly  there  are  still states where,  as  you
say,  you  can  get  the  marriage  annulled  from  lack  of  sexual  consummation.
Separate  and  independent  of that,  to  my knowledge  there  is  no  case  law  that
would  enforce  the agreement  that we not have sex although we have  the benefit
of marriage.

STRASSER:  Yes.  All  I  was  saying  is  that  it  allows  for  it  and  the  idea  of

getting  it voided is  that one  of the parties  says  ...

COLLETT:  Complains?
STRASSER:  That's  right.
AUDIENCE:  Something  that  all  of the  speakers  who  have  spoken  in  favor
have  mentioned  to  a  certain  extent  is  this  notion  of procreation,  particularly
with  respect  to  the  elderly  or  those  for  whom  it  is  simply  not  possible-the
procreative  potential  does  not  exist  even  though  there  may  be  a  heterosexual
relationship.  Those  of you  who  have  spoken  against  have  not addressed  that.  I

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  57

am  curious  why  it  is  in  the  state's  compelling  interest  for  me  to  be  able  to
marry  an  eighty-two  year  old  woman  where  there  is  no  procreative  interest
whatsoever,  but I cannot marry the man  I consider  to  be my husband when  the
relationship  might  have  the  first  three  of  Professor  Collett's  important
ontological  features of the  marriage  but neither situation can  have the last.

DENT:  I would  give you a  couple of answers  to  that.  One is  that, in many
cases,  to  make  such  a  determination  would  require  invasion  of privacy  of the
kind  that  our  government,  fortunately  I  think,  has  never  undertaken.  All  we
ask is,  "Is  it a man and  a woman?"  We're not  going to  require  you to  undergo
physical examination...

AUDIENCE:  I'm sorry. I  don't think that there's  any invasion of privacy in

assuming  that a woman who is eighty-two  years  old can't have  a  baby...

DENT:  You  get  into  line  drawing  questions  especially  with  modern
technology  allowing  older  women  to  have  children,  where  this  is  becoming
possible.  Why  get  into  that?  And  the second  is,  if a  man  and  a  woman  really
can't have children  and  they nonetheless  want to  marry, they are  doing they're
best  to  follow  the  traditional  pattern.  That  is  an  inspiration  to  other  people.
That is  to  say  to  the young man  "Look, even  this older  couple who  can't have
children wants  to  marry because  it's an  honorable  relationship.  It is  something
that you should  respect and something that  is good for you."

AUDIENCE:  And  the  relationship  that  I  have  with  another  man  is  thus

dishonorable?  Am I correct in inferring  that from what you have just stated?

DENT:  Certainly  that  is  the  attitude  that  has  been  traditional  in  most

societies  throughout  history, yes.

AUDIENCE:  And  that's  a reason  for legislation-tradition?  If people of the
same  race,  to  bring  up  Loving  again,  couldn't  marry  basically  based  on
traditional reasons,  there really  are no  logical arguments for it then.

DENT:  If there's  another  planet  with  red  and  green-I'm  dealing  with
human  beings  as  they  are.  If human  beings  were  other  than  as  they are,  what
would  we  do  then?  I  frankly  don't  find  pursuing  that  type  of question  very
fruitful.

MADIGAN:  One last question...
AUDIENCE:  If what's  important  about marriage  is  providing  for  children,
why not just have really  strong laws  about  recognizing parents  or families  with
children  as opposed  to  laws  recognizing  marriage whether  or not there  are  any
children?

COLLETT:  I  think  in  the  social  ordering  that  that's  one  of  the  sort  of
arrangements  that  Professor  Nussbaum  suggested  might  in fact  be  something
we  should  consider.  Then  the  question  becomes  is  it going to  be  a  matter  of
democratic process where you and I come together with our representatives  and

58  Roundtable

dialogue  and say it's not that there's  not a compelling  interest  in  the protection
of children  but  it's  not  narrowly  tailored  enough,  the  idea  of marriage,  and so
let's  rethink  it. If we're going  to  accommodate  all  of these  benefits, we're going
to  attach  them  to  those whose  sexual  intercourse,  whether  intentional  or  not,
results  in  children. My  argument  would  be,  I'm willing  to  entertain  that at the
legislative  table  and talk  about  that. I  think  my  concern  is  I would  want  more
of a  commitment  than  a  "Whoops,  now  I'm  caught  into  the thralls  of law and
I'm  now  required  to  be  in  union  with  this  woman  and  help  her  raise  this
baby."  We've  seen  that  work  with  welfare  reform,  and  it  hasn't  worked  real
well.  But  it's  certainly  something  that  I  find  within  the  realm  of imagination
and  not an  illegitimate way  of structuring  society.

DENT:  I  tend  to  disagree  with  you  Teresa.  What  are  you  going  to  do?

Shoot  people  for  not reading to  their children?

COLLETT:  No, I just  beat my husband  for that! [laughter]
COOLIDGE:  Now there's  a reason  for marriage!
MADIGAN:  I  know we have  one  in  the  back corner. This  is going  to  be  the

last question.

AUDIENCE:  Why  is  this  debate  not  really  couched  in  terms  of separating
marriage  into  an  instrument  of the  state  and  an  instrument  of the  church?
Because  I  think,  really,  it  kind  of  helps  us  define  what  this  debate  really  is
about,  because  marriage  as  an  instrument  of  the  church  really  is  about
following  biblical  law  or  rabbinic  law.  But  as  an  instrument  of  the  state,  it
really  is about equal  rights.

DENT:  Because  I  think  society  has  an  important  interest  in  the  raising  of

children.

KOPPELMAN:  One  of  the  points  about  separating  out  the  honor  with
respect  to  material benefits,  one  of the  odd  things  about  the law of marriage,  is
that  the  state  seems  to  be  perceived  as  honoring,  as  sanctifying,  certain
relationships.  I  think  that  one  thing  that  gets  lost  in  the  same-sex  marriage
debate  is  that  even  if  you  get  state  recognition,  you  don't  necessarily  get
everything.  And  so,  this  means,  I  think,  that  if you lose  on  same-sex  marriage,
you  don't  lose  everything,  because  there's  such  a  variety  of perspectives  in
society.

One  thing that there  continues  to  be  deep  moral  disagreement  about  is  the
status  of the  marriages  of people  who  are  divorced  from  previous  marriages
who  have  still  living spouses.  And  the people  in  those  marriages  are  recognized
in  the  law,  but  that's  not  taken  to  be  legal  repudiation  of  the  moral  and
theological  beliefs  of, for  example,  Catholics  who  hold  the  position  of  the
Church.  The state  just doesn't  take  a  position  on the  theological  views.  I  think
state  recognition  of same sex marriage  could  be understood in  the same way.

2000]

Same-Sex Marriage  59

COOLIDGE:  One  other  quick  thought  on  your  question.  It's  a  good
question,  and  maybe  it was confusing  having  the  rabbi  and  the pastor  talking
just to the  extent  that  it sort  of felt like  it conflated  the  two,  but I  would  just
say  that to  formulate  it the way that you  did  is  to  answer  the  question the way
that  you  did.  And,  the  question  that  remains  open  is:  what  do  equal  rights
mean?  I mean,  rephrasing it in those terms  doesn't solve the  question. And, the
other  question  that  it doesn't  solve  is:  what  is  the  proper  relationship,  if any,
between  folks who  are religious  or folks  who aren't,  who are  both advocates  in
areas  of public  policy,  and  what  legitimate  role  they have,  you  know,  when
we're  making  decisions  together  as  a  society,  and  I  certainly,  I  agree  that
whatever  the  United  Methodist  Church  does  with  marriage  is  not what  the
state  of  Illinois  will  do  with  marriage  necessarily,  but  I  certainly  would  not
deny or argue  that Greg Dell doesn't have  the right to  not only argue his  point
as  a pastor,  but  to  go  down  and  argue  his  point  in Springfield,  which he  may
well have done  under other circumstances.

COLLETT:  And  one  of the interesting  systems  that we  find when we  study
the  issue from an international  perspective,  is  that there  are in fact legal  systems
where  the  regulation  of  the  marriage  is  conducted  in  a  secular  court  in
accordance  with  the  religious  community  of which  the  martial  partners  are
members.  So that a secular court will allocate  the rights  and duties of a  Roman
Catholic  couple  in  accordance  with  Cannonical  Law,  a  Jewish  couple  in
accordance  with  Rabbincal  Law,  a  Calvinist  couple  in  accordance  with
Calvinist Law.  One of the  problems,  of course,  with such  a  system is  that  not
all  people  are  members  of religious  communities,  and  so  you'd  have  to  have
some  body of secular  law for the  agnostics  or for those who are  not, and not all
religious  bodies,  most  of  the  ones  that  we  are  familiar  with  in  the  United
States,  but  not  all  religious  bodies  have  any  clear  sort  of  guidance  about
property  division  and  the appropriate  allocation  of custody and  those sorts  of
things.  But  there  are  some  interesting  alternatives  when  you start  thinking  in
terms  across  the  world,  that  address  the  question  very  differently  about
integration of religious beliefs  in the political sphere on  this topic.

MADIGAN:  I  have  to  say  I'd like  to  thank this panel  in particular. It was
great.  Although  I  have  to  say  that  the  funniest  thing  that  I've  heard,  and  I
know  it  wasn't  meant  to  be  funny,  is  when  David  said  that  there's  no
community  of  difference  in  the  same-sex  couple.  And  what's  funny  to  me
about that is  that  every  time I am with friends who  are straight and we see  two
women walking  by hand in hand,  the first thing  they ask is,  "Which one's  the
guy?"  [laughter]  I  guess  there  are  other  heterosexuals  who  don't  share  the
presumption  that there is no  community of difference.

COOLIDGE: There  are.

60  Roundtable

MADIGAN:  I  would  really  like  to  thank  Ellen  Fulton  and  the  members  of
the Roundtable  board who worked very  hard  to make this  all  happen.  I  want  to
thank the  panelists,  especially  those who  traveled  to  be  with us.  I  would  leave
with  a  thought  of  why  these  sort  of talks  are  so  important.  We're  not  just
talking and  preaching  to  the various  choirs.  If you  look  in  the  past  two  years,
someone  walked  into  a  Baptist  church  and shot  eight  people  dead,  screaming
anti-Baptist  rhetoric.  A year  later,  a  young  man  named  Matthew  Shepard  was
beaten  to  death  after  being  identified  as  gay,  and  hung  out  on  a  fence,
effectively  crucified,  you  know,  two  millennia  after  the  crucifixion  we  know of
best  in  our  tradition.  What's  sad  about  all  this  is  that  people  don't  always
choose  the  best way  of communicating  rationally about  subjects  on which  they
disagree.  That's  what  makes  my admiration  for  our  panelists  so  great,  because
they  come  to  this  discussion  whole-hearted,  and  really  listen  to  one  another.  It
means  a  lot.

I  will  close  by  responding  to  something  Dwight  Duncan  said,  that  was
echoed  in  this  panel,  and  that  is:  no  society  in  history  has  ever  recognized
same-sex  marriage.  I would  say,  given  that nobody disputes that  in every  one of
those  societies,  some same-sex  sexuality was going on  (I  mean,  that's why  it's  in
the  Bible,  because  it  was  going  on),  there  may  have  always  been  people  who
had  those  inclinations,  yet  marriage  was  never  open  to  them.  And  so  my
response  to  Mr.  Duncan's  claim is  that that should make  us ask what  humanity
has  lost  in  never  having  had  a  normative  union  between  people  with  those
inclinations.  Maybe  those  people  would  be something  entirely  different.  What
we  think  of  as  homosexuality  may  really  be  something  shaped  by  social
ostracism.  We  don't  know  what  gay  people  would  even  be  like  without  this
ostracism.  Unfortunately,  we'll  all  die  never  having  known  what  they  might
have  been  like with  the  normative  ideal of marriage  to  which  they could aspire,
the  ideal  that every  person  who  is  heterosexual  has.  I  would encourage  you  not
to  take  it  for  granted.  I  think  the  panelists,  though,  have  made  us  think
carefully  about  what  the  costs  and  benefits  of  an  institution  of  same-sex
marriage  would  be,  and  I appreciate  that.

Thank  you very  much.

