University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein
perspectives. " In all of these contexts, the discussion has tended to be quite abstract. Within the legal culture, there has been little discussion of what CBA specifically entails or of how the technique might be used or improved by agencies. To date, there appears to be no sustained investigation within the legal culture of any regulation in which CBA proved pivotal to the outcome. In this Article, I hope to begin to fill the gap. I do so by exploring one of the most contested early decisions of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under President George W. Bush: the suspension of the EPA regulation of arsenic in drinking water.' Much of the contest over that decision has involved a debate about the relevant costs and benefits of the regulation. As we will see, it is possible to draw a range of general lessons from the arsenic controversy.
My principal finding is simple: Sometimes the best that can be done is to specify an exceedingly wide "benefits range," one that does not do a great deal to discipline judgment. Much of this Article will be devoted to establishing this must be made both to identify the health benefits and to monetize them. As a result of this finding, it would be wrong to have confidence that the EPA's proposed rule in the Clinton Administration was either right or wrong, based on the evidence before the agency at the time. I also offer three more positive suggestions. First, CBA, even with wide ranges, provides an important improvement over the "intuitive toxicology" of ordinary people, in which general affect helps to determine judgment.' This intuitive toxicology can lead people to large blunders in thinking about risk, not excluding the public's excessive reaction to the Bush Administration's decision to suspend the arsenic rule issued by the Clinton Administration.- Second, considerable progress could be made by authorizing the EPA both to use market incentives and to target drinking water controls to areas where they would do the most good. Third, the EPA should be required to provide, if feasible, a distributional analysis showing exactly who would be helped and hurt by regulation. In its voluminous materials on the effects of the new arsenic rule, for example, the EPA does not say a
My principal topic will be the contest over the appropriate analysis of existing data relating to arsenic, but it will be useful to begin with a puzzle. In April 2001, the Bush Administration suspended the Clinton Administration's arsenic regulation after calling for further study.2 There seems to be little question that of all the controversial environmental actions of the Bush Administration's first year, the suspension of the arsenic rule produced the most intense reaction.
A national survey, conducted between April 21 and April 26, 2001, found that fifty-six percent of Americans rejected the Bush decision, whereas only thirtyfour percent approved of it-and that majorities of Americans opposed the decision in every region of the nation. At various points, the public outcry combined concern, certainty, and cynicism. "Arsenic Everywhere, and Bush is Not Helping," according to one newspaper.2 "You may have voted for him, but you didn't vote for this in your water," wrote the Wall Street Journal. In an editorial, the New York Times demanded that "Americans should expect their drinking water to be at least as safe as that of Japan, Jordan, Namibia and Laos," all of which impose a 10 parts per billion (ppb) standard.2 A respected journalist asked, "How callous can you get, Mr. Compassionate Conservative? The public reaction came to a head during the legislative debates on the issue, particularly within the House of Representatives, which voted to reinstate the Clinton rule on the theory that arsenic "is a poison.'
Here is the puzzle: With respect to arsenic, the underlying issues are highly technical, and very few people are expert on the risks posed by exposure to low levels of arsenic. What accounts for the public outcry? I believe that the reason is simple: Arsenic was involved, and so was drinking water.
These two facts made the controversy seem highly accessible, and it was easy to be outraged. Why was the Bush Administration allowing dangerously high levels of arsenic to remain in drinking water? This appeared to be a rhetorical question. By contrast, many environmental problems are both obscure and
technical, and people do not have an easy or intuitive handle on them. Is carbon dioxide a serious problem? Most people have no idea. But arsenic is wellknown, and it is well-known to be a poison, not least because of the exceedingly popular movie, Arsenic and Old Lace.3 An influential environmental group, the Natural Resources Defense Council, exploited exactly this reference with its work on the arsenic problem, under the title, Arsenic and Old Laws. The public reaction would have been different if the controversy involved a water contaminant with an obscure name, such as cadmium.
Ordinary people seem to be "intuitive toxicologists," with a set of simple rules for thinking about environmental risks.33 Among those simple rules is a belief that substances that cause cancer are unsafe and should be banned.34 That intuitive toxicology does not easily make room for issues of degree. It does not accommodate the judgment that low levels of admittedly carcinogenic substances should sometimes be tolerated because the risks are low and the costs of eliminating them are high. It does not show an understanding of the different imaginable dose-response curves and the possibility of safe thresholds or even benefits from low exposure levels.
As part of intuitive toxicology, people rely on the "affect heuristic," through which rapid, even automatic responses greatly affect judgments about risks.36 Consider, for example, the remarkable fact that stock prices increase significantly on sunny days, a fact that is hard to explain in terms that do not rely on
With respect to risks, affect often operates as a kind of mental shortcut, substituting itself for a more careful inquiry into consequences.3 Something very much of this sort has happened with the Bush Administration's suspension of the arsenic standard, partly because of skepticism about President Bush, but mostly because of the associations of arsenic. "If there is one thing we all seem to agree on is that we do not want arsenic in our drinking water. It is an extremely potent human carcinogen It is this simple: arsenic is We could easily imagine public outrage over any decision to allow arsenic in drinking water, even if the permissible level were exceedingly low. The outrage would likely be promoted by cascade effects in which people's concern would
be heightened by the fact that other people were concerned. Indeed, the Bush Administration's suspension of the arsenic rule seems to have created a cascade effect in which many people objected to the suspension because other (reasonable) people seemed to have objected.4 In fact one of the most compelling arguments, within both the House of Representatives and the public at large, was that other countries regulated arsenic at the level of stringency proposed in the Clinton Administration. The practices of other countries seemed to operate as a kind of mental shortcut, showing what it is right to do-notwithstanding the reasonable questions that might be asked about the scientific bases for those practices.
There is a deeper point here. The problems in intuitive toxicology and the crudeness of the affect heuristic seem strongly to support the use of CBA,4 understood not as a way to stop regulation, but to ensure that when government acts, it does so with some understanding of the likely consequences. CBA might well be understood as a way of moving beyond intuitive toxicology toward a form of toxicology that is actually supported by data. This point raises some much larger issues, involving significant trends in the nature of government regulation, to which I now turn.
More than any other federal statute, the SDWA, as a result of the 1996 amendments, reflects a strong commitment to cost-benefit balancing. The rise of interest in cost-benefit balancing signals a dramatic shift from the initial stages of national risk regulation. Those stages were undergirded by what might be called "1970s environmentalism," which placed a high premium on immediate responses to long-neglected problems, emphasized the existence of problems rather than their magnitude, and was often rooted in moral indignation directed at the behavior of those who created pollution and other risks to safety and health.4 Important aspects of 1970s environmentalism can be found in the apparently cost-blind national ambient air quality provisions of the Clean Air Act4 and in statutory provisions requiring that standards be set by reference to "the best available technology" without a requirement of cost-benefit balancing or even an effort to quantify benefits.
It is clear that 1970s environmentalism has done a great deal of good. It has
helped to produce dramatic improvements in many domains, above all in the context of air pollution, where ambient air quality has improved for all major pollutants.4 Indeed, 1970s environmentalism appears, by most accounts, to survive cost-benefit balancing, producing aggregate benefits in the trillions of dollars, well in excess of the aggregate But even though the overall picture is no cause for alarm, a closer look at federal regulatory policy shows a wide range of problems.
Perhaps foremost is the problem of exceptionally poor priority-setting, with substantial resources sometimes going to small problems and with little attention paid to some serious problems.4 The point has been dramatized by repeated demonstrations that some regulations create significant substitute risks49-and that with cheaper, more effective tools, regulation could achieve its basic goals while saving billions of dollars. According to one study, each embodying admittedly rough calculations, better allocations of health expenditures could save 60,000 additional lives each year at no additional cost-and better allocations could maintain the current level of lives saved with $31 billion in annual savings.5
In these circumstances, the most attractive parts of the movement for CBA have not been rooted in especially controversial judgments about what government ought to be doing. They have been rooted instead in a more mundane search for pragmatic instruments designed to reduce the problems of poor priority-setting, excessively costly tools, and inattention to the unfortunate side-effects of regulation. By drawing attention to costs and benefits, it should be possible to spur the most obviously desirable regulations, to deter the most obviously undesirable ones, to encourage a broader view of consequences, and to promote a search for least-cost methods of achieving regulatory goals.5 Notice here that so defended, CBA is not only an obstacle to unjustified regulation it should be a spur to government as well, showing that regulation should attend to neglected problems. If cost-benefit balancing is supported on these highly pragmatic grounds, the central question is whether that form of
balancing is actually producing what can be taken as policy improvements by people with diverse views about appropriate policy.
On these counts, the record of CBA-at least within the EPA-is generally encouraging. Assessments of costs and benefits has, for example, helped produce more stringent and rapid regulation of lead in gasoline, promoted more stringent regulation of lead in drinking water, led to stronger controls on air pollution at the Grand Canyon and the Navajo Generating Station, and produced a reformulated gasoline rule that promotes stronger controls on air pollutants.5 In these areas, CBA, far from being only a check on regulation, has indeed spurred government attention to serious problems.
CBA has also led to regulations that accomplish statutory goals at lower cost, or that do not devote limited private and public resources to areas where they are unlikely to do much good. For regulation of sludge, protection of farm workers, water pollution regulation for the Great Lakes, and controls on organic chemicals, CBA helped regulators produce modifications that significantly reduced costs.55 With respect to asbestos, an analysis of benefits and costs led the EPA to tie the schedule for phasing down (and eventually largely eliminating) asbestos to the costs of substi-
gasoline and control of chlorofluorocarbons (destructive of the ozone layer), CBA helped promote the use of economic incentives rather than command-and-control
In this case, economic incentives are much cheaper and make more stringent regulation possible in the first place. For modem government, one of the most serious problems appears to be not agency use of CBA, but frequent noncompliance with executive branch requirements that agencies engage in such analysis.
Of course, CBA is hardly Insofar as both costs and benefits are measured by the economic criterion of "private willingness to pay," there are many problems. Poor people often have little ability and hence little willingness to pay. Some people will be inadequately informed and hence show unwillingness to pay for benefits that would make their lives go better.6 Perhaps regulatory agencies should seek not private willingness to pay, but public judgments as expressed in public arenas. ' Society is not best taken as
Regulatory statutes typically instruct agencies to require as much as "feasible or to "protect the public health. Only a few such statutes expressly require agency decisions to turn on cost-benefit balancing. The SDWA is an intriguing hybrid, combining an analysis of public health and feasibility with reference to CBA as well. Indeed, the cost-benefit provisions of the SDWA go as far as any other federal statute in requiring close attention to costs and benefits, and because Congress has been quite interested in imposing more general costbenefit requirements,7 ' the SDWA might well be a harbinger of the future. For this reason alone, the implementation of the statute is worth careful attention.
More particularly, the SDWA asks the EPA to proceed in three steps. First, the EPA is asked to set "maximum contaminant level goals" (MCLG) for water pollutants.72 The goals must be set "at the level at which no known or anticipated adverse effects on the health of persons occur and which allows an adequate margin of safety. In practice, this statutory standard will frequently call for a MCLG of zero because many contaminants cannot be shown to have safe thresholds and because the "adequate margin of safety" language will, in these specific circumstances, seem to support a zero MCLG. Second, the EPA is told to specify "a maximum contaminant level [MCL] for such contaminant which is as close to the maximum contaminant level goal as is feasible."75 The statute defines feasible (not terribly helpfully) to mean "feasible with the use of the best technology, treatment techniques and other means which the [EPA] finds are available.",76 Third, the EPA is required to undertake a risk assessment for pollutants, discussing the level of the danger and the costs of achieving the requisite reduction. The risk assessment is supposed to give an account, for the MCL being considered and for all alternative levels being
considered, of the "[q]uantifiable and nonquantifiable health risk reduction benefits for which there is a factual basis in the rulemaking record" the "[q]uantifiable and nonquantifiable the "incremental costs and benefits associated with each alternative" and "[a]ny increased health risk that may occur as the result of compliance, including risks associated with co-occurring contaminants." 8' The risk assessment is no mere disclosure provision. The SDWA expressly permits-but does not require-the EPA to set a MCL at a level other than the feasible level if it determines that the benefits of that level "would not justify the costs of complying with the level. On the basis of that determination, the EPA is permitted to set a maximum level "that maximizes health risk reduction benefits at a cost that is justified by the benefits. Courts are authorized to review the EPA's judgment about whether the benefits of a certain level justify the costs, but only by asking whether that judgment is "arbitrary and capriWhat does all this mean? The SDWA is quite different from the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), which expressly requires the EPA to base decisions on a simple comparison of costs and benefits.85 The SDWA is more indirect, even circuitous, in its endorsement of cost-benefit requirements. But the difference between the SDWA and the TSCA is more apparent than real. In regulating contaminants in drinking water, the EPA is required to show that its judgment about cost-benefit balancing is not "arbitrary," and this standard is essentially the same as applied under the TSCA.8 Perhaps the SDWA gives the EPA somewhat more room for the exercise of discretion. But at most, the difference is one of degree. It is clear that courts are authorized to invalidate an arbitrary or unreasoned assessment on the cost or benefit side or on the question of whether the benefits justify the costs. As we shall see, this point raises many questions for the future.
Arsenic is commonly found in nature as a part of the mineral compound arsenopyrite.87 As a result of soil and rock erosion, arsenic is released into the
water supply, where it can be found in many regions, including New England, eastern Michigan, and the southwestern United States.8 It has long been known that arsenic can be toxic, even carcinogenic, and since 1942, the EPA has had in place an arsenic regulation calling for an MCL of 50 But in the past decades, some evidence has suggested that arsenic may have significant adverse effects at levels well below the 50 ppb standard. The principal evidence comes from epidemiological studies in Chile, Argentina, and above all Taiwan. The evidence from these studies suggests that exposure levels of 300 to 600 ppb cause significant increases of various cancers and other adverse effects.9 These levels are of course far higher than 50 ppb but if we extrapolate from the risk at high levels to what might well happen at lower levels, there could be serious reason for concern. I will return to this point shortly.
In 1996, Congress directed the EPA to propose a new standard for arsenic by January 1, 2000. At the same time, Congress told the National Academy of Sciences and the EPA to study the health effects of arsenic in order to assist the Council (NRC) of the National Academy of Sciences conduct an independent review of arsenic toxicity data and recommend changes to the EPA's arsenic criteria. In its 1999 report, the NRC located few studies that examined arsenic effects at low-level concentrations and even fewer studies in agreement.96 A 1995 Japanese study found cancer mortality near or below expectation among persons exposed to arsenic in drinking water at less than 50 ppb.97 Domestic research in the same year revealed no association between bladder cancer risk and arsenic exposure, where eighty-one of eighty-eight Utah towns (ninety-two percent) had concentrations below 10 ppb, and only one town exceeded the 50 ppb standard.9 A 1999 assessment of Utah mortality rates, which the EPA described as "the best U.S. study currently available," found no increased
bladder or lung cancer risks after exposure to arsenic levels of 14 to 166 ppb per liter. °° More recent studies in Finland and Taiwan, however, linked increased risks of bladder cancer and cerebrovascular disease to groundwater arsenic consumption as low as 0.1 to 50 ppb.' ' The Taiwan study, with its significant population base, seemed especially impressive.
These results could have led the NRC in several different directions. It would not have been entirely astonishing for the NRC to find that the evidence was too inconclusive to support a new rule. Nonetheless, the NRC concluded that the Taiwan studies provided the best available evidence on human health effects of arsenic. The NRC used linear extrapolations from these data to obtain cancer risks at exposure levels below 50 ppb per liter and subsequently recommended that the EPA should significantly lower its current standard.' Indeed, the NRC concluded that "considering the data on bladder and lung cancer noted in the studies ... a similar approach for all cancers could easily result in a combined cancer risk on the order of 1 in 100" from exposure at 50 ppb.'0 The 1 in 100 risk figure is a special source of concern because the EPA is usually attentive to environmental risks at or below 1 in 1 million,' and a risk of t in 100 seems plainly intolerable.
Critics attacked the NRC's recommendation on the grounds that Taiwanese cooking and health practices put Taiwanese citizens at greater risk for arsenic toxicity than Americans, as demonstrated by the absence of a single report of U.S. arsenic-induced cancer.' The Taiwanese population is much poorer than the American population and suffers from a number of dietary and nutritional deficiencies, including a higher intake of arsenic from food and a deficiency in selenium, zinc, and vitamin B 12, all of which can reduce the toxicity of arsenic. Animal studies even suggest the possibility that arsenic may be a nutritional requirement, though there is insufficient data to indicate any nutritional role in human health.' Despite these criticisms, the EPA relied heavily upon the NRC's scientific conclusions when redeveloping its current MCL.
In 2000, the EPA issued a proposed regulation setting an MCLG of 0 ppb, on the ground that no safe level could be identified an MCL of 3 ppb, on the ground that this was the lowest feasible level and a regulatory ceiling of 5 ppb, on the ground that the CBA justified this approach but not any more stringent mandate.' The EPA also requested comments on regulatory ceilings of 3, 10, and 20 ppb, for which it provided accounts of both benefits and costs. On January 22, 2001, the EPA issued a final rule that essentially embodied the same analysis as the proposal, but with a crucial change to a regulatory ceiling of 10 ppb rather than 5 ppb." The EPA urged that its assessment of costs and benefits for the four different levels of stringency justified the 10 ppb level."' The rule was to become effective on March 23, 2001, with a compliance date of January 23, 2006. 12 1. Costs
The new regulation would have required several thousand water systemsserving about 10 million people-to install new equipment.1 The overall cost of the 10 ppb standard would have been about $206 million.' This aggregate figure is not entirely informative because the additional payments would vary considerably across the nation. For most households, the annual increase in water bills would be in the range of $30." Water systems with 500 or fewer customers, however, would face significantly higher costs, ranging up to $325 per household." 16 These water systems represent a small fraction of the total number of people affected by arsenic, and they tend to involve rural communities.
As it was required to do, the EPA also calculated the costs of alternative levels of regulation. A 20 ppb standard would cost about $70 million a 5 ppb standard, $470 million and a 3 ppb standard, $790 million." Here, too, the disaggregated figures are important. The most stringent standard of 3 ppb would cost an average of $41 per affected household, while the 20 ppb standard would cost about an average of $24." 8 At the extremes, the 20 ppb standard is actually more expensive ($351) than the 3 ppb standard ($317), because of the particular control technologies that would be involved. Consider the following summary:
Table 1 Mean Annual Costs Per Household
(in 1999 dollars)
3 ppb 5 ppb 10
317 318.26
166.91 164.02
74.81 73.11
63.76 61.94
42.84 40.18
38.40 36.07
31.63 29.45
25.29 23.34
7.41 2.79
41.34 36.95
The EPA did not offer a population-wide breakdown to show the numbers of people served by the various system sizes and to examine whether the people who would bear the costs could do so easily or with difficulty. One analysis, admittedly from a group with a particular point of view, suggests that eightyseven percent of people who consume arsenic at a significant level in their tap water (over 1 ppb) are served by systems serving more than 10,000 customers. This data suggests that almost nine out of ten of the people who will have to pay for water technology would face annual increases of less than $30-not entirely trivial perhaps, but certainly not a huge expenditure. 2. Benefits
Within the EPA, the much harder issues involved the benefits of the 10 ppb requirement.' The most easily quantified benefits involve prevented cases of bladder and lung cancer here the epidemiological data, mostly from Taiwan, allowed quantitative estimates to be made.' For two reasons, however, even these estimates should be taken with some grains of salt. The first reason is that there are differences between the population of Taiwan and that of the United States.' The second reason is that a great deal turns on the nature of the
System Size
Less than 100
101-500
501-1000
1001-3300
3301-10,000
10,001-50,000
50,001-100,000
100,001-1,000,000
More than 1,000,000
All categories
10 ppb
326.82
162.50
70.72
58.24
37.71
32.37
24.81
20.52
0.86
31.85
20 ppb
351.15
166.72
68.24
54.36
34.63
29.05
22.64
19.26
0.15
23.95
dose-response curve. If the curve is "linear," meaning that cancer cases do not drop sharply at low exposure levels, many more cancers will be predicted than if the curve is "sublinear," meaning that after exposure declines to a certain level, the number of cancer cases drops off. Lacking any data on the question, the EPA decided to assume that the dose-response curve is linear, noting that "[t]he use of a linear procedure to extrapolate from a higher, observed data range to a lower range beyond observation is a science policy approach that has been in use by Federal agencies for four decades."' The EPA added that the policy objectives were "to avoid underestimating risk in order to protect public health and be consistent and clear across risk assessments."' From these remarks, it seems clear that the default assumption of linearity is not based on science-which cannot produce a standard default assumption-but on a policy judgment, designed to err on the side of protecting health by ensuring against underestimation of the risks. I will return to this important issue below. 128
Armed with the assumption of linearity, the EPA thought that estimates were feasible for bladder and lung cancer and calculated bladder and lung cancer risks using the analysis of the NRC. The NRC used the Taiwan data to calculate a I to 1.5 per 1000 lifetime risk of male fatal bladder cancer at the current 50 ppb standard it also examined the Chile and Argentina studies and concluded the rates of cancer were comparable to the Taiwan data.' The EPA assessed lung cancer risks, which are known to be two to five times greater than bladder cancer risks, but for many of the health effects from arsenic, the EPA concluded that quantification was impossible.' 3' a. Lives and Health: Quantities. The EPA estimated that the 10 ppb requirement would prevent twenty-one to thirty cancer deaths and sixteen to twenty-six cases of curable cancer.' By comparison, a 20 ppb requirement would prevent ten to eleven deaths and nine curable cancers a 5 ppb requirement, twenty-nine to fifty-four deaths and twenty-two to forty-seven curable cancers and a 3 ppb
requirement, thirty-three to seventy-four cancer deaths and twenty-five to sixtyfour curable cancers. 133 Consider the following table:
Table 2
Annual Total of Bladder and Lung Cancer Cases Avoided
Arsenic Level Reduced Reduced Total Cancer
(ppb) Mortality Cases Morbidity Cases Cases Avoided
3 32.6-74.1 24.6-64.2 57.2-138.3
5 29.1-53.7 22.0-46.5 51.1-100.2
10 21.3-29.8 16.1-25.9 37.4-55.7
20 10.2-11.3 8.5-8.8 19.0-19.8
b. Lives and Health: No Quantities. The EPA also concluded that the 10 ppb
these are certain health impacts known to be caused by arsenic, though, while they may be substantial, the extent to which these impacts occur at levels below 50 [ppb] is unknown."
The relevant effects include several kinds of cancer: skin, kidney, liver, prostate, and They also include pulmonary, cardiovascular, immunological, neurological, and endocrine effects. To these health effects, the EPA added that there would be other benefits that would defy quantification. Among these benefits is "the effect on those systems that install treatment technologies that can address multiple contaminants."' Some of the technologies that would reduce arsenic levels would also remove "many other contaminants that [the] EPA is in the process of regulating or considering regulating." 139 c. Converting Quantities to Dollars. To compare the quantified benefits of regulation with the $206 million cost, the EPA was required to engage in several exercises in conversion. With respect to lives saved, the EPA used a value of a statistical life of $6.1 million.' That figure was derived by calculating the average of over two dozen studies, conducted mostly in the 1970s and generally designed to show how much an employer had to pay employees to compensate for a statistical risk of death. By multiplying the number of expected mortali-
ties by $6.1 million, the EPA obtained most of the "dollar value" of the arsenic regulation.
As noted, however, many of the cancers caused by arsenic are not fatal. For a nonfatal cancer, the EPA used a figure of $607,000.143 This figure does not come from measurements of people's willingness to pay to reduce a statistical risk of nonfatal cancer, but instead-and somewhat astonishingly shoppers' responses to hypothetical questions about how much they would be willing to pay to reduce a statistical risk of chronic bronchitis. Apparently, the EPA thought that this was the closest available analogue to a nonfatal cancer. 3. Summary of the EPA's Analysis
The EPA's basic analysis is captured in the following table.
Table 3
Estimated Benefits from Reducing Arsenic in Drinking Water
(millions of 1999 dollars)
Total Quantified Health Potential Nonquantified
Level Benefits, in Millions Health Benefits
(Lower and Upper Bounds) (Applies to All Levels)
3 $213.8-$490.9 Skin cancer, kidney cancer
Cancer of nasal passages,
The monetized costs of the 10 ppb standard are between $2 million and $60 million higher than the monetized benefits-and the overall benefits are in line with overall costs only at the 20 ppb level. The EPA was well aware of this point. Nonetheless, it concluded that once the nonquantified benefits of the 10 ppb standard were included, the costs would be well justified. The cost per cancer case avoided for the final rule would be between $3.2 million and $4.8
Arsenic Level
(ppb) 3
Prostate cancer, cardiovascular
effects
Pulmonary, neurological,
endocrine effects
million-hardly an extraordinary price to pay, and far lower than the $5 million to $12.2 million range produced by a 3 ppb standard.
The EPA's conclusion was sharply criticized by a widely reported paper from the AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies. The authors, Jason Burnett and Robert Hahn, concluded that the costs of the rule would exceed the benefits by about $190 million each year and hence that the rule deserved membership in the Joint Center's' "$100 million club," which includes regulations that cost at least $100 million more than they promise to deliver. For two reasons, the Burnett-Hahn study is worth close attention. First, the AEIBrookings Joint Center is highly respected for its careful work on CBA, and Hahn is an especially able and influential observer of the regulatory process. Second, the disagreements between the EPA and the Joint Center provide a great deal of information about the nature of CBA itself and the likely nature of legal challenges to such analysis by federal agencies. Burnett and Hahn raised no questions about the EPA's finding of a $200 million cost to the arsenic rule. Instead, they made several key adjustments to the EPA's calculation of benefits. The first set of adjustments involved the actual number of cancer cases to be prevented. The second set involved the translation of that figure into a dollar number.
To calculate cancer cases, Burnett and Hahn made two changes. First, they attempted to quantify the "nonquantifiable benefits" by multiplying the EPA's estimate of twenty-eight lives saved by two, for a total of fifty-six.)5 ' They reasoned that "including 'nonquantifiable risks' would increase the lives-saved estimate by some factor between one and four."' This number came from the report of the NRC, which suggests that the risk of death from all kinds of cancer might be eight times the risk of bladder cancers. Recognizing that the EPA's quantified figure represents both bladder and lung cancers, Burnett and Hahn took a multiple of four as producing a "reasonable upper bound" of 112 but they decided to use the fifty-six estimate because it seemed more reasonable.
Second, Burnett and Hahn divided their chosen number of fifty-six by five to reflect their judgment that the risk of arsenic is not linearly related to arsenic concentrations. They explained that "[t]his assumption is not realistic the human body can metabolize arsenic at low levels, rendering it nontoxic."''
(Note that the EPA concluded that recent research has drawn into doubt the claim that the metabolized forms of arsenic are any less toxic. 155) According to Burnett and Hahn, the upshot is that the new regulation would save about eleven lives annually. 156
To translate this amount into dollar terms, Burnett and Hahn adjusted the $6.1 million figure downward. They emphasized that cancer follows exposure to arsenic not immediately but only after a latency period ranging from ten to forty years. Burnett and Hahn use a seven percent discount rate on the theory that "future benefits should be discounted just as future costs are." As a result of the adjustment, the value of a statistical life fell to $1.1 million. Sharply disagreeing with the National Research Council's and the EPA's projected risk of 1 in 100, Burnett and Hahn added that "the risk reduction is about 1 in 1 million, which is so small as not to be worth addressing, given the uncertainties in the data and the EPA's limited resources to develop regulations."' Burnett and Hahn concluded that no plausible version of the arsenic proposal going beyond the existing 50 ppb standard could be justified on cost-benefit grounds. Here is their overview:
Table 4
AEI-Brookings Joint Center Estimates'
Lives Saved Benefits Costs
EPA's Model Without
Accounting for Latency
1. The Dose-Response Curve in General In calculating health effects, the EPA assumed a linear dose-response curve for arsenic. 166 In so doing, it followed its usual practice, which is to assume a linear, no-threshold model for Class A carcinogens in drinking water. In the EPA's words, this is a "conservative mathematical model for cancer risk assessment" that "is consistent with a no-threshold model of carcinogenesis, i.e., exposure to even a very small amount of the substance is assumed to produce a finite increased risk of cancer."1 Note that the EPA's Science Advisory Board, which consisted of prominent scientists who issued a report advising Agency, also recommended linear extrapolation based upon the Taiwan data.
But Burnett and Hahn are correct to urge that this was not an inevitable decision. It is quite possible that the effects of arsenic dwindle at low "There is no strict rule with respect to the shape of the dose-response curve." To summarize what will be a lengthy and somewhat technical discussion: On the basis of what is known about carcinogens generally, the best scientific judgment seems to be that the dose-response curve for arsenic is sublinear. But this is a speculative judgment, not based on direct evidence. In addition, we certainly do not know how sublinear the dose-response curve is, if indeed it is sublinear.
There are many complexities here, for dose-response curves come in many shapes and sizes:
It has long been recognized that a number of different mathematical models
can fit a given set of dose-response data reasonably well, but produce vastly
that: a number of models have been proposed, and there is active debate on which
and concepts on carcinogenic mechanisms at low levels of exposure. There are five basic possibilities. a. Supralinearity. For some forms of radiation, the curve is actually "supralinear" in the sense that with lower doses, deaths fall at relatively lower rates than a linear curve would predict.' If a dose-response curve is supralinear, of course, the death rate will be higher than if it is linear. Agencies do not assume supralinearity, apparently because it is an unusual pattern. No one has urged supralinearity in the context of arsenic. b. Linearity. It has long been assumed that linear curves are appropriate for "genotoxic" carcinogens that is, carcinogens that work directly on DNA to produce mutations that give rise to tumors. For a long time arsenic has been assumed not to be genotoxic-a point that draws the EPA's assumption of linearity into some doubt because sublinearity is the ordinary assumption for nongenotoxic carcinogens. But a recent paper suggests that arsenic may be genotoxic after all. c. Sublinearity. According to a standard text, the typical dose-response curve is "sigmoidal" in shape and thus sublinear at low doses. While there is some dispute about the issue, evidence suggests that this is the shape of the doseresponse curve for benzene. As noted, scientists generally assume sublinear-
ity for substances that are nongenotoxic-that is, that do not work directly on DNA. d. Thresholds. Sometimes there is a threshold below which exposure produces no adverse effects, as is apparently the case for basal cell carcinomaexposure to the sun179-and also for chloroform.' This is the extreme case of sublinearity. It is generally agreed that thresholds exist "for all toxicities other
fects."' "' Government agencies tend to treat carcinogens as lacking safe thresholds. Taken purely as a scientific judgment, this is disputed: "It is a fact that most of the identified human carcinogens induce cancer only after exposure to high e. U-shapes. Some dose-response curves-like the curve for fluorideactually show desirable effects at low levels, so that what is harmful to health at high doses turns out to produce beneficial effects at low doses. This is true of course for many medicines, like aspirin, antibiotics, and antihistamines. There appears to be increasing reason to believe that u-shapes are common. "In recent years, the concept of hormesis, the phenomenon whereby a toxic substance elicits a beneficial effect at doses below its observed range of toxicity, has been gaining popularity among scientists engaged in toxicology and risk assessment."
2. The Dose-Response Curve in Particular The possibility of varying shapes suggests many possible projections of the health consequences of exposure to low doses of arsenic. Without having any direct evidence for arsenic in particular, the NRC suggested: "Of the several modes of action that are considered most plausible, a sub-linear dose response curve in the low-dose range is predicted, though linearity cannot be ruled out."'
This statement should be taken as exceptionally speculative. It ought not to be read to suggest a reliable scientific judgment about the true dose-response curve, for the NRC offered no evidence that would justify its "prediction" for arsenic. It appears to have been generalizing from the more typical patterns. If a specific judgment is required, this approach is as sensible as any other, but it is not much more than a hunch. Nonetheless, we can reach some more definite conclusions. First: When agencies generally assume linearity, it is not because anything in the science solidly justifies this assumption, but because of a "conservative" approach to uncertain data.186 This is a policy choice, not a technical one-a point with implications for judicial review, as we shall see. Second: Rather than setting forth a specific number, it seems best to acknowledge the uncertainty about the dose-response curve and hence to identify a range of benefits-capturing a low end and a high end.
The upshot? For arsenic in particular, the high end emerges from a linear curve and therefore would be twenty-eight lives saved annually. The low end is six lives saved annually, which is what emerges from dividing that number by five. That division is essentially arbitrary, so we should not credit the BurnettHahn suggestion that it is likely to be accurate. 3. Nonquantified Benefits
What about the nonquantified benefits? Here it would be certainly responsible to say, as did the EPA, that the data do not allow numerical judgments of any kind. But it would also be responsible to attempt to specify an upper and lower bound. Burnett and Hahn estimate the "nonquantified" benefits by multiplying the EPA's expected lives saved by But this seems arbitrary. As they note, the National Research Council estimated the risk of all types of cancer as eight times greater than the risk from bladder cancer alone. Because the EPA's figure of twenty-eight lives saved came from both bladder and lung cancer, it would have been sensible to posit an upper bound of 112 (arrived at by multiplying twenty-eight by four). The multiplier of four is reasonable because the NRC suggested a risk eight times as high as the risk from bladder cancer, which is to
c. One More Wealth Effect. There is a final point. The studies that produced the $6.1 million figure involved the workplace, and the people involved were poorer than most workers. Because the median salary of all wage earners is twenty-three percent higher than the median salary of most workers involved in the willingness-to-pay studies, a further adjustment seems appropriate, producing a VSL of $33 million.
Now it would be foolish to claim that this figure has a unique claim to accuracy. But with different assumptions, none of them entirely implausible, the value of a statistical life at risk from arsenic can range from $1.1 million to $33 million-and the number of lives saved from 6 to 112. In terms of dollars, that produces a lower bound of $6.6 million, and an upper bound of $3.7 billion! d. Life-Years as Opposed to Lives. Would the arsenic rule protect young people or old people? The question seems to matter because, in principle, it is better for the government to devote resources toward saving many years rather than simply a few. If the government can prevent a death at seventy-five that would otherwise occur at eighty, surely it should attempt to do so but if resources are limited, the government would do better to prevent a death at twenty that would otherwise occur at eighty. The point seems to matter here because it appears that the arsenic rule would protect mostly older people, not younger ones. If this is right, it is because of the long latency period. Because arsenic-induced cancer does not occur until decades after exposure, the average age of the victims of arsenic-induced cancer would be relatively high, possibly above retirement age.20 Nonetheless, the EPA treated each life involved as worth $6.1 million. This number might well be inflated. e. Nonfatal Cancers. As we have seen, the EPA valued a nonfatal cancer at $607,000 based on shopping mall studies involving answers to hypothetical questions with respect to chronic bronchitis. There are obviously many problems with this approach chronic bronchitis simply is not nonfatal cancer. In fact another study (also with serious methodological problems) produced a $3.6 million figure for nonfatal cancers. This amount seems quite odd because it suggests that preventing a nonfatal cancer is valued at well over fifty percent of the value of preventing a fatal cancer ($6.1 million using the EPA's estimate). But suppose that this number is taken to be accurate or a reasonable upper bound. If so, the monetized value of reductions in nonfatal cancers from the 10
that future health benefits should be discounted at the same rate as future monetary costs-and, more speculatively, that there is good reason to think that the discount rate for health benefits should be lower than the discount rate for monetary costs.
What of the latency period? Hahn and Burnett chose thirty years, but this time period seems both long and somewhat arbitrary. If the latency period is chosen to be twenty years rather than thirty, the value per life saved increases still further, approaching $5 million.
Here is my own summary of possible cost-benefit assessments:
Table 6
Cost-Benefit Ranges
One final point on this table. It might be suggested that some effort should be made to identify a "best estimate" and that analysis would be greatly improved by trying to assign probabilities to the various outcomes, with the "best esti-
mate" consisting of the most probable one. The goal of this suggestion is correct. When the underlying science and economics allow analysts to come up with a "best estimate" and to assign probabilities to the alternative outcomes, this indeed should be done. In terms of monetizing the relevant values, it seems correct to say that the cancer risk deserves a premium as compared to workplace risks, but also to insist on discounting the monetary value of the risk to take account of the latency period and the fewer life-years saved. Hence, rough estimates of $4.5 million per life saved and $1.5 million per nonfatal cancer prevented seem as reasonable as anything else, even if somewhat arbitrary. At the very least, the EPA's $6.1 million figure appears too high in light of the long latency period, and the AEI-Brookings $1.1 million figure appears too low in light of the high discount rate that it reflects and the various factors suggesting that the workplace studies understate the monetary value of the risk involved here.
But with respect to health benefits, science does not allow best estimates to be provided here. It would be reasonable to suggest that the high estimate of 112 lives saved is unrealistically high and a bit of a scare tactic in light of the problems in the Taiwan data and the probability that the dose-response curve is sublinear. The estimate of zero lives saved is highly improbable. But it does seem to me sensible to move toward concern with life-years saved rather than lives saved, and because of the long latency period, the quantified benefits are most unlikely to be enormously higher than the $210 million price tag.2 ' On the other hand, they might well be higher whether or not they are much higher, and for reasons to be elaborated shortly, the "bottom line" numbers need not be dispositive.
Does all this suggest that CBA is, in cases of this sort, unhelpful? It would not be hard to imagine an affirmative answer to that question. A skeptic might conclude that because the range of uncertainty is so large, any number at all could be justified and the ultimate decision is essentially political or based on "values." This view is not exactly wrong, but it should not be taken as a convincing challenge to CBA.
An analysis of benefits and costs cannot resolve the ultimate judgment, but it can certainly inform it. Once we understand the potential effects of different arsenic regulations and see where the uncertainties come from, we are in a much better position to know what to do. Of course a decision on that count will be a product of "values"-how could it be otherwise? The point is that the values should be identified as such, so that when the government acts, its
reasons are transparent and explicable. If what I have said thus far is correct, the choice of a new arsenic rule was a genuinely hard question on the data before the EPA in 2000. Under the best case scenario, the benefits will exceed the costs, though perhaps not by a great deal. Under the worst case scenario, the costs will exceed the benefits. It is a tribute to CBA that we know exactly why the ultimate judgment is hard.
V. CBA
We are now in a position to see the multiple possible challenges to any agency decision, that involves cost-benefit balancing. Because such balancing has become a staple of regulatory practice, it is important for lawyers to have some understanding of the underlying ideas and of how agencies might be said to have gone wrong. There are lessons for courts as well, mostly involving the need for deference to agencies.
With respect to the regulation of social risks, the legal culture is increasingly required to pay close attention to both science and economics, and here legal understandings remain in a primitive state. If we keep in mind the arithmetic of arsenic, we can see how creative lawyers representing water systems or environmentalists might be able to mount plausible challenges to the EPA's decisions regardless (almost) of the content of those decisions. I do not mean to endorse these challenges, but simply to give a sense of what they might look like. The following list catalogues the potential challenges. 1. The Dose Response Curve
A great deal depends on the dose-response curve, and at low levels the scientific evidence will often be inconclusive. With the assumption of a linear curve, the benefits of regulation will seem far higher than they might otherwise be. But from the scientific point of view, that assumption might be vulnerable. In the case of arsenic, the most striking point is that the independent entities on which the EPA relies actually split on the issue, with the Scientific Advisory Board supporting linearity and the National Research Council tentatively favoring sublinearity. In addition, linearity makes more sense for genotoxic carcinogens, and there is a dispute about whether arsenic is genotoxic. A decision to assume linearity, in the face of scientific uncertainty, is best seen as a (reasonable) policy judgment. Under a statute that calls for a "margin of safety," such a judgment is plainly supportable. It may be that an agency can indulge such a
judgment under a statute that calls for cost-benefit balancing, but certainly not if science clearly points in the other direction. For a lawyer objecting to regulation that seems too stringent, the best claim is that sublinearity is more likely. For a lawyer objecting to regulation that seems inadequate, the best claim is that in the absence of specific data, linearity is the standard default assumption on policy grounds. As a legal matter, the EPA is probably on solid ground in relying on the linearity assumptions if the scientific evidence is unclear. 2. Inadequate Evidence
When regulating a pollutant, the EPA will often have to rely on evidence from other times and areas, and it will be easy to suggest that there are relevant differences between the population at issue and the population from which that evidence derives. In the case of arsenic, the Taiwan data could certainly be challenged as inadequate in light of the absence of data from the United States confirming the basic results. 3. Valuation Problems
If cancer risks are involved, the agency's decision to use its ordinary VSL can be challenged on the ground that good evidence shows a higher VSL for risks that are dreaded and uncontrollable (as cancer risks are likely to be). Lawyers objecting to insufficiently aggressive regulation could use this evidence to suggest that the VSL numbers from workplace studies are simply too low. Lawyers objecting to overaggressive regulation could insist that the only reliable data come from the workplace studies and that any efforts to produce higher numbers are too speculative.2 4. Poor Morbidity Data
Agencies frequently lack good data on morbidity risks and therefore use crude substitutes. These are easily subject to challenge. In the arsenic case, an environmental lawyer could urge that the chronic bronchitis numbers are far too low because a case of cancer is very likely to produce higher willingness to pay than a case of chronic bronchitis.2 For their part, industry lawyers could urge that chronic bronchitis is comparable or perhaps even worse, simply because it is chronic. Perhaps a case of cured cancer, even if it is entirely cured, is not much more serious than a case of any other curable disease, and perhaps a
serious chronic condition such as chronic bronchitis is more serious than a cured cancer. In either case, it would be easy to challenge the actual numbers used for chronic bronchitis as unreliable, because they were generated through responses by shoppers in North Carolina to hypothetical questions. Even if well-designed, that study is not likely to produce reliable numbers. 5. Lives vs. Life-Years
If an agency uses lives rather than life-years, there may be a serious problem, at least if the regulation would protect a large number of children or elderly people. For protection of children, the $6.1 million figure is arguably far too low for protection of elderly people, that same figure is arguably far too high.2 6. Inadequate Quantification of Benefits
For a lawyer on either side, it is not hard to argue that unquantified benefits should be quantified, if this is at all possible.2 Without quantification, how can agency decisions be evaluated? And once a decision is made to quantify benefits that had formerly been unquantified, agency judgments are subject to challenge because the judgment about how to quantify will be highly speculative. If the agency has not specified a range but has relied on a fairly specific projection, it will be extremely vulnerable. 7. Choice of Discount Rate
The level of monetized benefits will differ dramatically with the chosen discount rate. It would be easy to challenge any agency's decision not to discount a risk that will come to fruition in the future. A monetary loss or a loss to health is worse today than years hence. Once the agency has chosen to discount, any particular discount rate might well be challenged. Economists disagree about the proper approach. If the agency chooses a discount rate for health in the vicinity of the discount rate for money-that is, seven to ten percent-its choice might well be challenged on the ground that no good evidence supports the view that health problems averted should be discounted at the same rate as financial losses averted. But if the agency chooses a discount rate below seven percent, it would not be hard to challenge that choice as essentially arbitrary and unsupported by evidence.
Notwithstanding the availability of countless legal challenges, the basic lesson for courts is simple: Hands off. When courts are reviewing an agency's
judgments about health benefits and how to monetize them, they should give agencies the benefit of every reasonable doubt.
The reasons are threefold. First, the issues are exceedingly complex, and judges are not specialists in the area at hand. Like everyone else, they are prone to error. There is no systematic reason to think that a firm judicial hand will make things better rather than worse. Second, any judicial judgment will perpetuate the status quo and make rulemaking more difficult. ' Because it is extremely time consuming to make rules and because a clever advocate likely will be able to produce a plausible challenge to whatever an agency does, an aggressive judicial posture will essentially freeze whatever rule is currently in place. In many domains, people have expressed concern with the "ossification" of rulemaking. When a statute calls for cost-benefit balancing, any nondeferential judicial posture will magnify the risk of ossification. Third, many of the underlying decisions involve values, not facts. We have seen that often the choice between a linear and sublinear dose-response curve cannot be based on direct evidence. Any choice has a large policymaking dimension. "[T]here is wide recognition among experts-but not necessarily in the public opinionthat current approaches to the regulation of most agents remain judgmental."2 2' In this light, courts should be reluctant to displace the judgments of administrators, who have advantages both as technocrats and public representatives.
This does not mean that agencies should be permitted to do whatever they want. We can easily imagine genuinely arbitrary decisions.2 But so long as the agency has not done something truly unreasonable, its efforts to quantify and monetize health benefits should be held acceptable.
VI.
1. Puzzles
On the analysis thus far, it should be clear that there was no obviously best choice for the EPA. Of the options considered, the most dramatic would be the two poles: to retain the existing 50 ppb standard or to select the 3 ppb standard-which the EPA deemed feasible. Neither of these choices would have been ludicrous, and neither should be seen as violative of the SDWA. Notwithstanding the NRC report, it would not be entirely irrational to conclude that the existing data-most of it from Taiwan-simply does not justify further restric-
tions, especially in light of studies suggesting no adverse effects from low levels of arsenic in drinking water. And notwithstanding the AEI-Brookings study, it would not be impossible to produce numbers suggesting that the 3 ppb standard might well be justified, at least if the nonquantified benefits are taken into account and pegged at the higher points in the range. 2. Tiebreakers
Could it be possible to resolve the controversy through some general, background considerations? When individuals and governments are not sure what to do, they often invoke "second-order" principles designed to simplify the inquiry
difficulty.223
One solution would be to invoke the "precautionary principle," which says that reasonable doubts should be resolved in favor of protecting safety, health, and the environment. The precautionary principle has had a significant
policy.22 seems to track private behavior. People purchase smoke alarms and insurance perhaps regulation of arsenic can be seen as analogous. In the face of scientific uncertainty, why not make an expenditure that might well turn out to avert serious In a catchphrase: Better safe sorry.227
If this point is meant to suggest that significant investments are worthwhile to prevent speculative harms, it is certainly correct. But everything depends on the size of the investment and the speculative nature of the harm. Taken seriously, one problem with the precautionary principle is that it would lead to huge expenditures, exhausting the relevant budget before the menu of options could be thoroughly consulted. Indeed, the precautionary principle would lead to paralysis because there are risks on all sides of the equation.22 Recall that many households would be required to spend more than $300 per year for water EPA Administrator Whitman has expressed a concern that the increased expenditure will lead many people to use small, local wells, which have heavily
polluted water.22 In these circumstances, the precautionary principle suggests that new arsenic regulation is undesirable because it might sacrifice lives. Recall too that expensive regulations can have adverse effects on life and health and hence that the $210 million expenditure for arsenic regulation has, as a worst case scenario, significant adverse health effects, with perhaps as many as thirty to forty lives lost. If this is so, the precautionary principle seems to argue against new regulation. It seems clear that precaution, by itself, can be taken to argue for no regulation, much regulation, and every point in between. On reflection, the idea is insufficiently helpful.2 3'
Perhaps a more refined argument is better. For most of the country, the incremental cost of the arsenic regulation is low-less than $30 per year. If the vast majority of people would receive additional protection at a cost that is high in the aggregate ($210 million, for example) but extremely low for each affected family, shouldn't government proceed with regulation, perhaps with exemptions or subsidies for those who would have to pay more? The argument is not implausible, but it proves too much. In many cases, it would be possible to do some good by asking everyone to pay, say, $2 per year. Should the EPA ask every American to pay $2 year, so as to create a $500 million fund to be used to pay for additional reductions in sulfur dioxide emissions? Carbon monoxide emissions? Benzene emissions? Clean-up of lead paint? Anti-tobacco advertising? Childhood immunizations? Relief of poverty? Because the list of possibilities is endless, it is unhelpful to treat small per-family costs as if they were zero or its moral equivalent we do better to ensure that those funds are used for purposes that would do more good than harm or for the most possible good. This does not mean that a regulation imposing small per-family costs (say, $30 per family for 200 million people) should be treated as identical to a regulation imposing the same aggregate but higher per-family costs (say, $300 per family for 20 million people). High per-family costs do raise particular concerns. But a regulation that badly fails cost-benefit balancing should not be accepted on the ground that each family or person will pay little. (Imagine a program that would require every American to pay $1 per year for little or no return.)
instruments take many forms, but among the most popular are "cap and trade" systems, in which the total level of emissions is capped at a certain level and polluters are allowed to trade licenses as long as the cap is respected.2 A chief advantage of cap-and-trade systems is that they ensure the lowest-cost means of achieving regulatory goals. Those who can eliminate pollution cheaply will do exactly that. Those for whom reductions are expensive will purchase additional permits.
Why not create a system of tradeable emissions rights, involving the right to subject people to arsenic? The idea may well seem macabre. But if so, the reason is likely to be a belief that arsenic is a poison seriously dangerous at any level. This is a form of intuitive toxicology. If we suppose that within the range under discussion (say 3 ppb to 20 ppb) dangerously high exposure levels will not occur, and we suppose that the issue is one of appropriate degrees of safety, we could easily imagine a cap-and-trade system. For example, government could create an overall cap on arsenic and give licenses to subject people to 15 ppb, but also allow trading. As a result, companies that can reduce at low cost will do so, whereas those that can do so at only high cost will stay at 15 ppb or perhaps buy licenses to subject people to higher levels. Because of the familiar "hot spots" problem, government would, under this regime, take steps to ensure that no one is subjected to unacceptably high levels-say, 25 ppb or higher.
As compared with a system of national command-and-control, it is likely that a system of this kind would produce much lower costs. Indeed, a system of tradeable rights would likely spur considerable innovation in arsenic control technology, which would be a significant gain. To evaluate it, we would want to know the aggregate cost of the system and also compare the likely benefits to those that would be enjoyed under the alternatives. It is not unimaginable that a properly designed cap-and-trade system would produce both lower costs and higher benefits than the command-and-control alternative. Note in this regard that the Clinton Administration proposed a 10 ppb ceiling to be applied nationally, but that a cap-and-trade system could ensure that people would have levels well below 10 ppb in much of the country.
As compared with a system of arsenic targeting, the chief advantage of a cap-and-trade system is that it imposes less of an informational demand on the government, allowing the market rather than the EPA to ascertain the costs of arsenic reduction. Under arsenic targeting, the EPA would have to decide, in every area of the country, the real costs of reduction to various points-a difficult determination for which error is inevitable. Under cap and trade, those with low costs will trade their licenses, whereas those with high costs will attempt to acquire more in the way of arsenic rights. Of course the same objections that might be made to arsenic targeting might be made to a system of cap-and-trade. Perhaps poor people will be subject to unusually high arsenic
levels. But if these objections are not convincing there, they are also unconvincing in this context.
Under the SDWA, however, the EPA lacks the authority to implement a trading system for arsenic. This is a serious gap. The statute should be amended to allow the EPA to permit trading if the evidence justifies that step. I emphasize that trading should not be allowed to create what are, under existing science, unacceptable hot spots.
It might be suggested that the EPA should impose a stringent regulation of arsenic but that the federal government should subsidize communities for which the annual cost is high. Of course the EPA cannot offer subsidies on its own. But perhaps Congress should do so. In fact, Congress has made federal financial assistance available for water systems, and while the relevant programs contain a degree of discretion, it is certainly possible for financially strapped water
help.2
Recall that the total cost of the 10 ppb regulation would be about $210 million each year. To say the least, this would not be a large sum in the federal budget. If the federal government restricted itself to paying the cost of compliance in areas in which the annual per-household cost exceeds $100, its total taxpayer bill would be about $10 million-hardly a large sum to pay.
This would not be a foolish approach to the arsenic problem. In fact, it seems quite reasonable. The major difficulty is that the numbers do not tell us whether this is the best way to spend limited taxpayer dollars. Suppose that the risks that the regulation is reducing are quite small, so that the regulation will save somewhere between 0 and 0.5 lives. Is it really worth spending $10 million to save between 0 and 0.5 lives? Many government programs are designed to decrease risks to life and health some of those programs attempt to reduce violent crime. Perhaps the $10 million would be better spent on those programs. It would be possible to say that, as a practical matter, any $10 million subsidy is more likely to come from some other, less valuable use and that by using it to protect people against the health hazards of arsenic, we would not really be diverting resources from a more valuable use. Among the universe of imaginable government expenditures, a $10 million subsidy is hardly the worst. But in light of existing data, we cannot be sure that it is the best. The same considerations that justify cost-benefit balancing in the first place suggest that the hard issues cannot be avoided by arguing for an across-the-board 10 ppb standard accompanied by a federal subsidy for those who face a difficult financial burden.
in cases in which those views are patently unreasonable. There is indeed an emerging common law of cost-benefit analysis, but thus far it is being generated by agencies rather than courts. This is entirely proper.
I have also discussed the underlying policy issues. The EPA could make many reasonable decisions here, and in the range below 50 ppb and above 5 ppb, there is no obviously correct choice. But my principal claims have involved broadening the agencies' view screen. First, agencies should have the flexibility to produce variable standards targeting regulation to areas where it would survive cost-benefit balancing and also adopting economic incentives to ensure low-cost solutions. Second, agencies should be required to identify the winners and losers produced by regulation-to show when poor people or wealthy people are disproportionate losers or gainers. A distributional analysis should not be taken as conclusive, but it will help to inform the analysis. An effort to increase agency flexibility and also to identify both winners and losers would be natural steps not toward placing regulatory judgments in an arithmetic straightjacket, but toward ensuring that when government acts, it does so in a way that is informed by a full account of the consequences.
APPENDIX
Dose-Response Curves
To evaluate risks associated with toxic substances and to undertake costbenefit analysis, it is often important to have a sense of the dose-response curve. For arsenic, clear evidence is absent. This appendix offers a sense of the possibilities.
The dose-response curve can have a variety of shapes, including linear, where response increases proportionally with dose. Figure (A)(1) displays the linear relationship between dietary dose of organophosphate insecticide dioxathion and inhibition of the enzyme cholinesterase in rats.
Figure (A)(2) demonstrates another linear relationship, this one between subcutaneous administration of carcinogenic hydrocarbon dibenzanthracene and tumor incidence in mice.
Chemicals such as benzene, radon, and formaldehyde exhibit sublinear doseresponse relationships, where elicited responses are less than proportional. Figure (B)(1) displays a sublinear relationship for primary pulmonary (lung) tumors in rats following exposure to plutonium dioxide.
Figure (B)(2) exhibits a sublinear dose-response relationship between the number of female rat liver foci (a precursor to cancer) and the log dose of phenobarbital expressed as picomole per kilogram.
Some chemicals produce no adverse effects below a certain level, resulting in a threshold curve. Threshold-model agents include dioxins and chrysotile asbes-
Dose in Diet (ppm)
(1) Plutonium Dioxide
