University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2001

Regulating Risks after ATA
Cass R. Sunstein

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Regulating Risks after ATA" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 127, 2001).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 127 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
REGULATING RISKS AFTER ATA 

Cass R. Sunstein 

THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: 
http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
 
The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=274189

 

 
 

 
 

 

Preliminary draft 6/14/01 
All rights reserved 
 

Regulating Risks After ATA 
 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
 
Abstract 

 
Whitman v. American Trucking Association was one of the most eagerly awaited 
 
regulatory  decisions  in  many  years.  But  the  Court’s  understated,  steady,  lawyerly 
opinion was a bit of an anticlimax, representing a return to normalcy and leaving many 
open questions. The Court was correct to say that the relevant provision of the Clean Air 
Act forbids consideration of cost; it was also correct to refuse to invoke the nondelegation 
doctrine.  Importantly,  the  Court  left  in  place  a  set  of  important  lower  court  decisions, 
allowing agencies  to consider costs unless Congress expressly concludes otherwise. The 
Court also raised some new questions about the constitutional status of the Occupational 
Safety  and  Health  Act.  Perhaps  most  important,  the  Court  has  not  ruled  out 
nonconstitutional  challenges  to  the  particulates  and  ozone  standards,  or  to  ambient  air 
quality standards generally. In suggesting that some of those challenges should succeed, 
especially  against  the  new  ozone  regulation,  this  essay  urges  that  Justice  Breyer’s 
concurring opinion in the case may well be the most influential in the future, because it 
fits  most  comfortably  with  other  trends  in  the  law  of  risk  regulation,  signaling  the 
emergence of a kind of “cost-benefit state.” 
 
 
 
 
The last two decades have seen recurring conflicts between two strands in 
the law of risk regulation. The first strand, captured in what we might call “1970s 
environmentalism,”  places  a  high  premium  on  immediate  responses  to  evident 
hazards;  rejects  claims  for  quantification  of  likely  benefits;  and  avoids  or 
downplays  consideration  of  cost.  These  tendencies  play  a  role  in  prominent 
legislation1    and  also  in  the  courts.2  The  second  strand,  captured  in  what  we 

                                                 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law 
School  and  Department  of  Political  Science.  I  am  grateful  to  Richard  A.  Posner  and  Adrian 
Vermeule for helpful comments on a previous draft. 
1  See,  e.g.,  42  USC  7409(a),  as  interpreted  in  Whitman  v.  American  Trucking  Associations,  121 
S.Ct. 903 (2001). 
2 See Lead Industries Association v. EPA, 647 F.2d 1130 (DC Cir 1980); Ethyl Corp. v. EPA, 541 
F.2d 1 (DC Cir 1976).. 

 

might call “the cost-benefit revolution,” urges a highly quantitative approach to 
risk  control,  based  on  careful  specification  of  both  costs  and  benefits,  and  on 
close attention to relevant tradeoffs, including the risks sometimes introduced by 
regulation.  These  tendencies  can  be  seen  in  prominent  executive  orders,3  in 
legislation,4 and in courts as well.5  
 

Some  of  the  most  noteworthy  conflicts  between  the  two  strands  have 
involved  efforts  by  courts 
to  authorize  agencies  to  make  cost-benefit 
comparisons under statutes not explicitly calling for those comparisons.6 Recent 
presidents  and  courts  have  gone  so  far  as  to  create  a  series  of  “cost-benefit 
default rules,” allowing agencies to disregard trivial risks, requiring agencies to 
show  significant  benefits  from  regulation,  allowing  agencies  to  consider  the 
substitute risks introduced by regulation, and authorizing agencies to take costs 
into account when statutes are not explicit on the point.7 
 

Within  the  judiciary,  the  recent  conflicts  have  pressed  two  questions  in 
particular: When must agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), consider costs?8 When, if ever, will Congress be required to legislate with 
particularity?9  The  latter  question  has  not  often  thought  to  be  especially 
interesting,  because  courts  have  not  invoked  the  nondelegation  doctrine  to 
invalidate  a  federal  statute  since  1935.10  But  a  number  of  commentators  have 
suggested  that  it  is  past  time  to  revive  the  doctrine,  partly  in  order  to  ensure 
legislative  attention  to  tradeoffs  rather  than  pleasant  homilies.11  And  in  the  last 
decade or so, some courts, concerned about the grant of open-ended discretion to 
the executive, have shown an unmistakable interest in doing exactly that.12 
                                                 
3 See, e.g., Executive Order 12291, 46 Fed. Reg. 13193 (1980); Executive Order 12498, 50 Fed. Reg. 
1036 (1985); Executive Order 12866, 58 Fed. Reg. 51735 (1993). 
4 See, e.g., 42 USC 300f et seq. (Safe Drinking Water Act). 
5 See Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F2d 1201 (5th Cir 1991). 
6 See State of Michigan v. EPA, 213 F3d 663, 678-79 (DC Cir 2000). 
7 See Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Rules, Mich :L Rev (forthcoming 2001). 
8 See, e.g., NRDC v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146, 1154-1166 (DC Cir 1987); George Warren Corp. V. EPA 
159 F3d 616, 623-24 (DC Cir 1998). 
9 See, e.g., National Lime Association v. EPA, 233 F3d 625 (DC Cir 2000). 
10  Panama  Refining  Co.  v.  Ryan,  293  US  388  (1935);  Schechter  Poultry  Corp.  v.  US,  295  US  495 
(1935). 
11  See  David  Schoenbrod,  Power  Without  Responsibility  (1992);  John  Hart  Ely,  Democracy  and 
Distrust (1981). 
12 See American Trucking Assn. v. EPA, 175 F.3d 1027 (DC Cir 1999), reversed in part sub nom. 
Whitman v. EPA, 121 S. Ct. 903 (2001); International Union, UAW v. OSHA, 938 F.2d 1310 (DC 
Cir 1991); South Dakota v. Department of Interior, 69 F.2d 878 (8th Cir 1995); Massieu v. Reno, 915 
F Supp 681 (DNY 1996). 

2 

 

 

 

Because it promised to help answer both of these two questions, Whitman 
v.  American  Trucking  Association13  was  the  most  eagerly  anticipated  case  in 
administrative  law  in  many  years.  In  some  circles,  a  dramatic  decision  was 
anticipated,  raising  the  possibility  of  significant  new  directions  in  the  law  of 
environmental protection and risk regulation. On the central issues, however, the 
Court’s unanimous, steady, lawyerly opinion amounted to a return to normalcy 
– and to an understated but unmistakable rebuke to some attempted innovations 
on  the  part  of  the  court  of  appeals  for  the  District  of  Columbia  Circuit.  In  its 
principal ruling, the Supreme Court reaffirmed long-settled law to the effect that 
in  setting  national  ambient  air  quality  standards,  the  EPA  is  not  permitted  to 
consider costs.14 The Court also rejected a constitutional attack on the Clean Air 
Act,  reestablishing  long-settled  law  allowing  Congress  to  delegate  broad 
discretionary  authority  to  regulatory  agencies.15  And  through  this  return  to 
normalcy,  the  current  Court  treated  the  court  of  appeals  for  the  District  of 
Columbia in the same way that the 1970s Supreme Court treated that very court 
of appeals – attacking new judicial innovations and calling for at least a form of 
“hands off.”16 
 
The  Court  ruled  quite  broadly  on  both  of  the  key  issues,  but  it  also 
reasoned in an extremely unambitious way, saying invoking statutory language 
and precedent while saying  little about the topic of risk regulation and offering 
astonishingly  little  in  the  way  of  theoretical  ground  for  its  reluctance  to  invoke 
the  nondelegation  doctrine.  We  know  that  the  Court  is  not  much  interested  in 
reviving  that  doctrine;  but  we  do  not  know  why  it  lacks  that  interest.    If  we 
consider  the  importance  of  the  case,  the  opinion  seems  a  bit  of  an  anticlimax, 
potentially  even  a  judicial  return  to  1970s  environmentalism.  But  two  more 
interesting sets of issues lie beneath the dry surface. The first involves the state of 
the  nondelegation  doctrine.  To  be  sure,  the  Court  has  signaled  its  lack  of 
enthusiasm  for  the  doctrine  –  indeed,  it  has  given its clearest signal yet on that 

                                                                                                                                                 
 
13 121 S. Ct. 903 (2001). 
14 For the initial part of the long settlement, see Lead Industries Association v. EPA, 647 F.2d 1130 
(DC Cir 1980). 
15 See, e.g., Touby v. United States, 500 U.S. 160 (1991). 
16 The leading case here is Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. NRDC, 435 US 519 (1978). See 
Antonin Scalia, Vermont Yankee, The Supreme Court, and the DC Circuit, 1978 Supreme Court 
Review  345.  Professor  Scalia’s  general  (not  unqualified)  approval  of  the  Supreme  Court’s 
rejection  of policy initiatives by the D.C. Circuit finds a kind of echo in his majority opinion in 
ATA. 

3 

 

 

point.  At  the  same  time,  the  Court’s  rejection  of  the  approach  of  the  court  of 
appeals  produces  new  questions  about  the  nondelegation  doctrine  in  some 
important  domains  of  risk  regulation,  above  all  involving  the  Occupational 
Safety  and  Health  Act  (OSHA).  As  we  shall  see,  ATA  raises  anew  a  serious 
constitutional question about a key provision of OSHA. 

 
The  second,  and  more  pressing,  set  of  issues  stems  from  the  Court’s 
remarkably thin and unhelpful discussion of the meaning of the Clean  Air Act 
(CAA). As we shall see, the same concerns that led the court of appeals to invoke 
the  nondelegation  doctrine  might  well  reemerge  on  remand  in  ATA—and  in 
many  other  contexts  involving  risk  regulation.  Above  all,  the  court  of  appeals 
sought to require the EPA to attempt to quantify the risks that it was seeking to 
control, so as to ensure that the agency was attacking large problems rather than 
small ones.17 After ATA, this goal might be achieved through other, more modest 
routes, not involving the Constitution at all. While the ATA Court spoke largely 
in  the  terms  of  1970s  environmentalism,  it  did  so  in  the  context  of  an  Article  I 
challenge  and  a  highly  adventurous  effort  to  inject  cost  considerations  into  an 
apparently cost-blind statutory provision. As I will urge, the decision should not 
be  seen  as  an  attack  on  more  modest  judicial  innovations,  nonconstitutional  in 
nature, that attempt to increase the sense and rationality of risk regulation. 

 
In  this  Article,  I  suggest  reasons  to  approve  of  the  principal  holdings  in 
ATA,  arguing  that  the  Court  properly  interpreted  the  key  statutory  provisions 
and also that it was correct not to invoke the nondelegation doctrine in the case. 
In  a  period  in  which  the  Court  is  often  criticized  for  allowing  its  own  political 
convictions  to  overwhelm  its  duty  of  fidelity  to  the  law,  the  quiet,  lawyer-like 
analysis  in  ATA  warrants  considerable  enthusiasm.  I  also  argue  on  behalf  of  a 
large role, even after ATA, for the cost-benefit default principles, suggesting that 
they deserve a continuing place in the lower courts. In the process, I investigate 
one of the most interesting features of ATA: the sharply conflicting approaches of 
the Court’s two specialists in administrative law. Justice Scalia’s  opinion for the 
Court  is  lawyerly,  formalistic,  textualist,  and  apparently  indifferent  to  the topic 
of  consequences.  Justice  Breyer’s  concurring  opinion  is  highly  pragmatic,  going 
well beyond the legal materials to try to make sense of the regulatory regime that 
Congress created. With respect to the law of risk regulation, I believe that Justice 
Breyer’s  opinion,  an  unambiguous  rejection  of  1970s  environmentalism,  is  the 
harbinger of the future, and potentially the most important opinion in the case. 
Invoking Justice Breyer’s concerns, I suggest that a number of challenges remain 

                                                 
17 See American Trucking Assn. v. EPA, 175 F.3d 1027 (DC Cir 1999). 

4 

 

 

 

available to national ambient air quality standards – and that the most plausible 
of these challenges, connected directly with Justice Breyer’s opinion, promise to 
increase the sense and rationality of national environmental policy. 

 
This  Article  comes  in  four  parts.  Part  I  describes  the  background.  Part  II 
discusses  the  Court’s  opinion  and  offers  an  evaluation.  Part  III  briefly  explores 
the  three  concurring  opinions  in  the  case,  with  particular  reference  to  Justice 
Breyer’s  emphasis  on  recurring  issues  in  risk  regulation.  Part  IV  discusses  the 
future.  I  pay  special  attention  here  to  the  problems  not  resolved  in  ATA, 
including the place of cost-benefit default principles, constitutional status of the 
Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Act 
the  possibility  of 
nonconstitutional  challenges  to  the  EPA’s  particulates  and  ozone  regulations, 
and indeed ambient air quality regulations in general.  

(OSHA),  and 

 

I. 

The Setting 

To  understand  ATA,  it  is  necessary  to  know  something  about  what 
happened  in  the  EPA  and  the  court  of  appeals.  For  many  years,  the  EPA  had 
refused  to  issue  a  new  national  standard  for  particulates,  notwithstanding 
scientific evidence apparently indicating grounds for action. Eventually the EPA 
was  spurred  to  act  by  a  decision  of  a  district  court,  with  an  exceedingly    rapid 
timetable for action.18  

 
So spurred, the EPA issued a new standard for small particulates in 199719; at 
the same time, the EPA issued a standard for ozone. In both cases, the scientific 
issues  are  extremely  complex,  and  reasonable  people  might  well  argue  about 
whether  the  evidence  adequately  supported  the  EPA’s  decisions.  But  a  general 
reading  of  the  evidence  suggests  an  important  distinction,  one  that  is  relevant 
both to ATA and to the future of risk regulation. Under the EPA’s own data, the 
particulates  standard  promises  significant  health  gains,  both  in  terms  of 
mortalities averted and in terms of morbidity.20 Consider the following table: 

                                                 
18 See  American Lung Association v. Browner, 884 F. Supp. 345  (D. Ariz. 1994). 
19 62 Fed. Reg 38,652 (1997). 
20 The clearest evidence comes from U.S. EPA Innovative Strategies & Economics Group, Office of 
Air Quality Planning and Standards, Regulatory Impact Analyses for the Particulate Matter and 
Ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standards (1997). For an overview, see appendix to Cass R. 
Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional?, 98 Mich L Rev 303, 384-94 (1999). 

5 

 

 

Table 1 

Particulates Standard 
National Annual Health Incidence Reductions 

ENDPOINT 
 
 

 
Annual PM2.5  
Daily PM2.5   

1. Mortality: short-term exposure 
                        long-term exposure 
2. Chronic Bronchitis 
Hospital Admissions: 

3. all respiratory (all ages) 

all resp. (ages 65+) 
pneumonia (ages 65+) 
COPD (ages 65+) 

4. Congestive heart failure  
5. Ischemic heart disease 

6. Acute Bronchitis 
7. Lower Respiratory Symptoms  
8. Upper Respiratory Symptoms 

Partial Attainment Scenario 
50 
150 
360 
340 
6,800 
 
190 
470 
170 
140 
130 
140 
1,100 
10,400 
5,300 
18,300 
8,800 
106,000 
879,000 

shortness of breath 
asthma attacks 
9. Work Loss Days 
10. Minor Restricted Activity Days (MRADs) 

 
But  EPA  data  suggest  a  much  more  mixed  picture  for  ground-level  ozone. 
The evidence is more mixed for two reasons. First, the mortality and health gains 
from the new  standard appear much more modest; it is possible that the ozone 
standard  would  save  no  additional  lives  per  year.  Indeed,  tighter  regulation  of 
particulates, going well beyond the EPA’s rule, would appear to do a great deal 
more  to  protect  health  than  would  the  new  regulation  of  ozone.  Consider  the 
following table: 

6 

 

 

 
 

Table 2  Ozone Standard 

 

ENDPOINT 
 

Ozone Health: 
1. Mortality 

Hospital Admissions 

2. all respiratory (all ages) 

all respiratory (ages 65+) 
pneumonia (ages 65+) 
COPD (ages 65+) 
emer. dept. visits for asthma 
3. Acute Respiratory Symptoms 

(any of 19) 
asthma attacks 
MRADs 

4. Mortality from air toxics 
Ancillary PM Health: 

1. Mortality: short-term exp. 

long-term exposure 

2. Chronic Bronchitis 
Hospital Admissions: 

3. all respiratory (all ages) 

all resp. (ages 65+) 
pneumonia (ages 65+) 
COPD (ages 65+) 

4. congestive heart failure 
5. ischemic heart disease 

6. Acute Bronchitis 
7. Lower Respiratory Symptoms 
8. Upper Respiratory Symptoms 

shortness of breath 
asthma attacks 
9. Work Loss Days 
10. Minor Restricted Activity Days (MRADs) 

0.08 4th Max 
Low- to High-end Est. 
 
0 – 80 
 
300 – 300 
2,330 – 2,330 
870 – 870 
260 – 260 
130 – 130 
29,840 – 29,840 
 
60 – 60 
650 – 650 
1 – 1 
 
0 – 80 
0 – 250 
0 – 530 
 
0 – 90 
0 – 60 
0 – 20 
0 – 20 
0 – 20 
0 – 20 
0 – 400 
0 – 4,670 
0 – 430 
0 – 1,220 
0 – 5,510 
0 – 50,440 
0 – 420,300 

7 

 

 

Second,  the  evidence  for  ozone  is  more  mixed  because  ground-level  ozone 
provides protection against cataracts and skin cancer.21 To be sure, cataracts and 
skin cancer are not the most serious of health problems, especially in light of the 
very  high  cure  rate  for  skin  cancer.  But  if  the  protective  effects  are  taken  into 
account,  it  is  not  entirely  clear  that  the  new  regulation  of  ozone  will  actually 
produce a net improvement in terms of health. 
 

The relevant provision of the Clean Air Act requires the EPA to set primary 
standards  “the attainment and maintenance of which . . . are requisite to protect 
the  public  health,”  with  “an  adequate  margin  of  safety.”22  The  American 
Trucking  Association  and  others  launched  a  variety  of  challenges  to  the 
particulates  and  ozone  standards.  Of  these  challenges,  among  the  most 
interesting was based on the evidence just described -- a claim that the EPA was 
obliged  to take into account the health benefits, and not merely the health risks, 
of  ground-level  ozone.  The  court  accepted  this  objection,  concluding  that  the 
EPA had consider all “identifiable effects” of ozone, both positive and negative.23  
The  government  did  not  appeal  this  important  aspect  of  the  decision,  whose 
implications for future EPA action remain unclear, in part because of the EPA’s 
unenthusiastic response to the ruling.24  
 

But  the  two  major  rulings  of  the  court  of  appeals  involved  even  larger 
issues.  In  the  court’s  view,  the  statute  simply  did  not  allow  the  agency  to 
consider  costs,  and  hence  a  cost-blind  approach  to  statutory  standard  was  not 
merely  permissible  but  required.25  In  this  way  the  court  rejected  American 
Trucking  Association’s  imaginative  effort  to  produce  a  large-scale  departure 
from the longstanding understanding that national ambient air quality standards 
would  be  set  without  regard  to  costs.  But  construed  as    a  “benefits  only” 
provision,  the  court  thought  that  the  relevant  provision  of  the  CAA  raised 
extremely  serious  constitutional  problems  under  the  nondelegation  doctrine, 
which  grows  out  of  the  constitutional  vesting  of  “all  legislative  power”  in  “a 
Congress of the United States.”26 The reason for the constitutional difficulty was 

                                                 
21 See Randall Lutter and C. Wolz, UV-B Screening by Tropospheric Ozone: Implications for the 
National Ambient Air Quality Standard, 31 Env. Science & Tech. 142A (1997); Randall Lutter and 
Howard  Gruenspecht,  Assessing  Benefits  of  Ground-Level  Ozone:  What  Role  for  Science  in 
Setting National Ambient Air Quality Standards (unpublished manuscript 2001). 
22 42 USC 7409(b)(1). 
23 American Trucking Assns. V. EPA, 175 F.3d 1027 (DC Cir 1999). 
24 For an overview, see Lutter and Gruenspecht, supra note. 
25 See id. for an outline and for critical discussion.  
26 United States Constitution, Article 1, section 1. 

8 

 

 

simple:  The  relevant  provision,  as  interpreted  by  EPA,  seemed  to  allow  the 
agency to choose whatever standard it liked best. “The agency rightly recognizes 
that the question is one of degree, but offers no intelligible principle by which to 
identify a stopping point.”27 In the court’s view, “EPA’s formulation of its policy 
judgment  leaves  it  free  to  pick  any  point  between  zero  and  a  hair  below  the 
concentrations  yielding  London’s  Killer  Fog.”28    The  Constitution  could  not  be 
from 
satisfied  without  some  clearer  principle  distinguishing  permitted 
prohibited  regulation.  Rather  than  invalidating  the  statute,  however,  the  court 
allowed EPA to cure the difficulty. In the court’s view, it remained possible that 
the EPA could construe the statute in a way that would remove the constitutional 
doubts.29 Such a narrowing construction would be both necessary and sufficient 
for validity. 
 
 
But  what,  specifically,  did  the  court  have  in  mind?  The  question  is 
important both for understanding the Supreme Court’s decision in ATA and for 
understanding  the  future  of  national  standards  after  ATA.  Clearly  the  court  of 
appeals sought a high degree of quantification – indeed a high enough degree of 
quantification  to  allow  the  EPA  to  explain,  with  some  precision,  why  one 
standard would be “requisite” to protect the public health, while other standards 
would not be. In this way, the court signaled  its interest in moving well beyond 
1970s environmentalism, toward an approach that would rely on numbers rather 
than  general  concern  and  overall  impressions.  Above  all,  the  court  sought  a 
specification  of  the  kinds  of  numbers  –  in  terms  of  likely  adverse  health  effects 
under  the  existing  standard  --  that  would  call  for  increased  regulation,  and  the 
kinds  of  numbers  that  the  EPA  would  consider  tolerable,  and hence would  not 
call for increased regulation. In the key passage, the court wrote: “On the issue of 
likelihood,  for  some  purposes  it  might  be  appropriate  to  use  standards  drawn 
from  other  areas  of  the  law,  such  as  the  familiar  ‘more  probable  than  not’ 
criterion.  Of  course  a  one-size-fits-all  criterion  of  probability  would  make  little 
sense.  .  .  .  Nonetheless,  an  agency  wielding  the  power  over  American  life 
possessed by the EPA should be capable of developing the rough equivalent of a 
generic  unit  of  harm  that  takes  into  account  population  affected,  severity,  and 
probability. . . .”30  
 

                                                 
27 I75 F. 3d at 1036. 
28 Id. at 1037. 
29 Id. at 1039. 
30 Id.  

9 

 

 

What  the  court  apparently  sought  was  some  sort  of  general  measure  of 
adverse  effects,  one  that  would  give  an  explanation  of  why,  in  any  given  case, 
the agency regulated to one “point” rather than another. The agency might, for 
example,  value  a  statistical  death  at  “100,”  treat  a  case  of  chronic  bronchitis  as 
some fraction of that, and do the same for every other adverse health effect. The 
universe of harms from exposure might well be aggregated  in this way – so that 
the gains from the chosen level of regulation would be X, whereas the gains from 
less stringent regulation would be 80% of X, and the gains from more stringent 
regulation  would  be  120%  of  X.  With  quantification  of  this  sort,  it  would  be 
possible  to  know  why  the  agency  chose  one  point  rather  than  another  for 
particulates  and  ozone,  and  also  to  ensure  that  the  agency’s  particular  choices 
squared,  more  or  less  well,  with  its  particular  choices  for  other  pollutants.  The 
result  would  be  to  ensure  cross-pollutant  coherence,  and  also  to  provide  some 
coherent  explanation,  in  specific  cases,  of  why  industry  is  wrong  to  urge  less 
stringent  controls,  and  why  environmentalists  are  wrong  to  request  more 
stringent controls. 

 
Perhaps  the  court  suggested  this “generic unit of harm” approach partly 
because of the odd fact that the particulates and ozone regulations were before it 
in the same case – and because it seemed hard to understand why EPA did not 
regulate  particulates  more  stringently,  and  ozone  less  so.  Of  course  there  are 
many  complexities  in  doing  what  the  court  of  appeals  sought.  To  give  just  one 
illustration,  it is  not  clear  if the agency should focus on the probability of harm 
faced  by  each  individual,  or  instead  on  some  statistical  measure  of  aggregate 
harms,  faced  by  the  population  as  a  whole.31  But  the  EPA  does  have  sufficient 
information  to  produce  some  sort  of  overall  measure  of  harm,  in  a  way  that 
would satisfy the court’s concerns.32 A key question is whether the Constitution, 
or some other source of law, requires the EPA to be so quantitative, as a way of 
explaining  why  it  chooses  one  degree  of  regulation  rather  than  another,  either 
more or less stringent. 
 
the 
 
nondelegation  ruling.  In  a  bit  of  a  surprise,  the  respondents  cross-petitioned, 
arguing  that  the  Act  should  be  construed  to allow the EPA to consider costs in 
setting ambient standards. The cross-petition was analytically prior, and this was 
the question that the Supreme Court addressed first. 

The  government  promptly  appealed,  objecting  above  all 

to 

                                                 
31  For  a  plea  for  looking  at  the  size  of  the  affected  population,  see  James  Hamilton  and  W.  Kip 
Viscusi, Calculating Risks (1999). 
32 See Sunstein, supra note, for an overview, with reference to ozone and particulates. 

10 

 

 

 

 

II. 

Lawyer’s Fare 

Let us now turn to the Court’s rulings on the two key issues in the case.33 
 

A.  Costs? No Elephants in Mouseholes 

The  first  question  was  whether  national  ambient  air  quality  standards 
should be based on an assessment of benefits alone, or instead on some kind of 
balancing  of  benefits  and  costs.  Recall  that  the  relevant  provision  of  the  CAA 
requires the EPA to set primary standards  “the attainment and maintenance of 
which . . . are requisite to protect the public health,” with “an adequate margin of 
safety.”  At  first  glance,  the  statute  appears  to  be  indifferent  to  cost.  All  that 
matters  is  that  pollution  be  controlled  so  as  “to  protect  the public health.” This 
view  of  the  provision  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  national  standards  are 
supposed  to  be  based  on  a  “criteria”  document,  which  is  required,  in  turn,  to 
discuss  all  “identifiable  effects”  of  the  pollutant  on  public  health  and  welfare.34 
The  criteria  document  is  not  required  to  discuss  the  economic  effects  of 
regulation  itself.  Thus  the  analysis  seemed  simple:  If  the  ambient  standard  is 
required  “to  protect  the  public  health”  and  to  be  “based”  on  the  criteria 
document, and if that document is not supposed to discuss costs, then it would 
seem to follow that standard-setting may not be done with reference to costs. 

 
In  essence,  the  Court  accepted  this  analysis.  Proceeding  in  textualist 
manner, with an emphasis on statutory language and structure (but no reference 
to  the  legislative  history),  it  held  that  standard-setting  must  indeed  be  cost-
blind.35  The  Court  said that the key statutory term, “public health,” requires an 
analysis  of  the  effects  of  the  pollutant,  and  that  costs  are  irrelevant.  But  the 
American Trucking Association and its allies pressed some good questions from 
common sense: Can the EPA possibly issue national standards on the basis of an 
inquiry  into  public  health  only?    If  the  costs  of  compliance  are  extremely  high, 
won’t  the  EPA  inevitably  impose  more  lenient  regulations  than  it  would  if  the 
costs  are  extremely  low?  Isn’t  it  obviously  worthwhile  to  achieve  some  small 
improvement  in  air  quality,  if  the  costs  of  compliance  are  (say)  $500,000,  and 
obviously  less  worthwhile  to  do  so  if  the  costs  of  compliance  are  (say)  $10 
billion?  These  questions  seem  especially  powerful  in  light  of  the  fact, 
                                                 
33  I  do  not  discuss  the  third  ruling,  involving  the  relationship  between  the  new  ozone  rule  and 
statutory  provisions  governing  ozone.  This  third  ruling  has  considerable  practical  importance, 
but it does not raise recurring issues. 
34 42 USC 7409(b)(1). 
35 121 S. Ct. at 911. 

11 

 

 

acknowledged  by  EPA,  that  there  is  no  “safe  threshold”  for  many  pollutants, 
including those involving in ATA itself. If there is no safe threshold, a cost-blind 
analysis would seem to require EPA to eliminate pollutants from the ambient air 
– a result that would ban automobiles, coal-fired power plants, and much more. 
Consideration  of  costs  would  appear  necessary  to  avert  this  ludicrous 
conclusion.  And  the  argument  seemed  to  draw  further  strength  from  the 
apparent  fact,  urged  by credible observers, that the EPA had in fact considered 
costs, although tacitly and without public supervision.36 

 
In fact it makes most sense to interpret the “requisite to protect the public 
health” language  to require EPA to make a showing of significant risk, a point 
that goes some (not all) of the way toward answering these objections.37 But the 
Supreme Court’s major answer to these points was simple: Tell it to Congress.38  
For  the  Court,  the  only  real  question  was  whether  “public  health”  could  be 
understood  to  be  a  reference  not  only  to  environmental  effects,  but  also  to  the 
adverse  effects  introduced  by  regulation.  Invoking  the  dictionary39  as  its 
principal  authority,  the  Court  suggested  (not  so  helpfully)  that  the  ordinary 
meaning  “public  health”  is  “the  health  of  the  public,”  that  this  is  “the  most 
natural of readings,” and that the natural reading is inconsistent with the claim 
that costs are relevant to the EPA’s decision.40  

 
To be sure, the cross-petititioners did not rely on policy arguments alone. 
They  also  urged  (and  the  Court  acknowledged,  also  with  the  dictionary’s  aid) 
that “public health” is a not an unambiguous phrase. In their view, “many more 
factors  than  air  pollution  affect  public  health,”  and  “a  very  stringent  standard 
might  produce  health  losses  sufficient  to  offset  the  health  gains  achieved  in 
cleaning  the  air  –  for  example,  by  closing  down  whole  industries  and  thereby 
impoverishing  the  workers  and  consumes  dependent  upon  those  industries.”41 
There is a great deal of evidence to support this claim. Expensive regulation does 
appear to produce health risks.42  

 

                                                 
36  See  Marc  Landy  et  al.,  The  Environmental  Protection  Agency:  Asking  the  Wrong  Questions 
(1997). 
37 As Justice Breyer emphasized. See below. 
38 Id. 
39  Use  of  the  dictionary  has  become  a  common  textualist  theme.  See  Note,  Looking  It  Up,  107 
Harv. L. Rev. 1437 (1995); William Eskridge, The New Textualism, 37 UCLA L Rev 621 (1990). 
40 121 S. Ct.. at 908. 
41 I.d at 909. 
42 See Robert Hahn et al. Do Federal Regulations Reduce Mortality? (2000). 

12 

 

 

The Court did not reject the empirical claim, but it held that arguments of 
this  kind  could  not  defeat  the  “natural”  interpretation  of  the  Act.  Indeed  the 
Court  analyzed  the  statutory  structure  to  give  further  support  to  that 
interpretation.  Unlike  the  apparently  cost-blind  provision  governing  national 
ambient  air  quality  standards,  other  provisions  of  the  Clean  Air  Act  explicitly 
permitted cost to be taken into account. For example, a key provision of the Act, 
for  example,  asks  EPA  to  consider  costs  in  selecting  the  “best  system”  for 
emissions  reductions  from  new  pollution  sources.43  The  fact  that  some  statutes 
expressly referred to cost seemed to support the view that the provision at issue 
in ATA, most naturally read as cost-blind, did in fact have this meaning. To this 
the  Court  added  that  Congress  was  “unquestionably  aware”  of  the  potentially 
adverse effects of expensive regulation, and hence allowed the EPA to waive the 
compliance deadline for stationary sources upon a showing, inter alia, that “the 
continued  operation  of  such  sources  is  essential  .  .  .  to  the  public  health  or 
welfare.”44 

 
All this was enough to suggest that the basic provision of the Act banned 
consideration  of  cost.  Because  that  basic  provision  is  “the  engine  that  drives 
nearly all”45 of the subsequent provisions of the Act, Congress would not lightly 
be taken to have required cost consideration in other provision.46 Congress “does 
not  alter  the  fundamental  details  of  a  regulatory  scheme  in  vague  terms  or 
in 
ancillary  provisions  – 
mouseholes.”47  Hence  the  statute’s  terms  “adequate  margin”  and  “requisite” 
should not be taken to allow consideration of cost, because it is “implausible that 
Congress  would  give  to  the  EPA  through  these  modest  words  the  power  to 
determinate whether implementation costs should moderate national air quality 
standards.”48 To be sure, a number of provisions of the Act expressly require the 
EPA  to  generate  information  about  compliance  costs.49  But  in  the  Court’s  view, 
these provisions are designed to allow the EPA to assist the states in finding low-
cost  strategies  for  attainment.50  They  do  not  suggest  that  EPA  is  allowed  to 

it  does  not,  one  might  say,  hide  elephants 

                                                 
43 42 USC 7411(b)(1)(B). 
44 121 S. Ct. at 909. 
45 This is a considerable overstatement, to the point of inaccuracy. A number of provisions of the 
CAA  are  affected  by  the  national  ambient  air  quality  standards,  but  most  of  the  (countless) 
provisions are not affected by national standards. 
46 Id. at 910. 
47 Id. at 910. 
48 Id. at 910. 
49 42 USC 7408(b)(l).; 42 USC 7409(d)(2)(C)(iv). 
50 121 S. Ct. at 911. 

13 

 

 

 

consider  costs  on  its  own.  All  these  considerations  converged  on  a  single 
conclusion:  Ambient  standards  must  be  based  on  considerations  of  health,  and 
cost simply does not matter. 

B. Delegation? 

 
If  the  EPA’s  task  is  to  assess  public  health  alone,  is  the  statute  an 
unconstitutional delegation of power? Common sense might suggest that there is 
a  serious  problem  here.  The  question  of  what  level  is  “requisite  to  protect  the 
public health” seems unaccompanied by statutory standards. If there are no safe 
thresholds, perhaps EPA could (must?) require some pollutants to be eliminated 
entirely from the ambient air. But even in the absence of safe thresholds, perhaps 
EPA  could  decide  that  certain  risks  are  to  be  treated  as  residual,  ordinary,  the 
stuff  of  everyday  life.  If  the  statute  does  not  tell  the  agency  what  it  must  do, 
perhaps  its  range  of  discretion  is  unacceptable.  Note  in  this  regard  that  many 
people do not believe that certain imaginable steps are “requisite” to protect their 
own  health:  They  walk  at  night  in  dangerous  neighborhoods;  they  eat  peanut 
butter;  they  fail  to  exercise;  they  gain  weight;  they  drive  cars;  they  own  large 
dogs. In all of these cases, the risks may well be nontrivial as a statistical matter, 
and  perhaps  EPA  could  build  on  such  practices  in  deciding  what  level  of 
regulation is “requisite.” But  without statutory guidance, perhaps the Act gives 
the EPA excessive discretion – the discretion essentially to choose the level of risk 
regulation that it wants, with essentially no legislative guidance.  

 
It  is  important  to  say  here  that  a  statute  requiring  cost-benefit  balancing 
might, on this line of reasoning, raise similar  nondelegation issues, at least in the 
absence of legislative guidance on how to assess both costs and benefits. Without 
such  guidance,  is  an  agency  permitted  to  say  that  a  statistical  life  is  worth  $1 
million?  $10  million?  $50  million?  Can  an  agency  discount  lives  saved  in  the 
future? By  1%? By 7%? If the statute allows agencies to value statistical lives as 
they  choose,  there  might  seem  to  be  an  unacceptably  high  level  of  discretion. 
Thus  a  constitutional  attack  on  the  “requisite  to  protect  the  public  health” 
language would doubts about many other provisions, including those that give 
costs a role to play in regulatory choices.51 

 
Troubled by the wide range of discretion apparently enjoyed by the EPA, 
the  court  of  appeals  held  that  the  Constitution  required  the agency to come up 
with clear standards by which to explain why it would exercise its discretion to 

                                                 
51 See Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional?, supra note, for discussion. 

14 

 

 

regulate  to  one  “point”  rather  than  another.  But  as  a  constitutional  matter,  the 
Supreme  Court  found  the  lower  court’s  approach  quite  implausible.  “In  a 
delegation  challenge,  the  constitutional  question  is  whether  the  statute  has 
delegated  legislative  power  to  the  agency.”52  Because  this  is  the  question,  an 
agency cannot “cure” an otherwise unconstitutional delegation of power merely 
by  adopting  a  narrowly  construction.  “The  idea  that  an  agency  can  cure  an 
unconstitutionally  standardless  delegation  of  power  by  declining  to  exercise 
some  of  that  power  seems  to  us  internally  contradictory.”53  Thus  the  agency’s 
“voluntary  self-denial”54    has  no  bearing  on  the  real  constitutional  question, 
which  is  whether  Congress  has  cabined  agency  discretion  with  the  requisite 
“intelligible principle.” 

 
Turning to that question, the Court said that the statute required the EPA 
to  use  the  latest  scientific  knowledge  to  establish  standards  “at  a  level  that  is 
requisite to protect the public health from the adverse effects of the pollutant in 
the  ambient  air.”  The  statutory  idea  of  ‘requisite-to-protect”  meant  “sufficient, 
but  not  more  that  necessary,”  to  provide  that  protection.55  In  the  Court’s  view, 
this standard was constitutionally acceptable, because it was “strikingly similar” 
to  limitations  found  acceptable  in  other  cases.    The  Court  had,  for  example, 
upheld  a  grant  of  authority  to  the  Attorney  General  to  designate  a  drug  as  a 
controlled substance if this step was “necessary to avoid an imminent hazard to 
the  public  health.”56  The  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Act  contained  a  quite 
similar  provision,  which  was  also  found  constitutionally  valid.57  The  Court 
acknowledged  that  “the  degree  of  agency  discretion  that  is  acceptable  varies 
according  to  the  scope  of  the  power  congressionally  conferred.”58  Hence 
Congress “must provide substantial guidance on setting air standards that affect 
the entire national economy.”59 But it was nonetheless unnecessary for Congress 
to  provide  a  “determinate  criterion”  to  establish  how  much  regulation  is  too 
much.  To  be  sure,  the  EPA  would  be  making  “judgments  of  degree.”    The 
decision  about  what  is  “requisite”  would  not  run  afoul  of  the  nondelegation 
principle. 

 

                                                 
52 121 S Ct at 912. 
53 Id. 
54 Id. 
55 Id. at 912. 
56 Touhy v. United States, 500 S 160 (1991). 
57 Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO v. API (The Benzene Case), 448 US 607 (1980). 
58 121 S. Ct. at 913. 
59 Id. 

15 

 

 

C.  Evaluation: Two and A Half Cheers 

 
On both of the key issues, the Court’s unanimity should not be surprising. 
Indeed, the Court’s fidelity to preexisting law -- even its steady, unimaginative, 
lawyerly  opinion  --  gives  reason  for  some  confidence  in  a  Court  that  has  been 
much  criticized  for  allowing  its  own  political  convictions  to  play  an  excessive 
role in its interpretation of the law. It is far from unreasonable to speculate that 
some  of  the  justices  lacked  much  enthusiasm,  on  political  grounds,  for  a  cost-
blind  Clean  Air  Act,  and  that  some  of  them  would  like  Congress  to  give 
narrower delegations of authority to regulatory agencies. Nonetheless, the Court 
took  the  existing  legal  materials,  in  the  form  of  statutory  language  and  judicial 
precedents, extremely seriously. The Court was right to say that those materials 
required both results. The best interpretation of the CAA does not allow the EPA 
to  consider  costs  when  setting  national  standards.  Moreover,  there  is  no  good 
argument  for  a  large-scale  revival  of  the  nondelegation  doctrine;  and  if  the 
doctrine is to be used in the most extreme cases, ATA was not such a case. 

 
1. Cost. To say this is not to deny that the case had its complexities, or to 
urge that it would be impossible to imagine an opinion coming out the other way 
on  either  issue.  At  a  minimum,  the  Court  might  plausibly  have  said  that  in 
deciding  what  margin  of  safety  is  “adequate,”  the  EPA  is  permitted  to  take 
account of costs, not merely benefits. In addition, the phrase “requisite to protect 
the public health” is not altogether transparent. Especially in view of the fact that 
expensive regulations can have harmful effects on public health – a fact of which 
Congress  was  aware  –  it  could  be  urged  that  whether  a  particular  regulation 
qualifies,  under  that  phrase,  as  “requisite”  is  a  function  of  cost,  not  merely 
benefit. A reasonable court might well be drawn to this interpretation, at least if 
it were seen as the only way of making sense, rather than nonsense, of the statute 
as a whole. Such an opinion would not have been beyond the pale. 

 
Nor  would  this  approach  entirely  lack  precedential  support.  In  the 
Benzene Case,60 the Court interpreted the Occupational Safety and Health Act in 
a way that would ensure against regulatory absolutism – not by requiring cost-
benefit balancing, but by saying, without textual support, that the agency could 
not  regulate  a  risk  not  shown  to  be  “significant.”  In  dissent,  Justice  Marshall, 
sounding very much like Justice Scalia in ATA, contended that conventional legal 
tools  could  not  justify  imposing  a  “significant  risk”  requirement,  which,  in 

                                                 
60 Industrial Union Department, AFL-CIO, v. API, 448 US 607 (1980). 

16 

 

 

Justice Marshall’s view, was a judicial fabrication.61  In defending its conclusion, 
and its somewhat irreverent approach to the statutory text, the Benzene plurality 
emphasized  that  the  government’s  approach  “would  give  OSHA  power  to 
impose enormous costs that might produce, little, if any, discernible benefit.”62 It 
would not have been a gigantic  stretch from this line of reasoning to a holding, 
in  ATA,  that  the  EPA  should  be  permitted  to  consider  whether  an  enormous 
outlay  of  expenditures  can  be  justified  by  the  benefits  received.  In  any  case  a 
number of lower court decisions have not stayed close to the statutory text where 
common sense seemed to require a measure of regulatory flexibility.63 

 
Nonetheless, the path that the Court chose was unquestionably the easier 
one,  because  it  fit  so  much  more  naturally  with  the  statutory  language.  To  this 
we might add  three further points. First, the pressure on the Court was greatly 
relieved  by  the  fact  that  in  the  implementation  process,  costs  could  indeed  be 
considered,  and  at  multiple  stages.  This  point  sharply  distinguished  the  CAA 
from  OSHA,  which  lacks  any  comparable  implementation  stage.64  If  Justice 
Scalia’s  majority  opinion  in  ATA  is  close  to  Justice  Marshall’s  dissenting  one  in 
the  Benzene  Case,  it  might  be  partly  because  the  consequences  of  a  cost-blind 
approach to standard-setting are not quite what they seem – as Justice Scalia  was 
undoubtedly aware. Second, the “requisite to protect the public health” language 
might  well  be  regarded  as  imposing  a  significant  risk  requirement.  The  Court 
said little on this issue, a gap to which I will turn in due course; but even on the 
Court’s view, the CAA does not require the EPA to remove all risks, regardless 
of  their  magnitude.  For  this  reason  the  EPA’s  position  in  ATA  was  far  more 
cautious,  and  modest,  than  OSHA’s  more  draconian  position  in  the  Benzene 
Case.  Third,  textualism  might  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  “penalty  default,” 
imposing  a  burden  on  Congress,  and  on  relevant  interest  groups,  to  provide  a 
corrective for any problems introduced by a cost-blind approach. There is room 
for  reasonable  debate  about  whether  Congress  is  sufficiently  responsive  to 
penalty  defaults  of  this  kind.  But  some  comfort  can  come  from  the  fact  that  a 
legislative  corrective    is  certainly  possible,  and  has  in  fact  been  provided  in  a 
somewhat analogous context.65 

                                                 
61 Id at 640 (Marshall, J., dissenting). 
62 Id. at 620. 
63 See, eg., State of Michigan v. EPA, supra. 
64  This  is  because  the  CAA  requires  states  to  produce  implementation  plans  to  bring  about 
compliance  with  federal  standards,  whereas  OSHA  regulations  are  directly  binding  on  the 
private sector. 
65 See 21 USC 376(b)((5)(B) (the Delaney Clause), as discussed in Public Citizen v. Young, 831 F2d 
1108 (DC Cir 1987). In 1996, Congress amended the Delaney Clause in various ways, softening its 

17 

 

 

2. Delegation. On the nondelegation issue, the Court’s opinion is much less 
satisfying.  The Court appears to have delivered a death blow to those who have 
sought to revive the nondelegation doctrine. Why, exactly, did the Court do this? 
The Court’s opinion is quite wooden on the point, attempting only to show that 
the  delegation  in  the  CAA  was  no  different  from  those  delegations  found 
acceptable  in  many  other  cases.  This  was  an  example  of  dullest  and  the  most 
unambitious form of analogical reasoning – the sort of thing recently associated 
with  Chief  Justice  Rehnquist,  or  even  former  Chief  Justice  Burger,  and  very 
different from what usually emerges from the Justice Scalia’s pen.  

 
Most strikingly, the Court made no effort to explain exactly why it was so 
willing  to  allow  Congress  to  grant  considerable  discretionary  authority  to  the 
EPA.  Nor  did  the  Court  explain  why  it  was  uninterested  in  reviving  the 
nondelegation doctrine in general. With respect to analogies, the Court basically 
skimmed  the  surface,  arguing,  plausibly  if  not  entirely  convincingly,  that  the 
delegation here was not evidently greater than the delegation in other cases. The 
Court  offered  exceedingly  little  in  the  way  of  detail.  It  would  not  have  been 
terribly  hard  to  distinguish  those  cases.  The  EPA,  for  example,  is  authorized  to 
cover a much larger portion of the American economy than was involved in the 
precedents,  and  it  would  be  at  least  plausible  to  say  that  its  discretion  was 
broader as well. To know whether this latter argument is convincing, it would be 
necessary to say much more about the meaning of the relevant provision of the 
Clean  Air  Act.  But  here  the  Court’s  efforts  were  thin  to  the  point  of  being 
comical.  The  repetition  of  statutory  terms  –  “requisite  to  protect  the  public 
health”  –  was  not  much  aided  by  the  Court’s  (repeated)  explanation  that  these 
terms meant “no less, but also no more” than necessary to protect the health of 
the public. 

 
We might say that with respect to the nondelegation doctrine, the Court’s 
opinion is remarkably shallow, in the sense that it lacks any theoretical ambition, 
but also remarkably wide, in the sense that it appears to dispose of a wide range 
of imaginable  nondelegation challenges.66  The Court has made it clear that the 
nondelegation doctrine will be used, if at all, only in the most extreme cases. But 

                                                                                                                                                 
absolutist  character.  See  21  USC  321  (d),  by  replacing  the  flat  ban  with  a  requirement  of  a 
“reasonable certainty of no harm,” defined in the legislative history to reflect a policy of reducing 
cancer risks in the exposed population to no more than 1-in-1-million additional lifetime risk. For 
discussion, see Robert Percival et al., Environmental Regulation 496 (3d ed. 2001). 
66  On  shallowness/depth  and  narrowness/breadth,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  One  Case  At  A  Time 
(199). 

18 

 

 

it has given little indication of why it is taking this approach. Is it possible to say 
what lies beneath the surface here? 

 
Some  clues  come  from  Justice  Scalia’s  separate  writing  on  the  topic.67 
Justice Scalia has objected to the nondelegation doctrine on the ground, not that 
it  lacks  constitutional  roots,  but  that  it  is  not  subject  to  principled  judicial 
enforcement.  The  line  between  permissible  and  prohibited  delegations  is 
inevitably  one  of  degree:  How  much  discretion  is  too  much  discretion?  Judicial 
efforts to answer that question are not susceptible to rule-bound judgments, and 
hence particular rulings would inevitably have the appearance, and perhaps the 
reality,  of  judicial  partisanship.  In  these  circumstances  a  judicially  enforcement 
nondelegation  doctrine  might  even  be  said  to  violate  that  very  doctrine’s 
aspiration  to  rule-bound  law.  A  judge  who  aspires  to  reduce  judicial  discretion 
will inevitably be skeptical about the nondelegation doctrine. 

 
I believe that these concerns help explain the Court’s surface-skimming in 
ATA—and also that the concerns are well-founded. These institutional problems 
are best combined with a point about the nature of the regulatory state. There is 
no  good  evidence  that  a  revival  of  the  nondelegation  doctrine  would  make 
constitutional government work better, from any point of view. In this light the 
case  for  reviving  the  doctrine  seems  weak  indeed.68  Indeed,  the  purposes 
underlying  the  doctrine  can  better  be  achieved  through  other  routes,  including 
substantive  reform,  the  hard  look  doctrine,  and  narrowly  targeted  “nondele-
gation canons.”69 

 
But all this leaves a nagging question: What does the Act mean? Here the 
Court’s answer is embarrassingly thin. The respondents urged that the statutory 
standard – “requisite to protect the public health” – could mean anything at all. 
To respond to their complaint, it would be necessary to explain how the standard 
creates ceilings and floors on agency action. I will return to the question in Part 
IV. 
 

                                                 
67 See Mistretta v. US, 488 US 361, 375 (1989) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).. 
68 See Cass R. Sunstein, supra note. 
69 See Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons, in Designing Democracy: What Constitutions Do 
(forthcoming 2001). 

19 

 

 

III. 

Fundamentalism, Semantics and Pragmatism 

 
ATA  produced  three  separate  opinions  of  considerable  interest.  Justice 
Thomas’  concurring  opinion  is  noteworthy  because  of  his  brief  remarks  on  the 
nondelegation  doctrine.  Justice  Stevens’  far  longer  concurrence  is  noteworthy 
because  of  the  “caveat”  he  seeks  to  add  to  the  majority’s  view.  Justice  Breyer’s 
opinion  is  the  most  important  of  all,  because  of  its  effort  to  make  sense  of  the 
regulatory scheme, and because of its attempt to provide some guidance for the 
future  of  risk  regulation.    Before  exploring  the  majority  opinion,  I  offer  a  brief 
outline and several comments here. 

 

A.  Fundamentalism 

 
Justice  Thomas  agreed  that  the  CAA  provided  “no  less  an  ‘intelligible 
principle’  than  a  host  of  other  directives  that  we  have  approved.”70  But  he 
objected  that  the  parties  had  provided  “barely  a  nod  to  the  text  of  the 
Constitution,”  which  does  not  speak  of  ‘intelligible  principles’”71    Instead,  he 
urged,  “it  speaks  in  much  simpler  terms:  All  legislative  powers  herein  granted 
shall  be  vested  in  a  Congress.’”  In  Justice  Thomas’  view,  some  statutes  might 
contain  “intelligible  principles”  but  still  involve  a  delegated  decision  whose 
significance    “is  simply  too  great  .  .  .  to  be  called  anything  other  than 
legislative.”72  For  this  reason,  Justice  Thomas  indicated  his  willingness  “to 
address  the  question  whether  our  delegation  jurisprudence  has  strayed  too  far 
from our Founders’ understanding of separation of powers.”73 

 
At  first  glance,  Justice  Thomas’  reasoning  seems  mysterious.  The 
requirement of an “intelligible principle” is many decades old.74 It would be truly 
astonishing if the Court were to abandon the requirement as an understanding of 
the  nondelegation  principle.  In  any  case  the  idea  that  “all  legislative  power”  is 
vested  in  a  Congress  is  hardly  self-interpreting;  the  question  is  what  this 
provision  means.  It  would  even  be  possible  to  read  the  constitutional 
background  to  suggest  that  Congress  can  delegate  such  legislative  power  as  it 
wishes.  If  this  conclusion  is  overdrawn—as  I  believe  that  it  is75—then  the 
question  becomes  when  some  amount  of  executive  discretion  becomes 
                                                 
70 121 S. Ct. at 919. 
71 Id. at 919-920. 
72 Id. at 920. 
73 Id. 
74 See J.W. Hampton, Jr. v. US, 276 US 394, 409 (1928). 
75 See Sunstein, supra note, for discussion. 

20 

 

 

 

“legislative”  in  nature.  The  requirement  of  an  intelligible  principle  is  simply  a 
means of answering that question.  

 
But  underneath  the  implausible  formalist  veneer,  Justice  Thomas  might 
well have a point. His key sentence is this: “I believe that there are cases in which 
the  principle  is  intelligible  and  yet  the  significance  of  the  delegated  decision  is 
simply too great for the decision to be called anything other than ‘legislative.’”76  
Perhaps  Justice  Thomas  is  suggesting  that  an  otherwise  acceptable  delegation 
would  be  objectionable  if  the  area  or  context  suggested  –  the  “significance”—
indicated  that  an  intelligible  principle  is  not  enough.  So  understood,  Justice 
Thomas’ view is not inconsistent with the majority’s suggestion “that the degree 
of agency discretion that is acceptable varies according to the scope of the power 
congressionally  conferred.”  On  this  view,  the  nondelegation  doctrine  is  not 
entirely without life. Where an agency is given the power to regulate much of the 
American economy, the statutory principle must be more intelligible than it must 
otherwise  be.  All  statutory  principles  must  be  intelligible,  but  some  must  be 
more intelligible than others. This is a perfectly reasonable suggestion. 

 

B.  Semantics 

In an opinion joined by Justice Souter, Justice Stevens urged that the Court 
should  admit  that  agency  rulemaking  authority  counts  as  “legislative  power,” 
but that it is not unconstitutional for that reason.77 If national ambient air quality 
standards had been issued by Congress, “everyone would agree that those rules 
would be the  product  of an exercise of ‘legislative power.’”78 In Justice Stevens’ 
view, an agency that makes rules, under an acceptable delegation, is also acting 
“legislatively.”  For  Justice  Stevens,  the  proper  way  to  analyze  the  case  is  to 
acknowledge that the agency acted legislatively, but to hold that the exercise of 
legislative  power  is  legitimate,  because  it  was  constrained  by  a  sufficiently 
intelligible principle. 

 
This seems to be a purely semantic debate, and nothing at all appears to 
turn  on  it.    Where  the  majority  would  say  that  legislative  power  had  not  been 
delegated, because an intelligible principle could be found, Justice Stevens would 
urge  that  the  delegation  of  legislative  power  was  acceptable,  because  an 
intelligible  principle  could be found. Justice Stevens was apparently writing for 

                                                 
76 121 S. Ct. at 920. 
77 Id. at 920. 
78 Id. at 921. 

21 

 

 

the sake of conceptual clarity. But it is unclear whether his approach counts as an 
improvement on that score. The Constitution vests legislative power in Congress, 
and  on  the  standard  view,  legislative  power  cannot  be  delegated.  In  any  event 
the executive has long had the power to make rules, and there is nothing odd in 
saying that rule-making, if confined by some principle, is an executive function if 
the  executive  is  making  rules.  True,  the  same  exercise  would  be  legislative  if 
Congress  were  carrying  it  out,  a  point  that  suggests  that  whether  an  activity 
counts  as  “legislative”  or  “executive”  depends,  in  large  part,  on  whether  the 
Congress  or  the  executive  is  acting.  But where is the oddity in that conclusion? 
The Court’s approach seems as sensible as that offered by Justice Stevens. 

 
 
A good way to make progress would be to say that words, not excluding 
the  word  “legislative,”  have  meanings  connected  with,  and  not  divorced  from, 
the  purpose  for  which  they  are  used.  There  is  nothing  odd  in  saying  that 
rulemaking  is  “executive,”  when  sufficiently  cabined  by  statutory  standards, 
when undertaken by the executive branch – but that the same sorts of decisions, 
if made by Congress, would be “legislative” when done by Congress. It seems to 
me  that  Justice  Stevens  has  been  lead  astray  by  the  ordinary  language  use  of 
“legislative.” Even if agency rulemaking is legislative in one, perfectly intelligible 
sense,  it  is  not  legislative,  in  the  sense  of  Article  I,  section  1,  if  an  executive 
agency has engaged in it. 
 

C. Pragmatism 

 
In  its  own  way,  Justice  Breyer’s  opinion  was  the  most  remarkable  in  the 
case  –  an  intriguing  comparison  to  Justice  Scalia’s    majority  opinion,  indeed  an 
opinion  that  might  easily  be  imagined  as  a  majority  opinion  of  a  very  different 
sort. Justice Breyer’s separate opinion seemed to have two goals. The first was to 
show  that  the  legislative  history  of  the  Act,  and  not  merely  its  text,  strongly 
supported the majority’s conclusion.79 This part of Justice Breyer’s opinion is part 
of  a  longstanding  disagreement  between  Justice  Scalia  and  Justice  Breyer,80  and 
raises no novel problems.  

 
Justice  Breyer’s  second  goal  was  to  endorse  a  principle  of  interpretation, 
one that would allow agencies to consider costs in the face of statutory silence or 
ambiguity. “In order better to achieve regulatory goals—for example, to allocate 

                                                 
79 Id. at 922. 
80 Compare Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (1996) with Stephen Breyer, On the Uses of 
Legislative History in Interpreting Statutes, 65 So. Cal. L. Rev. 845 (1992). 

22 

 

 

resources  so  that  they  save  more  lives  or  produce  a  cleaner  environment—
regulators  must  often  take  account  of  all  of  a  proposed  regulation’s  adverse 
effects,  at  least  where  those  adverse  effects  clearly  threaten  serious  and 
disproportionate public harm. Hence, I believe that, other things being equal, we 
should  read  silences  or  ambiguities  in  the  language  of  regulatory  statutes  as 
permitting,  not  forbidding,  this  type  of  rational  regulation.”81  The  reason  that 
EPA  could  not  consider  costs  here  was  that  other  things  were  not  “equal”;  the 
statutory structure and history showed “a congressional decision not to delegate 
to  the  agency  the  legal  authority  to  consider  economic  costs  of  compliance.”82 
This is a centrally important cautionary note, one to which I will return. 

 
Justice Breyer’s third goal was to establish the rationality of the legislative 
scheme as he understood it. He wanted to show that the “natural” construction 
made  sense,  not  nonsense.  His  overall  suggestion  was  that  as  construed,  the 
statute would, at pertinent phases, allow consideration of costs after all, and that 
the EPA would be permitted to construe the statute reasonably, by making it less 
draconian  than  it  appeared.  To  this  end  he  offered  four  points,  each  of 
considerable interest. 
 

1.  As  part  of  its  cost-blindness,  the  statute  was  designed  not  to  take 
pollution  control  technology  as  given  but  to  force  technological 
innovation.  This  was  hardly  an  unrealistic  hope.83  In  fact  the  catalytic 
converter  was  developed  as  a  result  of  a  seemingly  draconian  statutory 
mandate.  And  because  the  statute  was  expressly  designed  to  force 
technological  innovation,  regulatory  efforts  to  calculate  the  costs  of 
compliance were “both less important and more difficult”84 -- because the 
relevant  calculations  would  be  based  on  speculation  about  the  cost  of 
unknown  future  technologies.  These  calculations  “can  breed  time-
consuming  and  potentially  unresolvable  agreements  about  the  accuracy 
and  significance  of  cost  estimates.”85  In  these  circumstances,  cost-benefit 
analysis might itself fail cost-benefit analysis. 

2.  Even as interpreted by the Court, the Act allows cost and feasibility to be 
considered.86 These factors are relevant, for example, to states deciding on 
the  mix  of  control  devices  used  to  achieve  compliance;  and  those facing 

                                                 
81 Id. at 921.  
82 Id. at 921-22. 
83 Id. at 922. 
84 Id.at 923. 
85 Id. 
86 Id. 

23 

 

 

economic  hardship  can  seek  an  exemption  from  state  requirements. The 
EPA  is  also  permitted  to  consider  costs,  not  in  setting  standards,  but  in 
setting  deadlines  for  attainment.    Congress  is  also  available  to  extend 
deadlines if necessary.87 The relevant provision of the CAA might be cost-
blind; but this is not at all true for the statute as a whole. 

3.  The EPA is not required to “eliminate every health risk, however slight, 
at any economic cost, however great.” Standards “requisite to protect the 
public  health”  need  not  produce  “a  world  that  is  free  of  all  risk—an 
impossible and undesirable objective.”88 In fact the terms “requisite” and 
“public  health”  should  be  understood  in  context.  It  is  relevant  for  the 
EPA to consider “the public’s ordinary tolerance of the particular health 
risk in the particular context at issue.” Hence EPA is allowed to produce a 
kind  of  common  law  of  “acceptable”  risks,  rather  than  eliminating  all 
risks as such. In deciding what is “requisite to protect the public health,” 
the  EPA  is  allowed  “to  consider  the  severity  of  a  pollutant’s  adverse 
health effects, the number of those likely to be affected, the distribution of 
the  adverse  effects,  and  the  uncertainties  surrounding  each  estimate.”89 
On this count, Justice Breyer is saying more cautious than, but something 
not  terribly  far  from,  what  was  said  by  the court of appeals. In his own 
way,  Justice  Breyer  was  urging  the  EPA  to  develop  standards  for 
separating acceptable from unacceptable risks. 

4.  The  EPA  is  allowed  to  “consider  whether  a  proposed  rule  promotes 
safety overall.”90 If a rule causes “more harm to health than it prevents,” 
it  is  unlawful.91  In  this  wage  Justice  Breyer  endorsed  the  lower  court’s 
conclusion  that  the  EPA  is  required  to  consider  the  health  benefits  of 
ground-level ozone, not just the health risks. 

 
What  is  most  important  about  Justice  Breyer’s  opinion  is  the  effort  not 
merely to read the statutory terms, but also to make sense out of them – to show 
that the statutory framework is not as silly, or absurd, as it might seem to be in 
the  abstract.  There  is  a  noteworthy  contrast  here  between  Justice  Scalia’s 
approach,  for  the  majority,  and  the  approach  favored  by  Justice  Breyer.92  And 

                                                 
87 Id.  
88 Id. at 924. 
89 Id. 
90 Id. 
91 Id. 
92  I  will  not  discuss  here  the  more  general  jurisprudential  issues  raised  by  formalism  and 
pragmatism  in  statutory  interpretation.  A  large  issue  is  empirical  –  whether  one  or  another 
approach can be defended on pragmatic grounds. If judges are undistinguished, formalism starts 

24 

 

 

 

 

because  it  pays  such  attention  to  the  pragmatic  issues,  Justice  Breyer’s  opinion 
might well prove to be the more important for the future. Each of the four points 
just  mentioned  has  significant  implications  for  EPA  decisions  and  indeed  for 
regulation more generally, as we shall shortly see. 
 

III. 

Implications—and the Future 

ATA  leaves  many  issues  open. For the future, the three crucial questions 
involve (a) the place of the “cost-benefit default principles,” which have played a 
large role in the last two decades of federal administrative law; (b) the status of 
the  nondelegation  doctrine;  and  (c)  the  legal  standards  governing  ambient  air 
quality standards, including the very standards involved in ATA. I discuss these 
issues in sequence. 
 

A. Cost-Benefit Default Principles 

The  Court  was  well-aware  that  a  number  of  lower  court  decisions  have 
established a new interpretive principle: Where statutes are ambiguous, agencies 
are  allowed  to  consider  costs.93  What  is  the  status  of  this  principle,  after  ATA? 
While  things  are  not  entirely  clear,  the  best  answer  is  that  the  principle  is 
unaffected. In fact Justice Breyer went out of his way to endorse the basic idea.94 
Justice Breyer was careful to say that courts “should read silences or ambiguities 
in  the  language  of  regulatory  statutes”  to  permit  consideration  of  “all  of  a 
proposed regulation’s adverse effects,” at least where those effects would clearly 
be serious and disproportionate.”95 For its part, the majority specifically referred 
to the cases establishing the principle and worked to distinguish them from the 
case at hand: “None of the sections of the CAA in which the District of Columbia 
Circuit has found authority for the EPA to consider costs shares [this provision’s] 
prominence  in  the  overall  statutory  scheme.”96  Thus  the  Court  was  at  pains  to 
cite,  with  apparent  approval,  the  key  cases  creating  the  basic  principle,  and 
appeared to be saying that the EPA might well be permitted to consider costs if 
the statute did not expressly forbid it from doing so.  
 

                                                                                                                                                 
to look a lot better; hence the best defenses of formalism are pragmatic in character. For the best 
discussion, see Adrian Vermeule, Interpretive Choice, NYU L Rev (2000); in the same spirit, see 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically?, U Chi L Rev (1999). 
93 See, e.g., Michigan v. EPA, 213 F.3d 663, 678-79 (DC Cir 2000). 
94 121 S Ct at 921. 
95 Id.  
96 121 S Ct at 910 n. 1. 

25 

 

 

On  the  other  hand, Justice Breyer was clearly concerned that the Court’s 
approach would override the cost-benefit default principle.97 Justice Breyer urges 
that  "In  order  better  to  achieve  regulatory  goals—for  example,  to  allocate 
resources  so  that  they  save  more  lives  or  produce  a  cleaner  environment—
regulators  must  often  take  account  of  all  of  a  proposed  regulation's  adverse 
effects, at least where those effects clearly threaten serious and disproportionate 
public  harm.  Hence,  I  believe  that,  other  things  being  equal,  we  should  read 
silences  or  ambiguities in the language of regulatory statutes as permitting, not 
forbidding,  this  type  of  rational  regulation."98    This  point  was  meant  as  a 
rejoinder  to  the  majority,  which  Justice  Breyer  took  to  be  saying  that  to  allow 
costs  to  be  considered,  Congress  was  required  to  be  “clear.”  But at first glance, 
Justice Breyer’s concern seems baseless. The Court was saying only that in view 
of  the  clarity  of  the  main  provision  of  the  Clean  Air  Act,  judges  would  be 
reluctant  to  find  permission  to  consider  costs  elsewhere,  since  Congress  “does 
not  alter  the  fundamental  details  of  a  regulatory  scheme  in  vague  terms  or 
ancillary  provisions—it  does  not,  one  might  say,  hide  elephants  in  mouse-
holes.”99  This  is  a  standard  approach  to  statutory  interpretation.  It  does  not 
suggest  that  where  a  statute’s  “fundamental  details”  are  vague,  they  will  be 
interpreted to forbid consideration of cost. 
 

But it would not be impossible to read the Court's opinion a bit more broadly. 
Recall  that  in  concluding    that  EPA  need  not  consider  costs  in  issuing  national 
standards,  the  Court  emphasized  that  some  provisions  of  the  CAA  explicitly 
refer  to  costs,  and  explicitly  require  them  to  be  taken  into  account.  Here  the 
Court  was  using  the  canon  of  construction,  “expressio  unius  est  exclusio 
alterius”: the expression of one thing is the exclusion of another. In the particular 
context  of  environmental  statutes,  the  “expressio  unius”  canon  could  have 
explosive implications. When Congress does not explicitly refer to costs, agencies 
may not consider them, and for one simple reason: Congress often does explicitly 
refer  to  costs.  If  the  canon  is  to  govern  the  future,  the  cost-benefit  default 
principles are in some trouble. 

 

There is a further point. The Court seems to suggest that a statute should 
not  be  taken  to  confer  broad  discretionary  authority  on  agencies:  “We  find  it 
implausible  that  Congress  would  give  to  the  EPA  through  these  modest  words 
the power to determine whether implementation costs should moderate national 

                                                 
97 121 S. Ct. at 921. 
98 Id. at 910 
99 Id.  

26 

 

 

air quality standards.”100 To support the view that ATA is best taken to disallow 
agencies to interpret ambiguous statutes to allow consideration of costs, it would 
be  necessary  to  make  a  simple,  two-step  argument.  First:  Statutes  should  be 
construed  so  as  to  give  agencies less rather than more in the way of discretion. 
Second:  A construction of a statute that would allow agencies to decide whether 
to consider costs significantly increases agency discretion. Now the claim here is 
not that a statute requiring cost-benefit analysis is itself disfavored on delegation 
grounds.  The  claim  is  instead  that  an  interpretation  should  be  disfavored if the 
consequence  of  the  interpretation  would  be  to  authorize  the  agency  to  decide 
whether  to  engage  in  cost-benefit  balancing.  If  this  claim  is  accepted,  then  the 
default rule in favor of allowing agencies to consider costs stands as repudiated.  

 
But  it  is  most  unlikely  that  the  Court  would  accept these lines of argument. 
The “expressio unius” canon can be a useful guide to statutory construction, and 
the more natural, cost-blind reading of “public health” is certainly supported by 
the  fact  that  some  provisions  of  the  CAA  make  explicit  reference  to  costs.  But 
here as elsewhere, the “expressio unius” idea should be taken with many grains 
of  salt.  If  Congress  has  not,  under  some  ambiguous  statutory  term,  referred  to 
costs,  it  will  often  be  because  Congress,  as  an  institution,  has  not  resolved  the 
question  whether  costs  should  be  considered.  And  if  this  is  so,  the  agency  is 
entitled to consider costs if it chooses.101 The fact that Congress explicitly refers to 
costs under other provisions is not a good indication that, under an ambiguous 
text, costs are statutorily irrelevant.  This would be an extravagant and therefore 
implausible inference. The use of the “expressio unius” approach in ATA is best 
taken as a  sensible way  of fortifying the most natural interpretation, and not at 
all as a way of urging that explicit references to cost, in some provisions, means 
that costs may not be considered under ambiguous provisions. 

 

What  about  concerns  about  agency  discretion?  Agencies  are  typically 
allowed to interpret statutory ambiguities,102 and in countless cases in which that 
principle  is  invoked,  the  agency  exercises  a  great  deal  of  discretion  over  basic 
issues of policy and principle.103 To allow an agency to decide to consider costs is 
not to allow it to exercise more discretion than it does in numerous cases. Where 
the  statute  is  unclear,  agencies  should  be  authorized  to  seek  “rational 
regulation”; and nothing in ATA suggests otherwise. This is especially so in light 
                                                 
100 Id.  
101 See Chevron v. NRDC, 47 US 837 (1984); see also note supra. 
102 See Chevron v. NRDC, 47 US 837 (1984).. 
103  See,  e.g.,  id.;  Babbitt  v.  Sweet  Home  Chapter,  515  US  687  (1995);  Young  v.  Community 
Nutrition Institute, 476 US 974 (1986) 

27 

 

 

 

of the fact, emphasized by both the Court104 and Justice Breyer,105 that the Clean 
Air Act allows EPA to consider costs at numerous stages in the implementation 
process. I conclude that ATA is best taken not to question the cost-benefit default 
principle, and indeed that the most reasonable reading of the opinion is that the 
Court has explicitly embraced that principle. 

B. Nondelegation Again? Nondelegation Ever? 

 
The Court’s nondelegation ruling seems to be a kind of return to normalcy 
—as  an  effort  to  place  the  doctrine  where  it  has  been  since  1935:  In  the 
constitutional coffin. This is a reasonable reading of the opinion, with the proviso 
that  the  doctrine  remains  available,  now  as  before,  for  the  extreme  cases.  What 
makes  a  case  extreme?  Apparently  an  extreme  case  would  be  one  in  which  the 
agency has far more discretion than does the EPA under the “requisite to protect 
the  public  health”  language.  Cases  of  that  sort  are,  by  the  logic  of  the  Court’s 
opinion, very few and far between. Schechter Poultry106 remains good law, and the 
Court  was  careful  to  say  that  when  the  area  of  agency  authority  is  very  broad,  
the statutory principle will certainly have to be intelligible.  But the Court’s basic 
message  was  that  its  own  precedents  suggest  that  almost  all  nondelegation 
challenges will be unavailing—and indeed that a mere repetition of any statutory 
standard will be a sufficient response. 

 
1.  An  unusual 

line  of  cases.  In  one  sense,  however,  the  Court’s 
nondelegation ruling was no mere a return to normalcy, and for a simple reason: 
It  places  some  longstanding  doctrine  in  disarray.  In  a  series  of  cases,  of  which 
ATA was the culmination, the court of appeals for the District of Columbia circuit 
has held that a narrowing construction by an agency will be a sufficient and necessary 
condition for saving an otherwise objectionable delegation of authority.107 The doctrine 
originated in a challenge to the statute granting the President the authority to fix 
prices and wages.108 The relevant provisions appeared not to limit the President’s 
discretion – to allow the President to set prices and wages however he chooses. 
In upholding the statute against constitutional attack, the court said not only that 
Congress  had  set  out  an  intelligible  principle,  but  also  that  the  executive  was 

                                                 
104 121 S Ct at 910. 
105 121 S. Ct. at 921. 
106 ALA Schechter Poultry Corp. v. US, 295 US 495 (1935). 
107  Amalgamated  Meat  Cutters  v.  Connally,  337  F  Supp  737  (DDC  1971);  International  Union, 
UAW  v.  OSHA,  938  F.2d  1310  (DC  Cir  1991);  International  Union,  UAW  v.  OSHA,  37  F3d  605 
(DC Cir 1994). 
108 Amalgamated Meat Cutters v. Connally, 337 F. Supp. 737 (DDC 1971). 

28 

 

 

obliged to come up with “subsidiary” principles to cabin its own discretion. This 
part  of  the  Court’s  opinion  owed  its  origins  to  some  imaginative  writing  from 
Kenneth  Culp  Davis.109  The  requirement  of  “subsidiary”  principles  seemed 
important to the decision, but it need not be seen as indispensable to it. It would 
be  possible  to  read  the  relevant  statute,  in  its  context,  as  sharply  limiting 
executive discretion, and thus to uphold it without relying at all on the need for a 
narrowing construction by the agency.110 

 
But  the  basic  idea  was  significantly  extended  in  an  important  case 
involving  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Act.111  The  relevant  provision 
authorized the agency to set standards “reasonably necessary or appropriate” to 
provide safe and healthful places of employment.112 But what does this mean? Is 
this an open-ended delegation of authority? Would it be sufficient to say that the 
statute  told  the  agency  to  do  no  more,  and  no  less,  than  was  “reasonably 
necessary or appropriate”? The court of appeals did not think that that would be 
sufficient. It was concerned that the statutory terms could mean any number of 
things.  It  could  mean,  for  example,  that  OSHA  should  engage  in  cost-benefit 
analysis; perhaps a standard is not “reasonably necessary or appropriate” unless 
the  benefits  justified  the  costs.  Or  it  could  mean  that  OSHA  was  supposed  to 
regulate all “significant risks” to a maximally protective point, subject perhaps to 
a  constraint  that  the  regulation  be  “feasible”  for  industry.  Or  it  could  mean 
something else. Because of the statutory term’s apparent plasticity, the court was 
obviously  tempted  to  strike  down  the  statute  on  nondelegation  grounds.  But 
instead of  doing  so, the court  remanded the case to OSHA, concluding that the 
agency  could  save  the  statute  with  a  narrowing  construction.  On  remand,  the 
agency  generated  what  the  court  found—barely—to  be  a  sufficient  response.113 
According  to  the  agency,  the  statute  required  it  to  regulate  only  “significant 
risks,”  and  only  to  the  point  of  “feasibility,”  and  within  those  constraints  the 
agency  was  required  to  select  the  standard  that  would  be  most  protective  of 
workers.  The  court  said  that  this  was  enough  to  satisfy  the  constitutional 
concern. 

 

                                                 
109 See Kenneth Culp Davis, A New Approach to Delegation, 36 U Chi L. Rev 713 (1969). 
110 In brief: The wage and price freeze was a response to the perception that the nation was in the 
midst of “cost-;push” inflation. That was the statutory background. If that is what the statute was 
about, then the President could not play favorites, or reward his friends and punish his enemies. I 
say a bit more on this issue below. 
111 International Union, UAW v. OSHA, 928 F2d 1310 (DC Cir 1991). 
112 29 USC 652 (8) 
113 International Union, UAW v. OSHA, 37 F3d 605 (DC Cir 1994). 

29 

 

 

Notwithstanding the Supreme Court’s ruling in ATA, the approach of the 
court  of  appeals  is  not  impossible  to  understand.  If  we  are  concerned  about  an 
absence of accountability, and also about values associated with the rule of law, a 
narrowing  construction  at  the  agency  level  can  do  a  great  deal  of  importance. 
Such  a  construction  can  expose  the  agency’s  standard  to  public  oversight  and 
review;  it  increases  transparency  and  to  that  extent  accountability.  And  by 
ensuring  that  agency  action  will  be  undertaken  pursuant  to  a  clear  standard,  a 
narrow  construction  can  go  a  long  way  toward  alleviating  the  concern  of 
arbitrary, unpredictable agency action, treating the similarly situated differently. 
But  we  should  be  careful  not  to  say  that  the purposes of the nondelegation are 
the doctrine itself, or to dissociate the doctrine from Article I, its legal source. At 
most,  a  narrowing  construction  can  be  helpful  when  the  Court  is  otherwise  in 
equipoise. The nondelegation concern is not eliminated by such a construction. 

 
This is basically the Court’s response in ATA.114 And it is evident that after 
ATA, the court of appeals’ approach is entirely unacceptable. The Supreme Court 
has  made  clear  that  a  narrowing  interpretation  by  the  agency  cannot  save  an 
otherwise objectionable delegation.  And in the end the Court’s reasoning makes 
perfect  sense.  If  the  problem  is  that  Congress  has  failed  to  lay  down  standards 
for  agencies  to  follow,  how  can  the  agency’s  own  standards  resolve  that 
problem? The question seems all the harder to answer in light of the fact that the 
source of the nondelegation doctrine is Article I, section 1, which vests legislature 
power  in  a  “Congress  of  the  United  States.”  The  purpose  of  the  nondelegation 
doctrine, it would seem, is to require Congress to legislate. Agency narrowing is 
neither here nor there. 

 
2. The line revisited—and OSHA’s fate. How, then, should the now-rejected 
court of appeals decisions  be understood? Might the Court have (inadvertently?) 
given a new boost to the nondelegation doctrine, by suggesting that a narrowing 
construction  cannot  be  helpful?  These  questions  are  not  simple  to  answer.  The 
case  of  freezing  wages  and  prices  is  the  easier  to  handle.  To  be  sure,  Congress 
did not give clear standards in the text of the statute. But statutory terms receive 
meaning  from  context,  and  the  context  behind  the  Act  suggested  a  desire  to 
protect  the  nation  from  a  certain  kind  of  inflationary  pressure,  captured  in  the 
notion  of  “cost-push  inflation,”  in  accordance  of  which  unions  and  employers 
create a kind of psychological spiral, one that needs to be broken through law.115  

                                                 
114 See 121 S. Ct. at 111. 
115 See Stephen Breyer and Richard B. Stewart, Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 80-83 
(2d ed. 1985). 

30 

 

 

The  statute  itself  did  not  refer  to  this  theory,  but  it  is  clear,  from  context,  that 
Congress  did  not  seek  to  give  the  President  the  authority  to  freeze  prices  and 
wages  in  a  way  that  involved  political  favoritism.  If  the  statute  should  be 
interpreted  so  as  to  avoid  the  constitutional  difficulty,  it  would  not  be  an 
intolerable stretch to say that any executive action should be reviewed with the 
particular  context  in  mind—and  hence  that  statutory  purpose  sharply  limited 
presidential  discretion.  Perhaps  it  will  be  responded  that  Congress  should  be 
required  to  say  all  this  clearly  in  the  statutory  text  itself.  But  would  much  be 
gained by requiring this step? This is far from obvious. 

 
But  the  contested  provision  of  OSHA  is  much  harder.  The  phrase 
“reasonably  necessary  or  appropriate”  seems,  on  its  face,  to  leave  everything 
open. To be sure, the phrase might at first appear similar to the standard that the 
Court  found  sufficient  in  ATA.  But  there  is  a  big  difference.  In  ATA,  the  Court 
held,  immediately  before  upholding  the  statute  against  nondelegation  attack, 
that the statute required a “health only” determination, and that it did not allow 
consideration  of  costs.116  The  ATA  Court  held  the  statute  constitutional  in  part 
because  Congress  was  clear  on  this  point;  Congress  itself  decided    that  costs 
would not count, and the agency was not permitted to create the legal standard 
out of thin air. It seems to follow that if a statute itself requires consideration of 
costs, and hence a form of cost-benefit balancing, it would also be constitutional, 
notwithstanding  the high levels of residual discretion that would remain. What 
makes the relevant provision of OSHA much harder is that it seems to give the 
agency  discretion  to  decide  whether  the  statute  does  or  does  not  allow 
consideration  of  costs,  and  thus  to  decide  what  the  statutory  standard  is.  This 
was  Chief  Justice  Rehnquist’s  objection  to  another  provision  of  OSHA117—an 
objection  that  was  rejected  on  the  ground  that  that  provision  could  be 
authoritatively construed sharply to discipline the agency’s discretion.118 

 
Nothing  in  ATA,  in  short,  resolves  the  question  whether  a  court  should 
uphold  a  statute  that  leaves  the  agency  the  authority  to  constructs  its  most 
fundamental  meaning. Now it is important to be careful with this point. As we 
have  seen,  lower  courts  have  created  an  interpretive  principle  authorizing 
agencies  to  consider  costs  if  they  see  fit,  and  ATA  seems  to  approve  of  this 
                                                 
116 121 S. Ct. at 109-110. 
117  See  Industrial  Union  Department,  AFL-CIO  v.  API,  448  US  607,  624  (1980)  (Rehnquist,  J., 
concurring in the judgment) (objecting on nondelegation grounds to 29 USC 655 (b)(5)). 
118  See  id  at  611  (interpreting  provision  in  a  way  that  implicitly  rejects  the  nondelegation 
challenge); see also Whitman v. American Trucking Association, 121 S. Ct. at 911 (interpreting the 
Benzene Case as rejecting nondelegation challenge).  

31 

 

 

principle.119 It would be implausible to suggest that a statute is unconstitutional if 
it  allows  an  agency  to  decide  whether  or  not  to  consider  costs;  this  kind  of 
decision has been found acceptable in many contexts, and ATA cannot be taken 
to  say  that  the  underlying  statutes  are  now  unconstitutional.  After  ATA,  the 
appropriate  answer  to  the  constitutional  question  is  this:  Statutes  that  allow 
agencies  to  decide  whether  to  consider  costs  admittedly  confer  considerable 
discretion.  But  after  ATA,  this  is  the  further  thing  from  fatal.  The  rest  of  the 
relevant  statutes  typically  contains  real  limits  on  agency  discretion.  Even  if 
agencies  are  allowed  to  decide  whether  or  not  to  consider  costs,  they  do  not, 
under those statutes, have anything like a blank check. 

 
But OSHA’s “reasonably necessary or appropriate” language seems quite 
different on this count. In the abstract, that language allows the agency to choose 
the statutory standard. The significance of ATA is that if this conclusion is to be 
avoided, it cannot be for the reason invoked by the court of appeals. It must be 
because the statute is best construed to cabin agency discretion to some degree. 
We know, for example, that the statute bars measures that are unreasonable, or 
inappropriate, as means of achieving safe work places. In this way the statute can 
be  taken  to  require  cost-effectiveness,  and  also  to  require  the  agency  to  pursue 
the  end  of  worker  safety.  But  is  this  enough?  The  end  of  worker  safety  can  be 
pursued  in  multiple  ways.  To  be  sure,  the  constitutional  doubt  would  be 
removed,  under  ATA,  if  the  statute  were  construed  to  require  cost-benefit 
balancing.120  We can easily imagine a judicial opinion that would so construe the 
statute; perhaps a step is “reasonably necessary or appropriate” if and only if it 
survives balancing, all things considered. But the court of appeals was probably 
right  to  say  that  this  interpretation,  while  possible,  is  not  ordained  by  the 
statutory text. And it is because the interpretation is not ordained that the court 
remanded  the  case  to  the  EPA  for  an  authoritative  construction.  The  problem, 
after ATA, is that such a construction is, with respect to the nondelegation issue, 
neither here nor there. 

 
In  these  circumstances,  future  courts  have  only  three  options.  The  first 
would be a version of the route taken in ATA:  to point to other statutes giving 
agencies  broad  discretion  (such  as  the  “public  interest,  convenience,  and 
necessity”  standard  of  the  Federal  Communications  Commission)  and  to  urge 

                                                 
119 See below. 
120  I  have  suggested  above  that  a  cost-benefit  standard  by  itself  leaves  agencies  a  great  deal  of 
discretion, especially in the valuation of benefits. But under ATA, this degree of discretion, which 
is in fact quite standard, cannot possibly be taken to raise a serious constitutional problem. 

32 

 

 

that  the  disputed  provision  is  not  much  different.  The  problem  with  this 
approach is that it would be somewhat irresponsible without some effort to show 
how the agency is not permitted to do whatever it chooses. The second would be 
to  generate  an  interpretation  of  the  provision  that  adequately  cabins  agency 
discretion.  This  would  certainly  be  possible,  but  the  strategy  in  ATA—merely 
repeating the statutory language, with the added words “no less and no more”—
would  not  be  helpful.  The  third  would  be  to  strike  down  the  statute  on 
nondelegation grounds. It is ironic but true that this route may have been made 
more  rather  than  less  likely  as  a  result  of  the  Supreme  Court’s  rejection  of  the 
approach of the court of appeals. 

 
Should the court take this step? In general, I think that the ATA Court was 
entirely correct to suggest that the nondelegation doctrine deserve little place in 
modern  constitutional  law.  For  this  reason,  some  combination  of  the  first  and 
second  routes  might  be  best:  An  effort  to  construe  the  statute  to  impose  some 
limitations,  with  a  recognition  that  a  great  deal  of  discretion  is  constitutionally 
legitimate.  But  if  the  nondelegation  doctrine  deserves  any  place  at  all,  the 
“reasonably  necessary  or  appropriate”  language,  in  context,  would  not  be  the 
worst place for judicial invalidation.  
 

C. The Future of National Standards  
(with special reference to particulates and ozone) 

 
 
After ATA, a major question is how a plaintiff might be able to challenge a 
national standard, if costs cannot be considered and if the constitutional route is 
unavailable.  ATA  offers  little  guidance  here.  If  the  regulation  is  less  stringent 
than  is  “requisite  to  protect  the  public  health,”  with  an  “adequate  margin  of 
safety,” it will be unlawful. If the regulation is more stringent than is requisite, it 
will also be unlawful. In the easy cases, the lessons are clear. A regulation will be 
subject  to  challenge  if  it  allows  significant  adverse  health  effects,  at  least  if  the 
agency cannot reasonably explain that the adverse effects are insignificant.  If we 
accept  the  evidence  described  above,  it  would  therefore  be  reasonable  to  argue 
that  the  EPA  was  required,  and  not  merely  permitted,  to  produce  a  new 
regulation  for  particulates.  A  regulation  will  also  be  subject  to  challenge  if 
significant adverse effects cannot be expected at levels that the EPA forbids. On a 
reasonable reading of the evidence governing ozone, the new EPA regulation is 
unlawful for that reason.  
 

I will return to these issues below. There are three major possibilities, and 
each  of  them  would  be  entirely  reasonable.  In  the  end  I  will  urge  that  the 

33 

 

 

particulates rule should probably be upheld, but that the ozone standard should 
probably  be  remanded,  so  that  the  EPA  can  give  a  better,  more  quantitative 
explanation  of  why  it  chose  the  particular  regulatory  "points"  that  it  selected. 
This  judgment  is  tentative.  What  is  more  important  than  the  conclusion  is  an 
appreciation  of  the  grounds  on  which  the  three  possibilities  might  be  criticized 
and defended. 
 
 
1.  A  soft  look.  The  court  might  say  that  there  is  substantial  scientific 
evidence  to  support  the  view  that  both  pollutants  produce  significant  adverse 
health effects at currently permitted levels -- and hence the new controls are, in 
the administrator’s reasonable judgment, “requisite to protect the public health.” 
The statutory requirement of an “adequate margin of safety” might well be taken 
to support this view. As I have emphasized, the evidence supporting regulation 
of  ozone  seems a good deal weaker than the evidence supporting regulation of 
ozone, especially if we take into account the fact that ground-level ozone seems 
to  have  nontrivial  health  benefits.  But  perhaps  a  court  should  say  that  there  is 
much scientific uncertainty here, and that the EPA should be allowed to resolve 
the  doubts  as  it  sees  fit.  If  the  court  took  this  route,  it  would  be  following  the 
direction  established  in  the  Lead  Industries  case,  in  which  the  EPA  was  given  a 
great deal of room to maneuver.121 
 
There  are  several  advantages  to  this  approach,  especially  if  we  consider 
 
the institutional role of the courts. A serious problem with intense judicial review 
of agency action is that it creates delay—and hence ensures a bias in favor of the 
status  quo.122  It  is  exceptionally  easy  for  a  skillful  adequate  to  challenge  a 
national standard as either too high or too low. On the basis of EPA’s own data, 
an  environmental  group  would  have  had  a  quite  plausible  argument  that  the 
regulation of particulates was insufficiently stringent under the statute. In order 
to allow agencies room to maneuver in the face of scientific uncertainty, it would 
be  reasonable  to  say  that  on  the  basis  of  minimally  plausible  evidence,  courts 
should  simply  uphold  the  relevant  decisions.  It  is  a  special  virtue  of  this 
approach  that  the  Bush  Administration  would  be  permitted  to  come  to  a 
different  conclusion  from  the  Clinton  Administration,  and  vice-versa,  because 
different  judgments  of  value  could  lead  to  different  conclusions  about  how  to 
proceed in the face of ambiguous science. 
 

                                                 
121 See Lead Industries Association v. EPA, 647 F.2d 1130 (DC Cir 1980). 
122 See Jerry Mashaw and David Harsft, The Struggle for Auto Safety (1993). 

34 

 

 

2.  Evidentiary  review.  A  second  possibility,  hinted  at  above,  would  be  to 
 
invalidate  the  ozone  regulation  while  upholding  the  regulation  of  particulates. 
The simple claim here would be that on the evidence given, the new particulates 
standard was requisite to protect the public health – but the new ozone standard 
was  not,  especially  if  we  take  into  account  the  health  benefits  of  ground-level 
ozone.123  We  have  seen  the  possibility  that  all  things  considered,  the  regulation 
would increase rather than reduce, health problems.  
 

Even if this is overstated, Justice Breyer’s opinion rightly suggests that the 
EPA  is  not  supposed  to  remove  all  risks  from  the  air,  or  to  make  the  air  “risk-
free,”  and  that  the  EPA  should  take  account  of  context  to  compare  the  risk  at 
hand to risks that people face in ordinary life. It does appear that the statistical 
risks  from  low  levels  of  ozone  are  smaller  than  the  statistical  risks  that  people 
find acceptable in multiple domains. Particulates are very different on this count. 
Here the existing hazards do seem high, on  a plausible reading of the evidence. 
By  upholding  the  particulates  standard,  and  asking  the  EPA  to  explain  itself 
more  thoroughly  with  respect  to  ozone,  the  court  would  be  contributing  to  the 
development of a kind of common law of acceptable risks, of the sort that Justice 
Breyer seemed to be encouraging. 
 
 
The  approach  I  am  suggesting—upholding  the  particulates  standard  as 
requisite,  while  invalidating  the  ozone  standard  as  not  requisite—would 
certainly be reasonable.  The  principal objection would be institutional; it would 
involve  the  special  limitations  of  judicial    review.  The  evidence  shows  the 
possibility of nontrivial health gains from the ozone regulation, and in the face of 
scientific  uncertainty,  the  agency  should  be  permitted  to  make  whatever 
(reasonable)  policy  choices  it  likes.  Especially  in  view  of  the  risk  of  status  quo 
bias,  perhaps  the  court  should  refuse  to  invalidate  a  judgment  like  that  in  the 
ozone case, even if the judgment seems wrong. 
 
 
3. Requiring a clear standard. A third possibility would be to invalidate both 
regulations as arbitrary or as inadequately justified, not because the risks are too 
low, but because EPA did not explain on what grounds it chose these particular 
regulations,  rather  than  regulations  that  would  be  somewhat  more  strict  or 
somewhat more lenient. This would be the administrative law analogue of what 

                                                 
123 I am not attempting here to reach definitive conclusions about the scientific data. I am simply 
suggesting  how  a  reviewing  court  might  reasonably  respond  to  the  data  that  the  EPA  has 
compiled. 

35 

 

 

Judge  Williams  took  to be a constitutional requirement in  ATA.124 The Supreme 
Court’s  holding  that  the  nondelegation  doctrine  does  not  require  this  form  of 
specificity  says  nothing  about  whether  such  specificity  might  be  required  as  a 
matter of administrative law. If the EPA cannot explain, in concrete terms, why it 
chose  the  particular  levels  it  chose,  how  can  courts  know  that  the  agency’s 
decision was not arbitrary? 
 
 
In doctrinal terms, judicial invalidation on these grounds might take one 
of  two  routes.  First,  the  court  might  say  that  it  cannot  know  whether  the 
particular  level  chosen  is  “requisite  to  protect  the  public  health”  unless it has a 
clear  sense  of  why  the  EPA  reached  that  conclusion.  Without  numbers  and 
criteria, it is impossible to obtain any such sense. Second, the court might say that 
it  cannot  tell  whether  the  agency’s  action  is  arbitrary  or  capricious,  within  the 
meaning  of  the  Administrative  Procedure  Act,125  unless  the  EPA  has  given  a 
more  detailed  explanation  of  its  choice.  Either  of  these  conclusions  would  be 
relatively conventional, and neither would mark a huge departure from current 
law.  
 

But  there would be  a  genuine innovation here. Thus far, courts have not 
required  anything  like  a  quantitative  basis  for  health  and  safety  regulation. 
Sometimes  they  have  required  agencies  to  show  that  the  costs  are  not  grossly 
disproportionate to the benefits126; sometimes they have prohibited agencies from 
acting  when  it  seems  as  if  there  are  not  benefits  at  all.127  But  the  relevant 
decisions  have  been  more  qualitative  than  quantitative,  and  when  they  have 
been  quantitative,  the  overall  judgment  has  seemed  overwhelmingly  clear.128  It 
would be a significant step from these decisions to a holding that agencies must 
quantify  the  effects  of  pollutants  at  various  levels,  so  as  to  explain,  in  specific 
terms, why one level was chosen rather than another. 
 

Would the step be worthwhile? While I cannot discuss the issue in detail, I 
believe that it would be, at least for the ozone rule, where the evidence of harm is 
relatively thin. 129  Such a ruling would not impose an unacceptable informational 
burden on EPA. In fact EPA routinely gathers enough information to provide the 
necessary  explanation.  At  the  same  time,  such  a  requirement  would  provide  a 
                                                 
124 See supra. 
125 5 USC 706. 
126 Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F2d 1201 (5th Cir 1991). 
127 See Chemical Manufacturers Assn. v. EPA, 217 F.3d 861 (DC Cir 2000). 
128 See Corrosion Proof Fittings, at 1205-1211. 
129 For a detailed discussion, see Sunstein, supra note. 

36 

 

 

useful  spur  to  theagency,  one  that  would  also  produce  a  higher  degree  of 
rationality  andcoherence.  The  result  would  be  to  show  when,  and  why, 
environmental groupsor industry would be able to mount a successful challenge 
to an ambient airquality standard. 

 
In sum: I believe that on remand, the court should uphold the particulates 
standard,  on  the  ground  that  on  a  reasonable  view  of  the  evidence,  the  agency 
had  sufficient  basis  to  conclude  that  that  standard  was  “requisite to protect the 
public health,” even without an attempt to quantify. At the same time, the court 
should  remand  the  ozone  rule,  on  the  ground  that  the  EPA  has  not  given  an 
adequate explanation of why that rule is “requisite.” The court should encourage 
the EPA to be as quantitative as possible. And on remand, the EPA should take 
up  the  invitation,  attempting  in  the  process  to  give  a  clear  sense,  for  the  first 
time,  of  why  it  has  chosen  one  regulatory  “point”  rather  than  another.  But  my 
principal  goal  has  not  been  to  urge  any  particular  result,  which  will  obviously 
turn  on  close  engagement  with  the  record.  I  have  attempted  instead  to  give  a 
sense  of  the  arguments  that  are  available, post-ATA, and a general sense of the 
grounds on which one might choose among them. 

Conclusion 

 
The Court’s principal rulings in ATA represented a return to normalcy – a 
rejection of some imaginative suggestions about how to read both the Clean Air 
Act  and  the  Constitution.  The  Court  established,  quite  correctly  under  existing 
law,  that  national  standards  should  be  set  without  regard  to  cost,  and  that  the 
nondelegation doctrine has a small place in constitutional doctrine – or perhaps 
no place at all. 
 
At  the  same  time,  the  Court’s  unambitious,  lawyerly  opinion  leaves  a 
number  of  questions  unresolved.  There  is  some  ambiguity  in  the  case,  but  the 
opinion  is  best  taken  not  to  question,  but  on  the  contrary  to  endorse,  the  cost-
benefit  default  principles  developed  by  lower  courts.  And  while  the  Court 
showed no interest in the nondelegation doctrine, its rejection of the approach of 
the  lower  court  now  makes  it  impossible  to  invoke  an  agency’s  narrowing 
construction  to  support  an  otherwise  objectionable  delegation.  For  that  reason, 
the nondelegation doctrine is not quite dead. I have attempted to show that the 
little  life  that  remains  in  the  nondelegation  doctrine  might  well  support  a 
constitutional attack on the Occupational Safety and Health Act. 

 

 

37 

 

 

ATA  also  leaves  open  a  number  of  challenges  to  national  ambient  air 
quality standards, including the very standards at issue in the case. The principal 
challenges  would  involve  the  language  of  the  relevant  provision  of  the  CAA 
(“requisite”) and the arbitrary or capricious standard of the APA. On the basis of 
the  evidence  before  the  agency,  it  would  make  sense  for  a  court  to  uphold  the 
particulates  standard  as  having  been  reasonably  judged  “requisite”  while  also 
invalidating  the  ozone  standard  as  not  shown  to  qualify  as  such.  For  the  EPA 
itself,  it  would  certainly  make  sense  to  move  in  the  direction  of  greater 
quantification,  in  which  national  standards  are  issued  only  after  an  effort  to 
specify  the  expected  benefits,  to  compare  them  with  the  expected  benefits  of 
alternatives, and in that way to produce clear standards for choosing appropriate 
levels  of  ambient  air  quality.  This  is  essentially  an  administrative  task,  not  one 
for the courts. But it would be entirely appropriate for courts to spur regulatory 
agencies  in  this  direction.  Justice  Breyer  wrote  only  for  himself,  and  his 
pragmatic,  consequence-centered  concurring  opinion  attracted  no  additional 
justices;  but  I  believe  that  it  will  exert  an  enduring  influence  on  the  law  of  risk 
regulation. If so, the ATA decision will stand not only as a responsible resolution 
of  the  principal  questions  in  the  case,  but  also  as  a  modest  step  toward  a  more 
sensible system of environmental protection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
Karl N. Llewellyn Dist. Service Prof. of Jurisprudence  
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL 60637 USA 
Phone: 773-702-9498 
E-mail: csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu  
 

38 

 

 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 

6. 
7. 
8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William  M.  Landes,  Copyright  Protection  of  Letters,  Diaries  and  Other 
Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Path  to  The  T. J.  Hooper:  The  Theory  and  History  of 
Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991). 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992). 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 
1992). 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992). 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992). 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 
1992). 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A 
Quantitative Study (August 1992). 
Alan  O.  Sykes,  The  Welfare  Economics  of  Immigration  Law:  A  Theoretical 
Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992). 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993). 
J.  Mark  Ramseyer,  Credibly  Committing  to  Efficiency  Wages:  Cotton  Spinning 
Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993). 
Richard  A.  Posner,  What  Do  Judges  and  Justices  Maximize?  (The  Same  Thing 
Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). 
Lucian  Arye  Bebchuk  and  Randal  C.  Picker,  Bankruptcy  Rules,  Managerial 
Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the 
Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 

18.  William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economics  of  Anticipatory 

Adjudication (September 1993). 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993). 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993). 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994). 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994). 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23.  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994). 
24. 

J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan 
(August 1994). 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994). 
Kenneth  W.  Dam,  Some  Economic  Considerations  in  the  Intellectual  Property 
Protection of Software (August 1994). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994). 

25. 
26. 

27. 

39 

 

 

28. 

29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 

36. 
37. 

38. 

46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 
1994). 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime 
Consumption (January 1995). 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995). 
Daniel  Kessler,  Thomas  Meites,  and  Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Explaining  Deviations 
from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for 
Litigation (March 1995). 
Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Das  Kapital:  Solvency  Regulation  of  the  American  Business 
Enterprise (April 1995). 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995). 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology 
(November 1995). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996). 
J.  Mark  Ramseyer  and  Eric  B.  Rasmusen,  Judicial  Independence  in  Civil  Law 
Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996). 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences 
Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996). 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996). 

41. 

39. 
40.  William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economics  of  Legal  Disputes 
Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996). 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  and  David  B.  Mustard,  Crime,  Deterrence,  and  Right-to-Carry 
Concealed Handguns (August 1996). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996). 
G.  Baird,  The  Hidden  Virtues  of  Chapter  11:  An  Overview  of  the  Law  and 
Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997). 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997). 

44. 
45.  William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay 

42. 
43. 

(March 1997). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997). 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: 
Evidence from California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997). 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to 
the Adoption of Norms (June 1997). 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through 
the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997).  
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  and  David  Schkade,  Assessing  Punitive 
Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997).  

51.  William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: 
A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998).  
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  A  Simple  Explanation  for  Why  Campaign  Expenditures  are 
Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998).  

52. 

40 

 

 

53.  

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 
71. 

73. 

Richard  A.  Posner,  Values  and  Consequences:  An  Introduction  to  Economic 
Analysis of Law (March 1998).  
Denise  DiPasquale  and  Edward  L.  Glaeser,  Incentives  and  Social  Capital:  Are 
Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998).  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to 
Law and Economics (May 1998). 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, 
Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998). 
Cass  R.  Sunstein  and  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit,  Second-Order  Decisions  (June 
1998). 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, 
Effects  on  Firm  Value,  and  the  Impact  of  Supreme  Court  and  Congressional 
Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998). 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998). 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and 
Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 
1998) 
David  A.  Weisbach,  Line  Drawing,  Doctrine,  and  Efficiency  in  the  Tax  Law 
(November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law 
(November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 
1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A 
“Third Way” (January 1999) 
Richard  A.  Posner,  An  Economic  Approach  to  the  Law  of  Evidence  (February 
1999) 
Yannis  Bakos,  Erik  Brynjolfsson,  Douglas  Lichtman,  Shared  Information  Goods 
(February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with 
Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan  M.  Karpoff,  John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  and  Graeme  Rankine,  Environmental 
Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 

72.  Matthew  D.  Adler  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  Rethinking  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  (April 

1999) 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  and  William  M.  Landes,  Multiple  Victim  Public  Shooting, 
Bombings,  and  Right-to-Carry  Concealed  Handgun  Laws:  Contrasting  Private 
and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  

41 

 

 

74. 

75. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 

81. 

82. 
83. 

84. 
85. 
86. 

87. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

Lisa  Bernstein,  The  Questionable  Empirical  Basis  of  Article  2’s  Incorporation 
Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again 
(May 1999) 

76.  William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz 

Collection (May 1999) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  David  Schkade,  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Do  People  Want 
Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a 
Function of Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial 
Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic 
than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 
Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special 
Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) 
Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 
Douglas  G.  Baird  and  Edward  R.  Morrison,  Optimal  Timing  and  Legal 
Decisionmaking:  The  Case  of  the  Liquidation  Decision  in  Bankruptcy  (October 
1999) 
Gertrud  M.  Fremling  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  Market  Signaling  of  Personal 
Characteristics (November 1999) 

Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and 
Satire (November 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on 
Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen  Eggleston,  Eric  A.  Posner,  and  Richard  Zeckhauser,  Simplicity  and 
Complexity in Contracts (January 2000)  
Douglas  G.  Baird  and  Robert  K.  Rasmussen,  Boyd’s  Legacy  and  Blackstone’s 
Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: 
The Severity Shift (February 2000) 
Richard  A.  Posner  and  Eric  B.  Rasmusen,  Creating  and  Enforcing  Norms,  with 
Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 

88.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When 

42 

 

 

97. 

98. 

99. 

Douglas  Lichtman,  Property  Rights  in  Emerging  Platform  Technologies  (April 
2000)  
Cass  R.  Sunstein  and  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit,  Solidarity in Consumption (May 
2000) 
David  A.  Weisbach,  An  Economic  Analysis  of  Anti-Tax  Avoidance  Laws  (May 
2000)  

100.  Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
101.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
102.  Robert  H.  Frank  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  and  Relative 

Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
103. 
104.  Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  
105. 

Jack  Goldsmith  and  Alan  Sykes,    The  Dormant  Commerce  Clause  and  the 
Internet (November 2000) 

106.  Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
107.  Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent 

108. 

System (November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International 
Relations:  A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 

109.  William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
110. 
111. 

Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul  Levmore,  Puzzling  Stock  Options  and  Compensation  Norms  (December 
2000) 

112.  Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious 

Liability, Class Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 

113.  William  M.  Landes,  Copyright,  Borrowed  Images  and  Appropriation  Art:    An 

Economic Approach (December 2000) 

114.  Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
115.  George  G.  Triantis,  Financial  Contract  Design  in  the  World  of  Venture  Capital 

(January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 

116. 
117.  Richard  Hynes  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  The  Law  and  Economics  of  Consumer 

Finance (February 2001) 

118.  Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) 

119. 

(March 2001) 
Eric  A.  Posner,  Controlling  Agencies  with  Cost-Benefit  Analysis:    A  Positive 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 

120.  Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital 

Age (April 2001) 

121.  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and 

the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 

122.  David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 

43 

 

 

123.  William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? 

124.  Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 

125.  Christopher  Avery,  Christine  Jolls,  Richard  A.  Posner,  and  Alvin  E.  Roth,  The 

Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)   

126.  Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 

(May 2001) 

2001) 

2001) 

127.  Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 

44 

 

