University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2001 

Cass R. Sunstein 

William Meadow 

Statistics, Not Experts 
Statistics, Not Experts 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein & William Meadow, "Statistics, Not Experts," 51 Duke Law Journal 629 (2001). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Essay

STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS

WILLIAM MEADOWt

CASS R. SUNSTEINtt

INTRODUCTION

Legal  proceedings,  both judicial  and  administrative,  frequently
raise questions about what people, including experts, ordinarily  do.' If

Copyright © 2001 by William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein.

%  Associate  Professor,  Pediatrics;  Associate  Director, Neonatology,  Assistant  Director,

MacLean Center for Clinical Medical Ethics, University of Chicago.

tt  Karl  N. Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  Law  School and

Department of Political Science, University of Chicago.

We  are  grateful  to  Gertrud  Fremling,  James  Heaton,  Anup  Malani,  John  Monahan.
and Richard  A. Posner  for valuable comments  on  an earlier draft. Laura  Warren  provided ex-
cellent research assistance and valuable comments.

1.  There is a dispute about the weight to be  given to ordinary  practice. Generally  in negli-
gence  actions,  custom  is  considered  informative  but  not  definitive.  RICHARD  A.  EPSTEIN,
CASES AND  MATERIALS ON TORTS  201-42 (7th ed. 2000);  PROSSER  AND  KEETON ON THE LAW
OFTORTS 193,195  (W. Page Keeton ed., 5th ed. 1984)  [hereinafter PROSSER  AND KEETON]:
[E]vidence  of the usual  and customary  conduct of others under similar circumstances
is normally  relevant and admissible,  as  an  indication  of what  the community  regards
as proper....  [A]s  a general rule, the fact that a thing is done in an unusual manner is
merely evidence  to  be considered  in determining negligence,  and is not in itself con-
clusive.

For the classic case,  see The  TJ. Hooper,  60 F.2d 737,740 (2d Cir. 1932)  (holding  that confor-
mity  to  custom  does  not  preclude  a  finding  of negligence).  See  also Trimarco  v.  Klein,  436
N.E.2d 502,  506  (N.Y.  1982)  (refusing  to  give  custom  in  shower  door  installation  conclusive
weight).

In many  jurisdictions,  however, medical  malpractice  is an  exception  to  the  rule, and
custom  defines reasonable  conduct  EPSTEIN,  supra, at  225  (identifying  the  role  of custom  in
medical  malpractice  cases  as  "conclusive  on  the  standard  of  medical  care");  PROSSER  AND
KEETON,  supra, at  189  ('T]he standard  of conduct  becomes  one  of 'good  medical  practice,'
which is to  say, what  is customary and  usual  in the  profession.");  see  eg.,  Burgess v. Superior
Court, 831  P2d 1197,  1206 (Cal. 1992) (holding that the legal  standard of care  required  for doc-
tors is  the standard  of practice  required by  their own  profession);  Cross  v.  Huttenlocher, 440
A.2d 952,  954 (Conn.  1981)  ("A physician  is under a  duty to his patient to  exercise that degree
of care, skill and diligence  which physicians  in  the same general  line of practice  ordinarily pos-

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 629 2001-2002

630 

DUKE LAW JOURNAL 

[Vol.  51:629

a  doctor is accused  of negligence,  for example,  it is  necessary  to know
about the customary  practice  of doctors.2  Of course,  negligence  judg-
ments depend, at least in part, on  an assessment  of ordinary practice.'
But  how  is  ordinary  practice  by  professionals  or  others  to  be  as-
sessed?

In  trials  and  on  appeal,  the basic  answer  is  that  the  assessment
comes  via  statements  from  expert  witnesses  who  describe  the  ordi-
nary practice.4  There can  be no  doubt  that experts  know  a  great  deal
about topics on  which  ordinary  people lack information.  But  experts,
no  less  than  other  people,  are  subject  to  predictable  biases.'  Their
judgments  about risk are affected by the same  heuristics and  biases to

sess  and exercise in similar cases."); Spensieri v.  Lasky, 723 N.E.2d 544, 548  (N.Y. 1999)  (stating
that  a physician  will  usually  be  insulated from  tort liability  where  there  is evidence  that  he  or
she conformed to  accepted  community standards  of practice);  Toth  v.  Cmty. Hosp.,  239 N.E.2d
368,  372  (N.Y. 1968)  ("The law  generally  permits  the  medical  profession  to  establish  its  own
standard  of care.");  MacPherson v. Ellis, 287 S.E.2d 892,896  (N.C. 1982)  (holding that  failure  to
adhere to customary practices  of informed consent  results in civil  liability); Boone v. Fisher, No.
13-96-001-CV, 2000 Tex. App. LEXIS 4244,  at *4  (Tex. App. June  22, 2000)  (stating  that  a trier
of fact,  when  determining whether a  doctor's actions  were reasonable,  must  be  advised of stan-
dard  medical  practice).  But  cf  McNeill  v.  United  States, 519  F. Supp. 283,  288  (D.S.C.  1981)
(cautioning  that customary medical  treatment  is not conclusive  on the  exercise  of care);  Vassos
v.  Roussalis,  625  P.2d  768,  772  (Wyo.  1981)  ("[Tlhe  skill,  diligence,  knowledge,  means  and
methods  are  not those  'ordinarily'  or  'generally'  or 'customarily'  exercised  or  applied, but  are
those that are 'reasonably'  exercised or applied.").

2-  See supra note 1.
3.  We build on existing law here, without intending to enter  into debates  about the extent
to which law  should simply incorporate,  or improve upon,  the existing standard  of care.  See su-
pra note 1;  see also, e.g.,  Advincula  v.  United  Blood  Servs.,  678  N.E.2d  1009,  1027  (IlI.  1996)
(suggesting  that existing  custom is not  determinative);  Roach v.  Springfield  Clinic,  No.  73,394,
1992  Il. LEXIS 204,  at *33-*36  (Ill.  Dec.  4,  1992)  (same);  Darling  v.  Charleston  Cmty. Mem'l
Hosp., 211  N.E.2d 253, 257  (Il. 1965)  (same).  On  any view,  the customary  practice is  relevant,
and that is sufficient for our purposes  here.

4.  See supra note 1.
5.  See Hillel  Einhorn,  Expert Judgment: Some  Necessary Conditions and an Elample, in
JUDGMENT AND DECISION MAKING  324,  325  (Terry  Connolly et al.  eds.,  2d ed. 2000)  (discuss-
ing the decisional factors  and biases of expert judgment);  David  Faust & Jay Ziskin,  The Expert
Witness  in Psychology and Psychiatry, in JUDGMENT  AND  DECISION  MAKING,  supra, at  336,
341-44  (discussing  factors  that  limit  clinical  judgments);  Gary  Gaeth  & James  Shanteau,  Re-
ducing the Influence of Irrelevant Information on Experienced Decision Makers, in JUDGMENT
AND  DECISION MAKING,  supra, at 305,  306-16  (outlining empirical  evidence  of experts'  use of
irrelevant  information in  decisionmaking);  Amos Tversky  & Daniel Kahneman,  Judgment Un-
der Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in JUDGMENT UNDER  UNCERTAINTY:  HEURISTICS  AND
BIASES  3, 18  (Daniel Kahneman et  al. eds., 1982)  (presenting  the intuitive  bias of statistical  ex-
perts).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 630 2001-2002

2001]

STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS

which  most people  are  subject,  even  if  (and  this  is  a  disputed  ques-
tion) expertise tends  to reduce the most serious errors.6

To  correct  the  resulting  problems,  we  offer  a  simple  proposal:
The  legal  system  should  rely,  whenever  it can  and  far  more  than it
now does,  on  statistical data about  doctors'  performance  rather  than
on  the opinions  of experts  about  doctors'  performance.  For the first
time, it is becoming  possible  for law to  rely  on this  evidence,  for the
simple reason  that  it is becoming  increasingly  available.  If our  argu-
ment  is  convincing  in the  medical  context,  it  should  apply  in  many
other settings  in which  experts  are asked  to  testify  about negligence
or  deviations  from  ordinary  practices.  In  many  settings,  the fallible
opinions  of isolated  experts  should  be supplemented  or  replaced  by
statistical data.  Those opinions  should be seen as a  kind of crude sec-
ond-best, far inferior to the  data that it approximates.  A step  toward
reliance  on such  data  would  dramatically  increase  the  sense  and  ra-
tionality of tort law, and perhaps  other areas of law as well.

We are  hopeful  that the use of statistical  data will simplify  some
of the central issues  in litigation  and  reduce  the role  of strategic  be-
havior in the litigation  process. Battles  between  isolated  experts  will
be easier to mediate when there  is a large pool of evidence  on which
to draw. But .our larger  claim is that by using statistical data,  the legal
system will reach far more  accurate results. If the law is seeking to de-
termine the standard  of care, it should  not depend  on fallible  memo-
ries  and recollections  of local  experiences.  It should draw  instead  on
more global evidence  of the kind that is increasingly  available for use
in court and elsewhere.

6.  See  Chris  Guthrie  et  al.,  Inside the Judicial Mind, 86  CORNELL  L  REV.  777,781-811

(2001)  (discussing errors in risk-related judgments by judges).

7.  It should  be clear  that this Essay  is intended  as a  contribution  to  the  rapidly growing
work in what is sometimes  called behavioral  law and  economics. See,  e.g.,  Christine Jols et al,
A  Behavioral Approach to  Law and Economics, 50 STAN.  L  REV.  1471  (1998)  (proposing that
law and economics  analysis  can  be improved by  increased  attention  to patterns of actual  human
behavior).  Our proposal also is in line with recent work on the general value of using social sci-
ence in law. For a valuable  discussion of the increased  use of social  science evidence  in law, see
generally Laurens Walker & John Monahan, Social Frameworks: A Ness,  Use of Social Science in
Law, 73 VA. L. REV. 559 (1987).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 631 2001-2002

DUKE LAW JOURNAL

[Vol.  51:629

I.  EXCESSIVE  OPTIMISM  ABOUT RISKS

A.  In General

It is  now  well  known  that  most  normal  people  tend  to  be  "risk
optimists,"  in the particular  sense  that they  believe  themselves  to  be
relatively  insulated  from  risks  that  are faced  by others  who  are simi-
larly situated.!  This is one of the most robust findings in cognitive psy-
chology. For example,  ninety percent  of  drivers  believe  that they  are
safer than  most drivers  and less likely to be involved  in  a serious  acci-
dent.9  Most people  believe  that  they are  distinctly unlikely  to be  sub-
ject  to  various  risks,  such  as  cancer,  heart  disease,  and  divorce.'0  In
some  important  domains,  people  appear  not  only  to  believe  them-
selves  less  likely than  others  to fall  prey to  certain  risks,  but  also  to
underestimate  the  actual risk to which  they are subject."  With respect
to  automobile  accidents,  people  believe  that  the  danger  they  face  is
less than it is as  a matter  of statistical fact.  Smokers  appear  to know

8.  Christine  Jolls,  Behavioral  Economic  Analysis  of  Redistributive  Legal  Rules,  in
BEHAVIORAL  LAW  AND  ECONOMICS  288,  290-92  (Cass  R.  Sunstein ed.,  2000)  (discussing  ex-
cessive  optimism);  Neil  D.  Weinstein,  Unrealistic  Optimism  About Future  Life  Events,  39  J.
PERSONALITY  & SOC.  PSYCHOL. 806,807-12  (1980)  (discussing  individuals'  tendency  to believe
themselves to be less vulnerable  than  other people  to adverse events).

W.  Kip Viscusi,  in  his  article  Using  Warnings  to Extend  the  Boundaries  of Consumer
Sovereignty, 23  HARV.  J.L. &  PUB.  POL'Y  211  (2000),  offers  an  intriguing  qualification,  sug-
gesting that although  people  might believe  that  they are  less  subject  to certain  risks  than  most
other people,  they  also might  have  a statistically  accurate  understanding  of the  risks  to  which
they are subject. Id. at 227. In other words, they might  believe that they are less  likely  to have a
car accident than most people, but also have  an accurate sense  of the lifetime  risk  that they will
die in  a car  crash  (say,  1  in  1000).  Id. Viscusi  offers evidence  to support  this  hypothesis.  Id. at
216-17  (describing evidence  of accurate risk  assessments  of workers). But see  John Ayanian  &
Paul Cleary, Perceived Risks of Heart Disease and  Cancer Among  Cigarette Smokers, 281  JAMA
1019,  1020-21  (1999)  (suggesting an underestimate  of the  actual  risk  for  smokers); Jolls, supra,
at 291  (same in the context of car accidents). In any event,  resolving  this debate  is not necessary
for our  purposes. The  very possibility  of expert error  and overoptimism,  confirmed  by  the stud-
ies described in  this Essay,  is enough  to justify  reliance  on  statistics  rather  than  on isolated  ex-
perts.

9.  SHELLEY E. TAYLOR,  POSrIVE ILLUSIONS  10-11  (1989).
10.  Weinstein, supra note 8, at 810.
11.  See Jolls, supra note  8,  at 291  ("[P]eople  [underestimate]  their  own  probability  as  op-

posed to overestimating  the average person's probability.").

12.  See  Richard  Arnould  &  Henry  Grabowski,  Auto  Safety  Regulation:  An  Analysis  of
Market Failure, 12 BELL J. ECON.  27,34-35 (1981)  (discussing  excessive  optimism about  the risk
of automobile  accidents);  Colin  Camerer  &  Howard  Kunreuther,  Decision  Processes for  Low
Probability  Events:  Policy  Implications,  8  J.  POL'Y  ANALYSIS  &  MGMT.  565,  566-67  (1989)
(same).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 632 2001-2002

2001]

STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS

the  statistical  risks  of  smoking, 3  but  they  believe  that  they  are  less
likely than  most smokers  to  fall  victim  to  the  various  risks."  In  one
study,  less  than  half  of  smokers  surveyed  believed  that  they  had  a
higher-than-average  risk  of  cancer or  cardiovascular  disease;  indeed,
most  heavy  smokers  (at least  forty  cigarettes  per  day)  believed  that
they were not at any increased  risky  Only  one group of  people  does
not show  a tendency to excessive optimism:  the clinically  depressed.6

It  would  be  natural  to  infer  that  unrealistic  optimism,  in  many
cases, is adaptive. Though such  optimism may  cause false predictions
of outcomes,  an optimistic  attitude may  increase  the probability  of a
good  outcome  and  otherwise  create  hedonic  benefits."  This  may  be
particularly  true in the medical  context;  perhaps an  excessively  opti-
mistic  doctor is more likely to get good results. If so,  optimism is well
adapted  to  the social  role  of a  doctor.  It also might  be thought  that
some social  settings  work  against  optimistic bias.  In  markets, for  ex-
ample,  entrepreneurs  might  have  an  incentive  toward  realism,  espe-
cially because  market pressures-it might be expected-would  punish
and  drive  out  those  who  are  unrealistically  optimistic.  But  even  if
markets  move  people  toward  realism,  entrepreneurs,  no  less  than
anyone else, have been shown  to suffer from unrealistic  optimism."  It
is  noteworthy  that  expert  witnesses  are  not  disciplined  by  ordinary
market  pressures.'  If experts  err,  they might  even  help  their  clients,

13.  See  W. KIP ViSCuSi,  SMOKING  4  (1992)  (showing  substantial  awareness  among  indi-

viduals  of the statistical risks of smoking).

Id.

14.  Ayanian & Cleary, supra note 8, at 1020-21.
15. 
16.  TAYLOR,  supra note  9,  at 212-15,  226  (noting  the  lack  of excessive  optimism  among
depressed  people);  Peter  Lewinsohn  et  al.,  Social  Competence  and  Depression,  89  J.
ABNORMAL  PSYCHOL. 203,207-08,210-11  (1980)  (same).

17.  This  is  the  thesis  of TAYLOR,  supra note  9.  For  a  discussion  of  optimism  and  self-
fulfilling  prophecies,  see  NICHOLAS  CHRISTAKIS,  DEATH  FORETOLD:  PROPHECY  AND
PROGNOSIS IN MEDICAL  CARE 135-62  (1999)  (evaluating the role of self-fulfilling prophecies  in
medicine). There  are analogies in  the domain  of athletics. Consider the comments  of basketball
coach  Lenny W"ikins:  "The  shooter should  think  the  shot's going  in.  Everyone  else  should  be
thinking  he's  going  to  miss."  Phil  Jasner,  Sixers Find the  Road  Better Titan  Home, PHILA.
DAILY NEws,  Dec. 30,2000, LEXIS,  Phila. Daily News  File.

1&  See  KENNETH  R_  MACCRIMMON  & DONALD  A.  WEHRUNG,  TAKING  RIsKs  7, 260
(1986)  (discussing  the  optimism  of entrepreneurs);  Daniel  Kahneman  &  Dan  Lovallo,  Timid
Choices and Bold Forecasts: A  Cognitive Perspective on Risk Taking, 39 MGMT.  Sc.  17,27-28
(1993)  (same).

19. 

In this respect,  experts  are  like juries,  which  also  lack  ordinary  market  discipline.  Of
course  there  is something  of a market  for expert  witnesses,  so  that people  will lack credibility,
and opportunities  to be witnesses,  if they  are systematically  (shown  to be) wrong. But  it would
be heroic to suggest that these pressures ensure accuracy from experts.

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 633 2001-2002

DUKE LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 51:629

and hence  excessive  optimism might  well  be favored,  rather  than dis-
favored, by whatever market pressures  exist in this domain.

B.  Optimism and Pessimism in Clinical Practice

It  seems  reasonable  to  speculate  that  those  with  specialized
knowledge  are  far less  prone  to  optimistic  bias and  to  other  motiva-
tional and cognitive  errors.  Unfortunately,  this  appears  not  to be the
case. It has been found almost universally  that physicians, no less than
other people,  are prone to make cognitive mistakes and indeed have  a
substantial tendency  to err in predicting  outcomes. 0  "Virtually  all"  of
the  existing  studies  of  physicians  "have  documented  frequent  and
large errors  in predictions., 2
' No  study  finds  a high  level  of  accuracy.
The errors  tend in a  particular  direction:  "physicians  are  prone  to an
optimistic bias.'' 2

As  an  example,  consider  a  study  published  in  1972  that showed
that in making  predictions  about the  length of survival for cancer pa-
tients, only 47%  of the physicians provided  prognoses that were  even
roughly  accurate  and  that  80-90%  of  the  mistakes  were  excessively
optimistic.2  A  subsequent  study  published  in  1987  found  overesti-
mates  of  survival  time  in  88%  of  the  cases,  by  roughly  a  factor  of
three.24  A  recent,  large-scale  study  found  inaccurate  predictions  in
80%  of  cases,  with  63%  of  these  showing  overestimates."  Interest-
ingly, patient characteristics  (age, race, sex, illness  duration)  were  not
correlated  with  inaccurate,  optimistic  estimates,  but  one  factor  was:

20.  For a  general discussion  of this finding, see  CHRISTAKIS,  supra note  17,  at 66-71  (de-
scribing  studies  that  conclude  that physicians  tend  to  substantially  overestimate  survival);  on
doctors  and  patients,  see  Donald  Redelmeier  et  al.,  Understanding Patients' Decisions, 270
JAMA 72,72-76  (1993)  (encouraging  physicians to recognize  that patients often make irrational
medical decisions  and that it is physicians' role  to identify pitfalls in reasoning).

21.  CHRISTAKIS,  supra note 17, at 66.
22.  Id.
23.  Id. (describing  C. Murray Parkes, Accuracy of Predictions of Survival in  Later Stages of
Cancer, BRIT.  MED. J., Vol. 2,  1972, at 29,29-31 which  examined  London  physicians'  prognoses
for 168  cancer patients,  where  the  prognostic  accuracy  was  defined  as no  more  than  twice  and
no less than half the actual duration of survival).

24.  Id. at 66-67  (describing Louis H. Heyse-Moore  & V.E. Johnson-Bell,  Can Doctors Ac-
curately Predict the Life Expectancy of Patients with Terminal Cancer?, 1 PALLIATIVE  MED.  165,
165-66 (1987),  which found  that physicians'  predicted survival rates for terminal  cancer patients
averaged  eight weeks,  compared to an observed average survival rate of two weeks).

25.  Id. at 67,201-08  (discussing Nicholas  A. Christakis & Elizabeth B. Lamont, The Extent
and  Determinants  of Error  in  Physicians'  Prognoses  for  Terminally  Ill  Patients  (unpublished
manuscript)  and comparing the mortality  predictions  of physicians for 504 Chicago  patients  ad-
mitted during 1996 to observed outcomes).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 634 2001-2002

2001]

STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS

"the  better  the  doctor  knew the  patient-as  measured,  for  example,
by the length  and intensity of their contact-the  more  likely the  doc-
tor  was  to  err  in  the  prognosis,  most  frequently  by  overestimating
survival.' ' 6 The  overall  picture  is  that  in  cases  involving  cancer  pa-
tients, physicians  accurately  predict survival  only 10-30%  of the time,
and the rest of the time  they overestimate  survival  by a  factor of two
to five.2

All  of this is highly suggestive  but not decisive with respect to the
particular point that we  mean to urge here: that experts make errone-
ous judgments  about the ordinary  standard  of medical  care,  and  that
they tend  to err in a particular  direction. Because  expert  witnesses in
medical malpractice  cases  typically  are doctors,  it would  be plausible
to  think  that  their general  tendency  toward  optimism  with  their pa-
tients  would  affect  their  testimony  as  experts,  causing  them  to  over-
state  systematically  the efficiency  and effectiveness  of ordinary  prac-
tice.  At the  same  time,  it also  would  be  possible  to imagine  that (a)
doctors'  predictions  about their  patients'  prospects  are systematically
overoptimistic,  but (b)  doctors have  an accurate  sense  of what is ordi-
narily done by themselves  and other doctors. If there is no  systematic
error  with respect to  (b),  there  would be  little need  to substitute sta-
tistical data for the expert testimony  of doctors. We now  offer the first
real  evidence  in the legal  literature  on  the  central  question,  showing
that medical  experts systematically err.2

26. 
27. 
28. 

Id.  at 67.
ld. at 68.
In a separate phenomenon,  physicians are sometimes informally  accused of deliberately
offering  excessively  optimistic or pessimistic  prognoses  in  their clinical  practices.  Both  of these
behaviors  are  understandable in context. Excessively  pessimistic  prognoses, commonly  referred
to  as "hanging  crepe,"  usually  accompany  discussions  of procedures  with particularly problem-
atic  outcomes  (e.g.,  surgery  for  aortic  aneurisms,  carotid  cndarterectomies,  cardiopulmonary
resuscitation  of  twenty-three-week-gestation 
infants).  Mark  Siegler,  Pascal's Wager and the
Hanging of Crepe, 293  NEW  ENG. 3.  MED.  853,  853-57  (1975).  In  these  cases,  the  underlying
idea  is that the patients  should be fully  prepared  for the statistically  expected result  (a  poor out-
come or even  death), and that in the unlikely, but possible, event  of a good  outcome, both phy-
sician and  patient alike will be pleasantly surprised. Id. at 853-54.  If patients are  prone to  opti-
mistic  bias,  excessively  pessimistic  prognoses  might even  be justified  as a  possible  corrective.
There also are well-recognized  examples of what appears to be excessive  clinical optimism.  End-
of-life prognostications  are  notoriously "optimistic"  in that the time to death  is commonly  over-
estimated.  Nicholas A.  Christakis  & Elizabeth  B.  Lamont,  Ertent and Determinants of Error in
Doctors' Prognoses in Terminally III Patients: Prospective Cohort Study, 320 BRIT.  MED. 
. 469,
472  (2000).  This error also is understandable  in context-to  the extent that there is  any element
of "self-fulfilling  prophesy"  in  these  situations,  physicians  may  wish  their patients  to  benefit
from this effect.

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 635 2001-2002

636 

DUKE LAW JOURNAL 

[Vol. 51:629

II.  STANDARD OF  CARE:  EXPERTS VERSUS  DATA

A.  Bacterial Meningitis

Consider  the  problem  of  bacterial  meningitis  in  children.29  For
the purposes  of  the  current  discussion,  it is  necessary  to  know  only
three things  about this  disease  and  its  treatment.  Bacterial meningitis
is an infection of the brain; it (usually)  can be treated with antibiotics;
and,  as a general rule, the sooner  the antibiotics  are  administered,  the
better the outcome will be.'

In medical  malpractice  cases,  the  question  often  arises  whether
treatment  of a  particular  child was  unduly  "delayed,"'  because  delay
can  cause  serious  harm.'  Of  course  a  key issue  is  how  a  legal  deci-
sionmaker  would  know  what  kind  of  delay  counts  as  "undue."  For

Both of  these  conditions  are  simply  tangential  to  the  claims  made  here.  We  are  sug-
gesting  that  expert  descriptions  of  actual  practice,  not  the  discussions  that  accompany  these
practices, are  often  inaccurate,  and  predictably so.  Practitioners  may or  may not be  well  moti-
vated  in their attempts  to exaggerate  outcomes in  order to  convince  their patients of the  desir-
ability of a particular course  of action ex  ante. This may or may not be a good thing to do. But it
is  irrelevant  to  expert  testimony.  Our  purpose  here  is  to  minimize  the  possibility  that,  when
charged  with  describing  the  actual  spectrum  of clinical  care,  experts  exaggerate  their descrip-
tions ex post.

29.  Some  of the  data  here is discussed  for a  nonlegal  audience  and  from  a  very  different
angle in William Meadow  et al.,  Ought  "Standard Care" Be the "Standard of Care"? A  Study of
the  Time  to  Administration of Antibiotics in  Children with  Meningitis, 147  AM.  J.  DISEASES
CHILD.  40, 40-44 (1993)  (concluding that  "standard of care"  is highly  subjective  and  should be
defined by data analysis rather than expert opinion).

30.  Acute  bacterial meningitis is one of the most  life-threatening  diseases of childhood and
constitutes  a  medical  emergency.  2  EMERGENCY  MEDICINE:  CONCEPTS  AND  CLINICAL
PRACTICE  1213  (Peter Rosen ed.,  4th ed. 1998). Death  may occur  within minutes  to hours  un-
less  rapid  diagnoses  are  made  and  appropriate  antibiotics  are  administered  immediately.
ROSCOE  N.  GRAY &  LOUISE  J.  GORDY,  ATTORNEYS'  TExTBOOK  OF  MEDICINE  §  33.62(la)
(Lois  L. Caswell  et al.  eds.,  3d ed.  1992).  "Some  of the  immediate  complications  of  bacterial
meningitis  include coma  with loss  of protective  airway reflexes,  seizures,  cerebral  edema,  vaso-
motor collapse, disseminated intravascular  coagulation,  respiratory arrest, dehydration,  pericar-
dial effusion, and death." 3 EMERGENCY  MEDICINE,  supra, at 2202.

31.  See, e.g.,  N. Trust Co. v. Louis A. Weiss Mem'l Hosp., 493 N.E.2d  6,12  (I11. App. 1986)
(holding  that "evidence  which shows  ...  that  negligent delay  in  diagnosis  or treatment...  less-
ened  the  effectiveness  of treatment  is  sufficient to  establish  proximate  cause"  in medical  mal-
practice cases).

32.  There is a presumed  correlation  between the  duration of symptoms before  administra-
tion  of antibiotics  and  the likelihood  of subsequent  permanent  brain  damage. The  appropriate
time scale  (not minutes, perhaps  hours, certainly  days)  to  evaluate  these  time  intervals  is  best
addressed  in Michael Radetsky, Duration of Symptoms  and Outcome in Bacterial Meningitis, 11
PEDIATRIC  INFECTIOUS  DISEASE J. 694,  694-98  (1992).  See  also Meadow  et al., supra note  29,
at  43  (discussing  how  this  presumed  correlation  breaks  down  when  it  is  considered  along  the
time scale of minutes).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 636 2001-2002

2001]

STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS

obvious  reasons,  juries  are  assumed  to  be  ignorant  of  the  general
medical facts in such cases, and consequently are instructed to rely on
the testimony  of expert  witnesses.  The instruction  that jurors  should
rely  on  expert  opinions  for  their  knowledge  about  the standard  of
medical  care  answers  one  question,  but  it  raises  another-on  what
should the experts  themselves rely?

In  the  traditional formulation,  experts  are  instructed  to  rely  on
their  personal  "knowledge  and  training."  For  the  reasons  stated,
however,  such  admonitions  raise  many  problems.  In  the  context  of
bacterial  meningitis,  for example,  it would  be  reasonable  to  predict
that  experts  would  tend  to  be  excessively  optimistic-that  their  rec-
ollections  of the amount  of time  that  elapsed  before  antibiotics  were
initiated  in  children  with  meningitis  would  be  tilted  toward  shorter
durations than actually occurred. And if this is the case,  these experts,
relying on their "knowledge  and training,"  will provide inaccurate  ac-
counts  of behavior.

We  attempted to  test this hypothesis  by surveying  doctors about
their  experiences  in  cases  of  childhood  meningitis  and  comparing
these survey  responses  to  detailed  descriptions  of  physicians'  behav-
iors  in actual  cases  of  meningitis.3  We  began  by  identifying  doctors
with  expertise  in  the  two  most  relevant  subspecialties  of pediatrics,
pediatric  emergency  room  medicine  (ER)  and  pediatric  infectious
diseases  (ID). These  are the fields  from which  potential  experts most
likely would  be drawn to testify  in lawsuits  about  deviations from  the
standard of care in meningitis  cases. We presented  these doctors with
a  questionnaire  about  a  child  who  was  brought  to  the  emergency
room  with  symptoms  suggestive  of  bacterial  meningitis.  We  asked
how  long, in their opinion,  it would  take  to administer  antibiotics  in

33.  Physicians  were  surveyed  using an  anonymous,  voluntary  questionnaire  distributed  at
the national meeting of the Society for Pediatric Research  in 1990. The respondents were identi-
fied  only  by  specialty:  general  pediatrics,  pediatric  infectious  diseases,  pediatric  emergency
room  medicine,  or other.  Respondents  also  indicated  their  year  of graduation  from  medical
school, the city in which they worked, and the  type of hospital  in which they worked  (children's
hospital, university hospital, "community"  hospital,  or other). Twenty-three  respondents identi-
fied  themselves as pediatric infectious disease  specialists  and fifty-four  identified  themselves as
pediatric emergency  room specialists. The  questionnaire  presented the  scenario  of a child  pre-
senting  to  their emergency  room  with symptoms  consistent  with  bacterial  meningitis. Two  re-
lated  questions  were  asked: 1) "What  do you  think  is the  median time  which  elapses between
the presentation  of such a patient to the emergency  room and  the administration  of intravenous
from initial presentation  to the  ER. until I.V. an-
antibiotics?";  and 2) "What length  of time -
tibiotic administration - would encompass  95%  of all such  cases;  i.e.  of all such patients  pre-
senting to the E.R., what  time would demarcate  the point where 95%  of children  have received
IV.  antibiotics?"  William Meadow,  Questionnaire,  1990 (on file with the Duke Law Journal).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 637 2001-2002

DUKE LAW JOURNAL

[Vol.  51:629

such  cases in their own hospitals. We  then compared  the responses of
these  doctors 
time  to  antibiotic  administration
(ABTIME)  observed  in  ninety-three  children  treated  at  two  large
university-associated  pediatric centers in Chicago.

the  actual 

to 

We  found,  as  we had  hypothesized,  that  the  recollections  of the
potential expert witnesses  were wrong. Moreover, they were wrong in
the anticipated  direction-that is, biased  in favor of the response  that,
in  retrospect,  would  be  desired  (in  this  case,  toward  a  shorter
ABTIME).  The  median  estimate  of the fifty-four  ER specialists  was
46  minutes;  the  median  estimate  of  the  twenty-three  ID  specialists
was 80 minutes. By  contrast, the median  ABTIME  of ninety-three  ac-
tual cases  at the two  university  centers was  120  minutes, significantly
longer than the estimates  of either of the sub-specialty  groups."  When
we reviewed  the medical  literature  in an attempt  to extend  these  ob-
servations  beyond  Chicago,  we found  two  hundred  reported  cases  of
children  with  meningitis  from  hospitals  in South  Carolina"  and Cali-
fornia. 6  These  two  hundred  cases  had  a  median  ABTIME  (114-126
minutes)  comparable  to  the  ninety-three  Chicago  cases,  and  longer
than the estimates of either of the two  sub-specialties. 7

34.  Patient  data  were compiled  from both  hospitals  independently.  ABTIME  values were
not  normally  distributed for either  institution.  Consequently,  the  comparison  of ABTIME  be-
tween hospitals  was  performed  nonparametrically  using  the Mann-Whitney  Rank  Sum test. As
no  significant  difference  in  ABTIME  was  noted  comparing  the  two  hospitals,  data  from  all
meningitis  patients were combined  for subsequent analyses.  The responses  of the ID vs.  ER ex-
perts  differed  significantly  from  each  other  (median  ER  ABTIME  =  46  mins;  median  ID
ABTIME  = 80 mins; Z t = 2.28; p = 0.023;  ER vs. ID, Mann-Whitney  Rank  Sum Test), and both
were significantly  shorter than the actual median value  of ABTIME  (120  minutes)  noted  in our
study  population  (H =  45.33, p < 0.001,  Kruskal-Wallis  Test; Zt = 2.67, p < 0.008,  ABTIME  vs.
ID ABTIME, Mann-Whitney  Rank  Sum Test; Z t = 6.60, p < 0.001,  ABTIME  vs,  ER ABTIME,
Mann-Whitney  Rank Sum Test) (aggregate results on file with  the Duke Law Journal).

35.  Charles  S. Bryan et al., Promptness of Antibiotic Therapy in Acute Bacterial Meningitis,

15 ANNALS  EMERGENCY MED. 544,545  (1986).

36.  David A. Talan  et  al., Analysis of Emergency Department Management of Suspected

Bacterial Meningitis, 18 ANNALS  EMERGENCY MED.  856,856 (1989).

37.  The university hospitals in Chicago  are representative  of what might be thought of as  a
national norm  for the  best possible  treatment  situation for  a  child with  meningitis.  Necessary
equipment  (i.v. catheters,  antibiotic solutions)  and experienced  personnel  (triage  nurses,  emer-
gency  physicians)  are  immediately  available  for children  with  meningitis  at  academic  medical
centers. Some have expressed concerns  that for many cases  this is too high a  bar. See Sydney  S.
Gellis,  "Standard Care" vs.  "Standard of Care" in Administration of Antibiotics in Children with
Meningitis, PEDIATRIC NoTES, Feb. 18,1993,  at 25:

Each  infant  or  child  presenting  to  an  ER  with  possible  meningitis  is  an  individual
problem and one which cannot be measured against  others ....  Timing will depend  on
the numbers of physicians available, numbers  of critically ill patients  being seen  at the
time, the  availability of nursing help, [and] the presence  of language  barriers ....

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 638 2001-2002

2001]

STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS

Table 1 captures  the  differences  between  the opinions  of poten-

tial experts and the actual data-based observations:

TABLE  1: VARIATIONS  BETWEEN  "EXPERT"  OPINIONS  AND
DATA-BASED  OBSERVATIONS FOR ABTIME IN
CHILDREN WITH  SUSPECTED BACTERIAL MENINGITIS

ID Experts 
80 minutes* 

ER Experts 
46 minutes** 

Chicago  Hospitals 
120 Minutes 

SC and  CA Hospitals
114-126 minutes

*p  < 0.01
**  p < 0.001

Whatever  "expert"  opinion  means  in  this  context,  it  does  not
mean  an accurate  opinion. Both groups  of potential pediatric experts
were wrong,  and substantially  so,  in their  opinions  about the amount
of  time  that elapses  before  doctors  administer  antibiotics  to children
with  meningitis. The  statistical  probability  that  the potential  experts
were correct was less than one part in  100 for the ID doctors, and  less
than one part in 1000 for the ER doctors. As we have emphasized, the
inaccuracy  found in the  estimates was consistent  with our hypothesis:
responses  were  biased  toward  the outcome  perceived  to be  desired,
that is, toward  shorter waiting periods.

Note  that  this  bias  operates  independently  of  the  pressures  im-
posed by the adversary system, which would naturally lead litigants to
hire  experts whose  accounts  will  favor their  side. The ID  and ER re-
spondents  were  not asked  to  consider  their  responses in  the context
of  a review for  either a  plaintiff  or  defendant in  this survey.  Moreo-
ver,  the optimistic bias presented  by the potential  experts  here is op-
erating  outside of the bounds  of the usual  doctor-patient relationship,
where  it  has  been  suggested  that  optimism,  even if inaccurate,  may
serve a therapeutic purpose.'

We  think it entirely possible  that other circumstances  (e.g., smaller hospitals,  clinics, or doctors'
offices)  may not be comparable  to  academic  medical  centers,  and that  ABTIME  in these  set-
tings consequently  might be longer than at university centers. We would  then  argue  that claims
about  care  in those smaller  centers ought  to  be  met with  ABTIME  data  gathered  from  these
clinics  or  offices.  Our main point  here is that  if the  standard of care  is normative,  appropriate
data-based  comparisons are best for determining what is normative.

38.  See supra note  17  and  accompanying  text.  There  are complex  relations  between  the
malpractice  setting  and  other contexts  involving  negligence.  For example,  the question,  "How
difficult would it have been for the worker to have  avoided  this hazard?"  might lead to  the (op-
timistic)  suggestion that it would  not have been difficult  at all,  whereas  the question,  "How  ex-

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 639 2001-2002

640

DUKE LAW JOURNAL

[Vol.  51:629

Others, in varying contexts,  have  demonstrated  a  similar discon-
nect  between  physicians'  descriptions  of  their  own  practices  and  ob-
jective  determinations  of  the  same  behavior.  As  examples,  consider
patient  education  by  physicians  in  general  practice.  Physicians  are
committed  to  the  value  of patient  education,39  and  they  devote  con-
siderable  time  and  resources  to  health  promotion.4"  Clearly,  the  de-
sired  practice is to spend this  time explicitly  informing patients  about
health-related  behaviors,  such  as the  uncontested  virtues  of  smoking
cessation  and  preventive  oncology.  Nevertheless,  when  physicians'
reports  of their office practices  are compared  with taped interviews  of
these  same  encounters,  there is  only  a weak,  insignificant  correlation
between  the  self-reported  patient  education  activities  and  the  actual
performance."  Not  surprisingly,  physicians'  recollections  err  in  the
predicted  direction;  that is,  more  explicit  counseling  is  recalled  than
actually occurred.

Here  too  the  cognitive  expectation  is  confirmed-anecdotal  re-
call  proves  to  be  inaccurate,  biased,  and,  inevitably,  systematically
imperfect.  If our findings  here  are  the rule  and  not  the  exception,  as
the  psychological  evidence  suggests,  it  is  hardly  clear  that  the  law
should  continue  to  base  a  system  of  medical-legal  jurisprudence  on
such  a shaky foundation.

pensive  would  it have  been  to  have  installed  a  safety  device?"  might  lead  to  the  (optimistic)
suggestion  that  this would  not  have  been expensive  at  all.  Hence  the  framing  of the  question
might  lead optimistically  biased agents  in different directions. In either case,  statistics are  better
than expert testimony,  simply because  they are more accurate.

39.  Thomas  E.  Kottke  et  al.,  Attributes of Successful  Smoking  Cessation Interventions in
Medical Practice, 259 JAMA 2883,  2887  (1988)  (finding  face-to-face  advice  from physician  and
nouphysician  counselors  to be  the best predictor of smoking  cessation);  Henry  Wechsler  ct al.,
The  Physician's Role in Health Promotion-A Survey  of Primary-Care Practitioners, 308  NEW
ENG. J. MED. 97, 98-99  (1983)  (finding that nearly three of four physicians feel it is a physician's
responsibility  to educate  patients on risk  factors including  smoking, alcohol,  drugs, stress,  exer-
cise,  and  diet,  and  that  eighty-one  percent  of  physicians  interviewed  personally  provide  such
education in place of a nurse or other health professional).

40.  C. Tracy  Orleans  et  al.,  Health Promotion in  Primary Care: A  Survey of  U.S. Family
Practitioners, 14 PREVENTIVE  MED.  636,643  (1985)  (surveying 610 family practice  physicians on
client demographics  and medical  treatment); see also Ulrich  J. Grueninger et al.,  Patient Educa-
tion in the  Medical Encounter: How to Facilitate Learning, Behavior Change, and Coping, in
THE MEDICAL INTERVIEW  122,  122-33  (Mack  Lipkin, Jr. ed., 1995)  (encouraging  physicians not
to simply provide information,  but to  incorporate educational and behavioral  techniques).

41.  Orleans  et  al., supra note 40,  at 643; see also James  E. Davis  et al.,  Cancer Prevention
and Screening Activities in Primary Care Practice, 16  PREVENTIVE  MED.  277,  277  (1987)  (con-
paring  estimates  by  Wisconsin physicians  of preventive  performance  with  their actual  preven-
tive practices).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 640 2001-2002

2001]

STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS

B.  The Proposal

We acknowledge  that the evidence  we have  offered is suggestive
rather  than  demonstrative.  Perhaps  there  are  contexts  in  which doc-
tors, or other experts,  have an accurate sense  of the ordinary  standard
of care. But the general evidence  of  mistakes,  together with  the em-
pirical  evidence  introduced here, is  sufficient to  show that both  error
and optimism  are  highly  likely to infect  a  wide  range  of expert  testi-
mony.4 2 This  point  operates  independently  of  the ordinary  incentive
to assist one's side in an adversary  system."

It therefore  makes  sense, in the  context  of malpractice  suits  and
probably more  generally  as well,  to move  toward  greater  reliance  on
actual  data  and less  reliance  on the recollections  of  isolated  experts.
Until recently,  the legal  system was unable  to rely  on statistical  data
for the  simple  reason  that it did  not  exist. But  it is  now  increasingly
possible  to  develop  data  sets  about  physician  choices  and  behavior,
and the legal system will have an increasing  amount of information  on
which  to  draw.  Perhaps  government  should generate  accounts  of or-
dinary practice, based on the information that is available;  or perhaps
people  in  the  private  sector  should  do  so.  In  either  case,  the  goal
would  be to ensure the compilation of actual data  about practice, sub-
stituting accurate  empirical  evidence  for.the  fallible judgments  of in-
dividuals.

Our proposal would  have  two  notable  advantages. First,  it could
simplify the task of discerning the truth. It is now exceedingly  difficult
for  juries  to  decide  which  expert  has  best  described  the  prevailing
standard  of medical  care  in the community.  Under  current  practice,
this  issue  may well  turn  on unreliable  judgments  about  credibility  or
on  sympathy  that  is  unrelated  to  the  standard  of  care.  Second,  and
more  important,  use  of  statistical  evidence  would  increase  the  accu-
racy of assessments of the standard of care, reflecting  the comparative
advantage  of  pooled  data  over  individual  recollections.  There  is  no
good  reason for  courts  to  continue  to  rely  on  the  latter  when  they
have access to the former.

42.  See Kabneman & Lovallo, supra note 18, at 18-21,24-27  (discussing individuals'  crro-

neous and overly optimistic decision-framing  of probabilities).

43.  See Linda  Babcock  & George  Loewenstein,  Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The Role
of Self-Serving Biases, in BEHAVIORAL  LAW AND  ECONOMICS,  supra note 8, at 355,355-65  (de-
scribing self-serving bias in judgments about fairness).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 641 2001-2002

DUKE LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 51:629

III.  PROBLEMS  AND  COUNTERARGUMENTS

A.  Statistical Error?

Our proposal  might  be  criticized  on  the  ground  that  statistical
analysis is itself subject  to error. Of course there can  be no  assurance
that  any  particular  compilation  or  interpretation  of  data  is  correct.
Perhaps  there will  be several  accounts  of data that will  compete  with
one  another.  If this  is  so,  it  might  be  objected,  the use  of statistical
evidence  will  merely  usher  in a  new phase  in the  battle  between  im-
perfect experts. How much would be gained by that?

This  objection  has  a  degree  of  plausibility,  but  rather  than  im-
peaching  our proposal,  it suggests  the need  to develop  good  methods
to evaluate particular  claims  about  the meaning  of statistical  data.  In
the event  of  disagreement,  there  is  no  escaping  the  need  to  test  the
data  in  the  ordinary  way  through  the  presentation  of  conflicting
views,  including  those  of  experts.  Data  might  be  met  with  contrary
data; it also  might  be met with  a professional  critique.  And  of course
it  is  possible  that  an  individual  expert  will  be  able  to  show  persua-
sively that some purported  evidence  does  not establish  what it claims
to  establish.  These  sorts  of  disputes  can  be  handled  in  the  standard
fashion.  We suggest that because  individual  experts  are  prone  to sys-
tematic error, it would  be far better to begin the process  with reliable
evidence  rather than with individual recollection.  If individual experts
can  show that  the statistical  data are  wrong,  the  legal  system  will  be
better off for the demonstration.  In the long run, however, we  predict
that these  demonstrations  will  be the  exception  rather  than  the  rule.
In any case,  an inquiry  into the evidence  will  anchor the legal  process
in something that is likely to be more reliable.

B.  Admissibility: Relevance and Hearsay

Statistical  data  are  not  typically  used  in  negligence  cases.  The
data might be excluded  as inadmissible  on several  grounds.  Most  im-
portant, questions  might  be  raised  about  whether  the  data  are  rele-
vant and about whether they are hearsay.

It is possible  to  object  that  statistical  data  are  not  relevant,  be-
cause  they  cannot  determine  the  proper  standard  of  care.  In  some
states, there is  a continuing  dispute  about  the proper  role of common

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 642 2001-2002

20011

STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS

practice in negligence cases.'  Where  common practice is not determi-
native  of the standard  of care' s  statistical  data cannot  resolve the le-
gal issue. It would be possible to argue that in such circumstances,  the
data should be inadmissible  on grounds  of irrelevance.  But this argu-
ment should be rejected. Even when common  practice is not determi-
native,  it is pertinent,  and  its  relevance  is reflected  by  the  very  fact
that experts frequently are allowed  to testify  about what most doctors
do.  Statistical  data  should  be found  admissible  for  the  same  reason
that expert testimony is admissible.

It also  might  be  thought  that  statistical  data  should  be  seen  as
hearsay.  Perhaps  the  witness  seeking  to  introduce  the  data  is  at-
tempting to  repeat what others  have  said in their  reports of the data.
If  so,  his  testimony  might  be  thought  to  violate  the  prohibition  on
hearsay."  But this  analysis  would  misread  the hearsay  rules.  Under
federal  law,  for  example,  experts  are  allowed  to  rely  on  "statements
contained  in published  treatises,  periodicals,  or pamphlets  on  a  sub-
ject of history, medicine,  or other science  or  art, established  as a reli-
able  authority  by  the  testimony  or  admission  of  the  witness  or  by
other  expert  testimony or  by judicial  notice."'  Federal  rules  also  al-
low experts  to base opinions  on facts  and data of the kind  reasonably
used  by experts  in the field when  they form  opinions  or inferences."
Statistical  data, if published, should be permitted  under the  first rule
just quoted;  if unpublished,  they should  be  admissible  to  the  extent
that they are of the sort reasonably  relied  on by experts. Under either
scenario,  however, data should not be treated  as inadmissible hearsay.

44.  See supra note 1; infra note 46.
45.  See, e.g., Advincula  v. United  Blood  Servs., 678  N.E2d  1009,1027-28  (i1.  1996)  (find-
ing that evidence  of compliance  by  the defendant blood  bank with  the professional  standard of
care imposed  under  a blood  shield statute  was  not conclusive  proof of "due  care");  Roach  v.
Springfield  Clinic,  No. 73,394,  1992  III.  LEXIS 204,  at  *33-*36  (IlL  Dec. 4,  1992)  (finding  that
the exclusion of evidence  describing  medical  standards of care  did not prejudice  a  malpractice
trial outcome); Darling v. Charleston  Cmty.  Mem'l Hosp., 211 N.E-2d  253,258  (IlL 1965)  (find-
ing that the hospital's standard practice  and conformity to regulations  did not constitute conclu-
sive evidence  of reasonable  care).

46.  See People  v. Anderson,  495  N.E2d 485,  487-90  (IlL.  1986)  (permitting  a  psychiatric
expert to  disclose the facts and opinions  from others'  evaluations  on which he relied in diagno-
sis); Schrag  v. Chi. City Ry. Co.,  106 N.E. 828,  829-30 (IlL  1914) (prohibiting  the admission  of
scientific  books  into evidence,  as  well  as  their  use  to  contradict  an  expert  witness  not relying
upon them).

47.  FED. R.  Evm. 803(18).
48.  FED. R.  EviD. 703,705.  But see Road,  1992  Ill. LEXIS, at *32-*33  (refusing  to  allow
references  to treatises  on the ground that their authors are not available  for cross-examination).
The Roach decision seems to us an anachronistic and odd reading  of the prohibition on hearsay.

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 643 2001-2002

644

DUKE LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 51:629

C.  Textbooks and Treatises

Perhaps  there  are  other solutions,  besides  reliance  on  statistical
data,  to  the  problem  of  idiosyncratic  recollections  of  individual  ex-
perts.  It might  be urged  that  the  opinions  of  experts,  as reported  in
textbooks  or journal publications,  should define  the  standard  of care.
By this  view, when actual  practices  differ from  the theoretical  or  rec-
ommended  standards,  the  practitioners  are  at  fault.  They  may  not
know  the  standard, may disagree  with it,  or may  have  misinterpreted
it, but the burden of proof falls on them.

We believe  that this  approach  would  be oversimplified  and  mis-
guided.  Under  the  law,  ordinary  practice  is  important  for  its  own
sake,  regardless  of  whether  it  is  decisive  of  the  legally  acceptable
standard  of care. If courts  are going to consider  the ordinary  practice,
they should  have  an accurate  understanding  of what  it is;  here,  text-
book  and  treatise  authors,  like  all  other experts,  are  prone  to  error.
Unless  a  textbook  or treatise  actually  draws  its  conclusions  from  or-
dinary practice, it will not report the ordinary  practice reliably.

Perhaps  textbooks  and  journals  merely  state  recommendations
that  are  worth  consideration  even  if  they  do  not  capture  ordinary
practice. This is not implausible. But interpreting  these recommended
standards  is  not  always  straightforward.  In the  particular  context  of
bacterial meningitis,  textbooks  recommend  that  antibiotics  should  be
administered  "early,"49  "promptly,"'  or  "immediately""1  to  children
with  suspected  meningitis.  But  what,  in the  minds  of  a  lay  jury, is  a
reasonable  interpretation  of this recommendation?  In  such  a context,
is thirty  minutes too long? Is  one hour, or  six hours? The  recommen-
dation in one text that antibiotics  be administered  "within  30 minutes
after  the  diagnosis  of meningitis  is  established"52  helps  a  good  deal,
but  it  does  not  resolve  the  question,  as  it  merely  presents  another
troubling  question-when  exactly  is  the  "diagnosis  of  meningitis  es-
tablished?"

But there is  a  more general  point. At  most, the  author  of  a text-
book  can  offer  an  opinion  about  the  standard  practice  or  about  the

49.  ABRAHAM M. RUDOLPH,  PEDIATRICS  422  (16th ed.  1977).
50. 

1  RALPH  D.  FEIGIN  &  JAMES  D.  CHERRY,  TEXTBOOK  OF  PEDIATRIC  INFECTIOUS

51.  RICHARD  E.  BEHRMAN  &  VICTOR  C.  VAUGHAN,  TEXTBOOK  OF  PEDIATRICS  571

52.  GERALD  L. MANDELL  ET AL.,  PRINCIPLES AND  PRACTICE  OF INFECTIOUS  DISEASES

DISEASES  302  (1981).

(Waldo E. Nelson ed.,  13th ed. 1987).

738  (1979).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 644 2001-2002

2001]

STATISTICS, NOT EXPERTS

practice  that is desirable.  If the  opinion  involves  what is  desirable,  it
should be  evaluated  as  such. But if the opinion involves  what  is stan-
dard,  the question  should  be whether  the  opinion  is  correct. To  the
extent  that  the  question  inquires  into  ordinary  practice-into  what
doctors do-it would be far better to rely on actual data  about physi-
cian performance.

Our  plea  here  has  been  for  attention  to  data,  rather  than  to
opinions. Ultimately we might hope for authoritative  texts  on what is
established  by the data,  and such texts  might  come  from the govern-
ment  or from the private  sector.  To the  extent that there is competi-
tion  among sources  of data,  all the better. And to the  extent that data
about  actual  practice  are  available,  the data  should  inform,  and  im-
prove,  the  debate  about the  extent  to which  the  legal  system  should
be bound by  the ordinary standard  of care when determining  the ap-
propriate standard of care.'

CONCLUSION

It is well known  that  ordinary  people  make  systematic  errors  in
assessing  probabilities  and  risks.'  It  is  less  well  known  that  experts
are subject  to the same biases  and likely  to make  the same mistakes."
We have  suggested  here  that there  is  general  reason  to  believe  that
expert judgments  about  the standard  of medical  care  will  be  errone-
ous,  and that the errors  will run in a  predictable  direction  because  of
optimistic  bias. People  tend  to believe  that things  can  be  done,  and
are  in  fact  done,  more  easily,  more  rapidly,  and  more  successfully
than the evidence suggests.  To establish this claim, we have drawn  on
existing  evidence,  highly  suggestive  on  this  point,  and  on  more  par-
ticular evidence, presented  here, that experts do not accurately report
the ordinary standard of care.

Our principal innovation  has been  to suggest  that in light of the
evident  divergence  between  expert  beliefs  and  empirical  reality,  the
legal system should  rely, whenever  possible, not on the former  but on

53.  See supra note 3 and accompanying  text (discussing  the relevance  of customary  practice

in negligence judgments).

54.  W. KiP Viscusi,  RATIONAL  RISK  POLICY  5  (1998);  Amos  Tversky  &  Daniel  Kahne-
man,  Judgment  Under  Uncertainty: Heuristics and  Biases,  in  JUDGMENT  AND  DECISION
MAKING  38  (Terry Connolly  et al. eds.,  2d  ed. 2000);  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Jurors, Judges, and the
Mistreatment of Risk by the Courts, 30 J. LEGAL STUD.  107,107  (2001).

55.  See supra note 42 and accompanying text  (discussing the inaccuracy  of expert judgment

that results from error and optimism).

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 645 2001-2002

646 

DUKE LAW JO URNAL 

[Vol. 51:629

statistical  evidence  of the latter. The best reason for the legal system's
longstanding reliance  on individual recollections  has been historical-
the  simple  absence  of statistical  evidence.  But  the  current  practice  is
an  anachronism.  The reason  is  that  this  gap  in statistical  evidence  is
rapidly  being  filled  with  a  great  deal  of reliable  data,  and it  may  be
completely  filled  in the  next  generation.  Our  emphasis  has  been  on
the question of medical  malpractice,  but the general  implication  is far
broader. In any case in which  a  disputed  question  calls  for expert  tes-
timony  about  ordinary  practice,  it  is  hazardous  to rely  on  what  par-
ticular experts  recall. If the  goal is accuracy  in adjudication  or regula-
tion,  it  is  far  more  sensible  to  make  the  outcome  turn  on  statistical
evidence.

HeinOnline  -- 51 Duke L.J. 646 2001-2002

