Predictably Incoherent Judgments Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=279181 Preliminary draft 7/28/01 All rights reserved Cass R. Sunstein,* Daniel Kahneman,** David Schkade, *** and Ilana Ritov**** 
When people make moral or legal judgments in isolation, they produce a pattern of outcomes that they would themselves reject, if only they could see that pattern as a whole. A major reason is that human thinking is category-bound. When people see a case in isolation, they spontaneously compare it to other cases that are mainly drawn from the same category of harms. When people are required to compare cases that involve different kinds of harms, judgments that appear sensible when the problems are considered separately often appear incoherent and arbitrary in the broader context. Another major source of incoherence is what we call the translation problem: The translation of moral judgments into the relevant metrics of dollars and years is not grounded in either principle or intuition, and produces large differences among people.. The incoherence produced by category-bound thinking is illustrated by an experimental study of punitive damages and contingent valuation. We also show how category-bound thinking and the translation problem combine to produce anomalies in administrative penalties. The underlying phenomena have large implications for many topics in law, including jury behavior, the valuation of public goods, punitive damages, criminal sentencing, and civil fines. We consider institutional reforms that might overcome the problem of predictably incoherent judgments. Connections are also drawn to several issues in legal theory, including valuation of life, incommensurability, and the aspiration to global coherence in adjudication. 
“Why didn’t the Commission sit down and really go and rationalize this thing . . .? The short answer to that is: We couldn’t. . . . Try listing all the crimes that there are in rank order of punishable merit. . . . Then collect results from your friends and see if they all match. I will tell you they don’t.”1 * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago. ** Eugene Higgins Professor of Psychology and Professor of Public Affairs, Princeton University *** Herbert D. Kelleher Professor of Business, University of Texas, Austin. **** Associate Professor, Hebrew University of Jerusalem. For helpful comments, we are grateful to Eric Posner, Richard Posner, and participants in workshops at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, the University of Chicago Law School, and Yale Law School. 1 Justice Stephen Breyer, as quoted in The New Republic, June 6, 1994, at p. 12. 
I. Introduction: Coherence and Incoherence 
Coherence in law is a widely shared ideal. Almost everyone hopes for a legal system in which the similarly situated are treated similarly. But there are many obstacles to the achievement of coherence in the law. This Article is concerned with one particular test of coherence, and with two cognitive limitations that help cause many failures of that test in actual legal systems. We believe that these failures are also failures of justice, and that they suggest a pervasive problem in existing legal systems. 
Our test of coherence is straightforward. We ask: When two or more judgments have been made separately, and each seems to make sense on its own, do they still make sense when considered together? When this test fails, and a need is felt to adjust or reverse the judgments that were made separately, we will speak of judgment reversals. The test of coherence can be readily applied to decisions by juries and by judges.2 With suitable modifications, it can also be applied to acts of legislators and regulators. More generally, we ask whether judgments made in isolation fit together in an orderly way when considered as part of the larger whole. 
Our emphasis will be on many categories of harms with which the law is concerned, such as physical injury‚ commercial fraud, and ecological damage. Our first psychological observation is that in law, as in ordinary life, people’s thinking is category-bound. People do not easily cross the boundaries of categories3 of harms in their thinking. When they consider an individual case of physical injury, or commercial fraud, the frame of reference for evaluation is usually a set of instances of the same kind of harm.4 When setting penalties for a category of cases, such as violations of regulations for occupational safety, regulators will naturally focus on instances that belong to that category. They are much less likely to concern themselves with the consistency of their determinations with punishments for other categories of harmful conduct, such as damage to endangered species. Yet, as we will show, simultaneous 2 Note that this is a test of coherence, not of social consensus, which was explored in Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman & David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages, 107 Yale LJ 2071 (1998). But the absence of consensus on dollar amounts, discussed below, does bear on the possibility of achieving coherence. 3 We say a few words below on the nature of categories. 4 Daniel Kahneman and Dale Miller. Norm Theory: Comparing reality to its alternatives, 93 Psychological Review 136 (1986). consideration of penalties for different kinds of infractions will often reveal that the more severe punishment was assigned to the misconduct which, in context, appears to be the less serious. 
A second significant source of incoherence is what we shall call the translation problem. By this term, we refer to the distinctive problem involved in translating a moral judgment of some kind5 into the terms made relevant by the legal system, such as monetary penalties, civil fines, or criminal punishment.6 We argue that the act of translation causes serious problems, because it is grounded neither in agreed-upon principle nor in widely shared intuitions. Even when people show coherent and consistent moral intuitions, they may show little consistency and coherence in translating those intuitions into numbers, such as dollars of fines or years in jail. Because of the translation problem, coherence fails: there is no guarantee that the relative severity of punishments administered by the system will still appear sensible, just, or fair when several punishments are considered together. The translation problem helps identify the cognitive foundations of current controversies over criminal sentencing, punitive damages, and contingent valuation. It affects the work not only of juries, but also of legislative and regulatory bodies that determine punishments for different kinds of misconduct within a particular category. The result, we will argue, is that the overall level of penalties set by different regulatory agencies may appear sensible when each set of regulations is considered on its own, but fail our test of coherence when several sets are considered at once. 
We consider it self-evident that if it exists, incoherence in punishments is a form of injustice. We shall also assume that when the public would not believe that outcomes fit sensibly together, this is a problem that calls for social response. We will assume that these points are correct, without defending them in any detail. 
The coherence and incoherence of punishments, both civil and criminal, will be the focus of our analysis, and in this domain we will attempt to show considerable reason for concern. Juries typically assess cases in isolation; in fact 5 We use this term because as a matter of fact, moral judgments appear to be the foundation of punishments. On the economic theory of punishment, optimal deterrence is the goal, and optimal deterrence is in conflict with ordinary intuitions, as we discuss in detail below. A. Mitchell Polinsky & Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 869, 870–76 (1998).For interesting reasons, the translation problem is not a serious one from the standpoint of economic analysis of law. We will refer to this point below. 6 We initially discussed the translation problem, under the technical term “scaling without a modulus,” in the particular context of punitive damage awards in Sunstein, et al., supra. We generalize the problem here. lawyers are actually barred from referring to awards in other cases. Administrators, and congressional committees setting up penalties for regulatory misconduct, typically deal with one category of misconduct, and do not attend to problems of other types.7 Criminal sentences are established over time by different legislatures and legislative committees, with little effort to ensure a good fit of penalties to crimes across a broad frame of reference.8 Because people are not inclined to consider the overall pattern – either because it is too difficult to do so or because it does not occur to them to try – the problem of incoherence does not naturally receive attention.9 As things now stand, the structure of those institutions charged with making regulatory and legislative decisions reinforces the effects of category-bound thinking. Scandalously large inconsistencies can therefore persist indefinitely, in the absence of a special effort to impose coherence. 
The fact that coherence cannot be taken for granted has significant implications for institutional design. It suggests, in some domains, a possible reason to favor judicial decisions over jury decisions, because judges are more likely to have a menu of cases before them. Because judges are human,10 they too are susceptible to producing incoherent patterns11; but especially if the risk of incoherence is brought to judicial attention, they might well likely to do better, on this count, than juries. Our claims also suggest the potential value of “coherence commissions,” assigned the explicit mission to ensure that decisions fit together as an orderly whole, or at least to correct the most serious anomalies. We bring the idea of “coherence commissions” in contact with many areas of the law, including civil and criminal penalties, punitive damages, and valuation of statistical lives. We will also attempt to cast new light on some large topics in legal theory, including the aspiration to similar treatment of the similarly 7 Indeed, an administrator or regulator who shows explicit concern with problems that lie outside his or her jurisdiction risks being criticized as improperly “poaching” on someone else’s turf, or even having his decision held unlawful. See Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. v. LTV Corp., 496 US 633 (1990) (allowing agency entrusted with pension guarantees not to consider other, relevant areas of law, and suggesting that any such consideration would violate the underlying statute). 8 The goals of the United States Sentencing Commission are, on this dimension, quite unambitious. See below. In fact a version of the translation problem appears in the international domain, where criminal sentencing also shows a degree of incoherence. See Allison Marston Danner, Constructing a Hierarchy of Crimes in International Criminal Sentencing, Virginia Law Review (forthcoming 2001). 9 Indeed we believe that this Article is the first to venture even a tentative assessment of the pattern of administrative penalties. See below. 10 Chris Guthrie, Jeffrey Rachlinsk, Andrew Wistrich, Inside the Judicial Mind, 86 Corn. L. Rev. 778 (2001). 11 This was an explicit rationale for the formulation of Sentencing Guidelines situated, the twentieth-century movement toward bureaucracy,12 and the general problem of “incommensurability.” Discussing several different kinds of incoherence, we identify some of the cognitive limits of the aspiration to global coherence in law,13 while also pointing the way toward institutional reforms that could overcome those limits. We urge that “coherence commissions” could do a great deal to reduce existing injustice, in a way that would provide a twenty-first century analogue to important, but less ambitious, institutional developments in the twentieth century. 
In this Article, we will be covering many topics, some of them in considerable detail. For purposes of exposition, it will be useful to give an overview of the specific claims that undergird our general arguments about incoherence • 
The moral intuitions of the public are firmly retributive in character.14 The intensity of what we shall call “punitive intention” – the desire to punish wrongdoing – is influenced both by the outrageousness of an action and by the severity of the harm that the action caused. • It is extremely difficult for people to translate punitive intentions into the terms made relevant by the legal system, such as fines or prison terms. That task is not rooted in shared intuitions, moral or otherwise, and outcomes can be largely arbitrary and unpredictable. Different juries may express the same punitive intention, but come up with quite different dollar awards. The bodies that set administrative punishments for particular categories of misconduct may differ widely in the general range of punishments that they choose, for no principled reason. State legislatures may produce widely varying punishments for the same crime, not because of different moral judgments, but simply because of the translation problem. • If people are asked to assess cases that fall within a particular category of actions and harms, but are not asked to translate their punitive 12 A helpful overview is Price Fishback & Shawn Kantor, A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins of Workers” Compensation (1999); see also Jerry Mashaw, Due Process in the Administrative State (1983), for a valuable discussion in the context of social security disability determinations. 13 Associated with Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (1985). 14 As recognized by the Supreme Court in Cooper v Leatherman, 532 U.S. S. Ct. (2001) at footnotes 5 and 11. intentions into dollars or years, people’s judgments tend to be both shared and coherent.15 It follows that if they are evaluating cases within each category, diverse people are likely to agree on how to rank a set of personal injury cases, business fraud cases, sexual harassment cases, or libel cases by their “punishable merit” (Justice Breyer’s term). When asked to evaluate a case separately and hence in isolation, people spontaneously proceed by comparing it against others falling within the same category.16 Thus, for example, people’s responses to a case of business fraud will be generated largely by comparing that case to other cases of business fraud. If the case of business fraud involves extremely egregious misconduct that caused very severe harm in this frame of reference, people will be extremely outraged. The fact that there are other categories of cases, involving actions that people view as more evil and harms that they think more serious, will be effectively neglected. We call this effect “normalization.”17 The requirement directly to compare cases drawn from different categories of harmful actions can cause large shifts in moral evaluations, punitive intentions and actual punishments, relative to the judgments of the same cases in isolation. Such shifts, which we generically label judgment reversals, provide a diagnostic indication of a breakdown of coherence. 
There is less consensus on the ranking of cases in the hierarchy of “punishable merit” when the cases involve different kinds of harms (e.g., personal injury vs. environmental damage) than when they belong to the same category. Harms from different categories may seem “incommensurable,” because they cannot easily be described in terms of the same dimensions: the question of how many animals died, for example, is relevant in one of these situations but not in the other. The difficulty of comparisons across categories of harms may be one of the cognitive sources of the difficulty pointed out by Justice Breyer. 15 The claim is based on results reported by Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade & Cass R. Sunstein, Shared Outrage and Unpredictable Awards, 16 J. Risk & Uncertainty 49 (1998) and Sunstein et al., supra. 16 See Kahneman & Miller, supra; see also Daniel Kahneman, Ilana Ritov & David Schkade. Economic preferences or attitude expressions? An analysis of dollar responses to public issues, 19 Journal of Risk & Uncertainty 220 (1999). 17 Id. 
There is substantial consensus on the ranking of categories, including those created or used by the law. People agree, for example, that murder is worse than rape, than rape is worse than assault, and that assault is worse than libel. We suspect, however, that there is less social agreement on the ranking of categories than the on ranking of cases within categories. • In spite of the difficulties of comparing categories of cases and cases across categories, there is in many cases sufficient consensus to permit a test of coherence, which examine whether judgments made in isolation are still retained when explicitly compared. 
We illustrate these claims by investigating judgments in several kinds of domains – some of them experimental, some involving actual government practice. The first involves punitive damages awards. Here we show that people rank cases within a given category of harms in a consistent and coherent fashion, that their judgments about isolated cases are “normalized” according to the category in which they fall – but that these narrowly-based and easily-made judgments shift when people are compelled to consider the case in a broader context, by forcing a comparison to a case that involves harm of a different kind. The second kind of problem involves contingent valuation – an influential method of valuation by which people assign dollar values to goods that are not ordinarily traded on markets.18 We observe a similar pattern here. The amount that the public will be willing to pay to prevent or correct some harm to a public good will be very different depending on whether the goods and the harms are viewed in isolation or in explicit comparison with harms to goods and harms from another category.19 This point fortifies existing doubts about the rationality and reliability of the contingent valuation method.20 
A third kind of problem involves administrative penalties. Investigating actual statutory practice, we find that such penalties tend to make a great deal of sense within categories, because (for example) the more serious occupational safety and health violations are penalized more severely than the less serious ones. At the same time, administrative practice seems to make little sense as a 18 See, e.g., George Tolley et al., Valuing Health For Policy (1995); Valuing Environmental Preferences (Ian Bateman & K. G. Willis eds., 1999). 19 See Julie Irwin, Paul Slovic, Sarah Lichtenstein & Gary McClelland, Preference reversals and the measurement of environmental values, 6 Journal of Risk & Uncertainty 5 (1993) 20 See Peter Diamond & Jerry Hausman, Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better Than No Number, 8 J. Econ. Persp. 45, 49-52 (1994); Note, Ask A Silly Question, 105 Harv L Rev 1981 (1992). whole: Once the practices of diverse agencies are put together, the area appears pervaded by cross-category anomalies. What requires explanation here is both how such anomalies arise and why they persist. We argue that the anomalies arise from the combined effects of category-bound thinking and the arbitrary nature of the translation of moral judgments into punishments. The anomalies persist because of the absence of a strong need, at the individual and social levels, to ensure coherence. Apparently no constituency is seeking to ensure that the system of penalties fit together as a whole. In fact we believe that ours is the first effort even to explore the question of coherence in civil penalties – a point that attests to the fact that people can live (perhaps in ignorant bliss) with patterns that make little general sense. Here as well, underlying sources of the difficulty are category-bound judgments and the translation problem. The result is injustice and arbitrariness. 
While emphasizing the problem of incoherence, we do not suggest that coherence is sufficient to produce good outcomes. Systems that are internally coherent can and should be criticized on independent grounds.21 It is also possible to insist that in some domains, the price of coherence is too steep, perhaps because of the administrative costs of achieving it, perhaps because coherence can be achieved only by altering some institutions, outcomes, and judgments that, on independent normative grounds, turn out to be good. But incoherence of the sort documented here is at the very least a serious problem, because it ensures a set of results that would widely be seen as indefensible and arbitrary. One of our largest goals is to uncover the mechanism that helps to produce this state of affairs, and to see what might be done about it. 
This Article is organized as follows. Part II provides some general background on the concept of coherence. Part III explores the psychology underlying the forms of incoherence that is our focus here. Part IV turns to the basic cases of punitive damages and contingent valuation, offering experimental evidence of judgment reversals. In order to provide a focus for normative work on incoherence in law, Part V discusses the implications of our findings for punitive damages awards. Part VI explores more general implications by showing patterns of administrative penalties that most reasonable people would 21 See Joseph Raz, The Relevance of Coherence, in Ethics in the Public Domain 261 (1994). Raz emphasizes that “Coherence conveys a specific good, the value of which is undeniable. What is incoherence is unintelligible, because it is self-contradictory, fragmented, disjointed.” Id. at 264. Raz raises serious doubts about coherence theories in id. at 265-70; we do not investigate the resulting complexities here. reject as absurdly inconsistent, and that nevertheless persist indefinitely, reflecting the pervasive indifference to issues of global coherence that we have attributed to human cognition. 
Our basic purpose is descriptive, but we also contend that at a minimum, we have uncovered a serious problem, one that infects judgments and penalties in many areas of the law. While emphasizing the difficulty of achieving agreement on the requirements of full coherence, we suggest that many steps can be taken to correct the worst anomalies. In Part VII, we urge that as an ideal, the legal system should attempt to create institutions that would create more in the way of systemic rationality, and that where results do not fit, there is likely to be a problem of injustice. With respect to the budget, the Office of Management and Budget was originally created on just this ground, and the Sentencing Guidelines had similar aspirations (as yet unrealized, partly because of the absence of explicit cross-category comparisons). With respect to regulation, there are some related problems: the existence of large and apparently inexplicable disparities in expenditures per life saved is, in part, testimony to the absence of sustained cross-category comparisons. Of course the jury system raises special problems and concerns, and there are large questions about the extent to which reforms, even dramatic ones, might overcome the problems stressed here. 
In Part VIII, we show that our analysis bears on some larger issues in legal theory, including the debate over the value and possibility of coherence in law and the nature and existence of “incommensurability.” A main theme is that any effort to proceed “one case at a time” will produce serious problems, because of identifiable features of human cognition. We also attempt to show the cognitive basis for the experience of incommensurability. Our closing plea is for institutional changes designed to overcome the problems we identify, replacing predictably incoherent judgments with reforms whose goal is to produce systemic rationality. 
Our emphasis here will be on the particular types of incoherence that stem from the human tendency to make category-bound judgments, and from the arbitrariness of the translation of punitive intent into actual punishments. But this type of incoherence should be understood against a more general background, formed by the broader interest in coherence as a goal and by a continuing debate within economics and other social sciences. 
Ethical and political philosophers have often viewed inconsistencies with concern,22 treating them as local warps in a web of beliefs that must be repaired by adequate reflection, in which specific beliefs are brought in line with each other and with broader principles.23 The search for “reflective equilibrium” is designed to ensure that one’s beliefs, at multiple levels of abstraction, fit together as a sensible whole.24 There is a similar aspiration to coherence within law,25 though a decentralized system, with numerous judges, may well have special difficulty in achieving that goal.26 Our central findings here will show some new difficulties with efforts to achieve anything corresponding to reflective equilibrium within the legal system, or even in moral judgments. 
“Rational agent” theories in social sciences, and much important theorizing in the domain of law, rest on the assumption that human agents are endowed with coherent systems of beliefs and preferences, and define coherence as the principal criterion of rationality.27 An influential definition of rationality avoids any normative evaluation of the specific contents of beliefs and choices, and refers neither to the truth of beliefs nor to the consequences of choices.28 Only internal consistency matters.29 In modern economic thinking, and in the economic analysis of law in particular, coherence is considered a touchstone of rationality.30 The preferences of the idealized rational agent provide a coherent ordering of possible states of affairs, and the beliefs of that agent permit an ordering of events by their probabilities.31 Furthermore, the dispositions to form new beliefs in the light of evidence, or to make choices when new options are offered, are also assumed to belong to the same coherent structure.32 
continuing debate about the “rationality” of human agents, involving 22 See Joseph Raz, The Relevance of Coherence, in Ethics in the Public Domain 261-278 (1994). 23 See Gilbert Harmon, Change in View (1986); David Brink, Moral Realism and the Foundations of Ethics (1989); Germain Grisez et al., Practical Principles, Moral Truth, and Ultimate Ends, 32 Am J. Jurisprudence 231 (1987). 24 See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 19-22, 46-51 (1971). 25 See Dworkin, supra note. 26 See Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict 48-52 (1996). 27 For overviews, see Rational Choice ( Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law ch. 1 (5th ed 1999). 28 See John Von Neumann & Oscar Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (2d ed. 1947). 29For an outline and critique, see Amartya Sen, Internal Consistency of Choice, 61 Econometrica 495 (1993). 30 See Von Neumann & Morgenstern, supra. In law, see Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law ch. 1 (5th ed. 1999). 31 See Gary Becker, Accounting for Tastes ch. 1 (1999); Leonard J. Savage, The Foundations of Statistics. (1954). 32 See id. economists, decision theorists, and psychologists, as well as philosophers and academic lawyers.33 It is now well-known that people are not in fact perfectly rational.34 They are better described, in Herbert Simon’s phrase, as boundedly rational.35 Bounded rationality has both cognitive and motivational aspects.36 Because of the limitations in their ability to process information, boundedly rational agents are not able to maintain a system of beliefs, preferences, and dispositions that is both comprehensive and internally coherent. At best, such agents are locally coherent -- achieving consistency over small regions of the space of possible events and outcomes, but not between more remote regions. Furthermore, boundedly rational agents are also cognitive misers -- they economize on difficult thinking and are not inclined to search for inconsistencies among their ideas, or even to acknowledge inconsistencies, unless they are pressured to do so. In particular, we will develop the claim that people effortlessly achieve local coherence in their rankings of actions and outcomes, but show limited ability and little interest in global coherence. Hence global incoherence can persist for long periods. 
As a practical matter, complete consistency of beliefs and preferences is an unattainable ideal for any individual, and probably for any legal system. Failures of consistency are inevitable, but some are easier to avoid than others. People are normally successful at avoiding immediate inconsistencies between statements they make in the same setting, but it is much harder to prevent remote inconsistencies between a judgment one makes now and judgments made, or accepted in the past. It is harder still to prevent situations in which a judgment that one makes now is inconsistent with a judgment that one would make if one were asked a different question (or the same question in different words). People who are unable to ensure that their current judgments are consistent with other judgments they accept, or with judgments they would make or would have made under different circumstances, inevitably produce a pattern of outcomes that they would themselves consider incoherent and indefensible. We will see this problem in many legal and policy domains. 33 See, e.g., Choices, Values, and Frames (Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky eds. 2000); The Rational Foundations of Economic Behavior (Kenneth Arrow et al. eds. 1996); Gerd Gigerenzer et al., Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart (1999). 34 For an overview, see Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein & Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics, 50 Stan L Rev 1471, 1476-1480 (1998). 35 See Herbert A. Simon, A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice, 69 Q. J. Econ. 99 (1955). 36 For an overview, see Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (1983). 
In this section we review in some detail the psychological underpinnings of the analysis to be presented in this Article. Much of our treatment here is an effort both to extend and generalize our earlier empirical research on punitive damages37 and on contingent valuation,38 and more generally to build on previous theoretical and empirical analyses, not yet applied to law and policy, of intuitive judgment,39 attitudes and emotion,40 and spontaneous categorization.41 We also offer two empirical results that we report for the first time here. The first is an experiment that demonstrates category-bound incoherence in judgments of punitive damages and in contingent valuation. The second is an examination of category-bound incoherence in administrative penalties. In this section, we explore the psychological mechanisms in some depth. 
Our previous studies indicated that the dollar numbers produced by jurors in civil cases involving punitive awards, and by respondents in contingent valuation surveys, can be interpreted as expressions of the intensity of a positive or negative attitude – an emotional evaluation of a defendant, or of a public issue.42 Specifically, we have argued that punitive damages are an expression of indignation or outrage on a scale of dollars, and we identified the problem of translating outrage onto that unfamiliar scale as a critical cause of unpredictability in punitive awards. We extend this conception of punishment here, by adding that (i) reprehensible actions are naturally categorized, and (ii) outrage and its manifestations – including punitive damages – involve a process that situates any particular case in relation to its category. We will show that this manifestation of category-bound thinking yields systematic incoherence in punitive intentions and in punitive awards. 37 Sunstein, Kahneman & Schkade, supra; Daniel Kahneman & Ilana Ritov, Determinants of stated willingness to pay for public goods: A study in the headline method. 9 Journal of Risk & Uncertainty 5 (1994); Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade & Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? 29 Journal of Legal Studies 237 (2000); Kahneman, Schkade & Sunstein, supra; David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein & Daniel Kahneman. Deliberating about dollars: The severity shift, 100 Columbia Law Review 101 (2000); Kahneman, Ritov & Schkade, supra. 38 Kahneman & Ritov, supra.. 39 Daniel Kahneman & Shane Frederick, Representativeness revisited: Attribute substitution in intuitive judgment, to appear in Heuristics of Intuitive Judgment: Extensions and Applications (Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin & Daniel Kahneman, eds, 2002). 40 Kahneman, Ritov & Schkade, supra; Kahneman & Frederick, supra; Paul Slovic et al., The Affect Heuristic to appear in Heuristics of Intuitive Judgment: Extensions and Applications (Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin & Daniel Kahneman, eds, 2002). 41 Kahneman & Miller, supra. 42 We intend to take no stand on the relationship between emotion and cognition. See Jon Elster, Alchemies of Mind (1999); Martha Nussbaum, Upheavals of Thought (2001). 
We also extend the same analysis of punishment to a task that at first glance seems to involve little emotion: the setting of penalties by legislative or administrative bodies. The leap is not as radical as it may appear at first. We argue that members of a society are in wide agreement on the categorization of reprehensible actions, and on the relative outrageousness of actions within any one category. Individuals and commissions that set penalties are likely to respect this ordering both for psychological reasons – it corresponds to their moral intuitions as well as to the intuitions of the public – and for political reasons: setting punishments that transparently violate the common ranking of “punishable merit” within a category will appear unjust and evoke resistance. In this situation as well, we argue, category-bound thinking and the problem of translating punitive intent into dollars or other penalties combine to produce global incoherence. 
We divide the task of setting punishment into two parts: which locates the appropriate punishment on a subjective scale that ranges from “no punishment at all” to “extremely severe punishment.” the legal system, such as dollars of fine or years in jail. 
As we shall show, some forms of incoherence arise at the level of punitive intent, while others are caused by features of the translation process. 
Social psychologists commonly identify an emotion and a tendency to action as elements of attitudes.43 In our usage, outrage is the emotion and punitive intent is the action tendency. We believe that they are directly related. Outrage and punitive intent both are psychological variables – along with other subjective variables such as brightness, loudness, pain, trust and dislike. Any subjective variable can be expressed in multiple ways. For example, outrage may be expressed by appropriate adjectives, by the choice of a number on a rating scale, by loud screams, or by jail sentences. 
The existence of something like a moral community is assumed in the analysis that follows. When we speak of the outrageousness of an action or the punitive intention that is evoked by it, we have in mind an emotional state and a tendency to act that are widely shared in a relevant community. Consensus in moral attitudes was demonstrated in an earlier study44 in which respondents (drawn from jury-eligible citizens in Travis County, Texas) were asked to evaluate product liability cases involving physical injuries. Different groups of respondents used different scales in these evaluations. Some evaluated the outrageousness of the defendant’s behavior (always a firm, also identified by annual profit as an indication of its size) using a rating scale (from “Completely Acceptable” to “Absolutely Outrageous”); others rated their punitive intent, also on a rating scale (from “No Punishment” to “Extremely Severe Punishment”). A third group assessed the appropriate amount of punitive damages, in dollars. 
We found substantial consensus in these judgments. Thus, on average, rich and poor; educated and less educated; white, Hispanic, and AfricanAmerican; old and young; male and female; and all others are likely to agree on how to rank and rate a set of personal injury cases in terms of their “punishable merit,”45 the outrageousness of the defendant’s conduct, and the punitive damages that are appropriate.46 Note that the agreement is between the average judgments for the various social groups. There is some variability in judgments of each case within each group, and especially for judgments made in dollars. In general, however, people appear to agree on what makes one personal injury worse than another (e.g., amount and duration of pain, disability, vulnerability of victims such as the elderly and the very young); they also agree on elements of the defendant’s behavior (e.g., intentionality, deception) that make one reprehensible action worse than another; and they agree as well on the severity of the harm inflicted on the plaintiff – provided that comparisons are restricted to harms of a particular type, such as physical injury. . 
An analysis of the results of our study showed that the punitive awards assessed for 28 separate scenarios was predicted quite accurately by a very simple formula, which captures the psychological conception of punishment that we apply and extend in this article47: 44 The results are reported in Sunstein, Kahneman & Schkade, supra note, and in Kahneman, Schkade & Sunstein, supra note. 45 See Breyer, supra note 1. 46 See Kahneman Schkade & Sunstein, supra; at 2099. Sunstein et al., supra. 47 The results of this analysis were described by Kahneman & Frederick, supra. The severity of the harm associated with each of the scenarios used by Kahneman, Schkade & Sunstein, supra was rated by a small group of Princeton students, who were not given any details about the cause of the harm. 
What this formula says is that punitive intent is proportional to the outrageousness of the harmful action, and that punitive intent is also proportional to the severity of the harm. The translation factor is required to transform punitive intent – here construed as a state of mind – into actual punishments. 
Punitive intent, as this formula indicates, is firmly retributive, in the sense that both the act and its consequences matter.48 Because of the retributive nature of the underlying intuitions, the public sense of what is just punishment is radically at odds with the idea, popular in some academic circles, that punishment should be grounded largely in its deterrent function, and therefore directly linked to the likelihood that an act will be discovered and punished.49 Punishments that appear just in this society are based on outrage directed at the action and concern with the degree of harm that the action caused.50 
We have described punitive intent as a state of mind – a sense that it is right for a miscreant to suffer some degree of pain. Punitive intent can be expressed in words, such as “severe” or “mild.” To have an effect in the real world, however, the intention to punish must be translated onto a scale that can be used by the legal system, such as dollars of fine or months in jail. The translation factor in the formula above represents this operation of scaling. 
For many classes of harms, people lack shared moral intuitions that might specify the translation factor. Except to the extent that they are familiar with existing practice, people do not have a clear, agreed-upon sense that a grossly reckless action should be punished with a punitive award of $50,000, or $100,000, 48 Jonathan Baron & Ilana Ritov, Intuitions about penalties and compensation in the context of tort law, 7 Journal of Risk & Uncertainty 17 (1993). 49 Sunstein, Schkade & Kahneman, supra, reported that probability of detection, which is central to the law and economics analysis of deterrence, is largely irrelevant to intuitions about just punishment. Punishment that is deliberately calibrated by probability of detection is considered unjust, when it results in similar actions being punished differently in different localities. Baron & Ritov, supra, report that known and explicitly specified future impact of decisions do not substantially affect judgment, even of experts, although regulating future behavior is a critical factor in the theory of law and economics. 50 See the acknowledgment of this point in Cooper v Leatherman, supra. or $1,000,000, or that a case of assault should be punished with a jail term of six months, two years, or five years. As a consequence, the translation factor that is used is often influenced by irrelevant considerations, personal experience, and random circumstances. In the case of punitive damage awards, for example, the plaintiff’s demand matters a great deal, simply because juries often have few other relevant dollar figures from which to begin.51 And because of the influence of these irrelevant considerations and random circumstances, actual punishments for transgressions are often incoherent in our sense. That is, different juries, who agree on punitive intent for a given set of case facts, may impose substantially different punishments solely because of arbitrary differences in their translation factors. These propositions have direct implications for a wide range of tasks relevant to the law. They apply with equal force to the determination of punishment for individual cases, and to the writing of statutes or regulations that specify punishments for particular transgressions. 
Optimal deterrence theory offers a way of calculating the appropriate punishments, again by connecting dollars awards to the harm through the translation factor of “likelihood of compensation.”52 But we have already seen that this analysis violates common intuitions about just punishment.53 For those who seek to come up with dollar amounts that are intuitively appealing, a main difficulty is that harm and punishment do not generally occur in the same or even in commensurable units What is the appropriate fine for hunting an endangered bird? $50? $500? $5000? Should the punitive damages for a case of employment discrimination be set at three times the value of compensatory damages, or at fifteen times that value? 
In an earlier analysis of punitive damages we focused on the arbitrariness of translation factors as a major cause of the notorious unpredictability of punitive damage awards.54 We expected, and found, large variation in the 51 Reid Hastie, David Schkade & John Payne. Juror judgments in civil cases: Effects of plaintiff’s request and plaintiffs identity on punitive damage awards, 23 Law & Human Behavior 445 (1999); also Gretchen B. Chapman & Brian H. Bornstein, The more you ask for, the more you get: Anchoring in personal injury verdicts, 10 Applied Cognitive Psychology 519 (1996) (finding similar effects for plaintiffs’ demand in the context of compensatory awards for personal injury). 52 See A. Mitchell Polinsky & Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic Analysis, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 869, 870–76 (1998). 53 See Sunstein, Schkade & Kahneman, supra. Indeed, the Supreme Court has acknowledged that punitive awards are not rooted in deterrent judgments. See Cooper v Leatherman, supra. 54 Kahneman, Schkade & Sunstein, supra at 2106-07. We described the juror’s task as a special case of scaling without a modulus. The term is borrowed from psychological experiments in which observers use numbers to indicate the intensity of sensations such as brightness, loudness or pain. The common practice in such scaling experiments is to specify a particular stimulus (e.g., a level of luminance) as a standard. Observers translation factor that people will apply in judging a particular case, even when their punitive intent is the same. In subsequent research we found that jury deliberations are not a cure for the variability of translation factors.55 The general effect of deliberation was instead a severity shift: it appears that when jurors start off with different translation factors, higher punishments that are proposed in the deliberation are more likely to be adopted, and are sometimes even exceeded by the jury’s award. Even after deliberation, different mock juries considering the same case often reach radically different decisions – punitive damage awards sometimes vary by a factor of 100 or more.56 
It is easy to see that free-floating translation factors will often cause failures of our test of coherence. Imagine two juries that consider separate claims A and B against the same defendant, awarding $1 million for case A and $5 million for case B. Because the translation factor that they apply may be different, it is entirely possible that both juries, if asked to compare the two cases, would agree that case A is higher in “punishable merit” than case B. The inevitable consequence of variability in the translation factor is incoherence in punishments: different individuals and different juries will make judgments that cannot be reconciled, even in the presence of underlying consensus on punitive intent. 
We do not intend to imply that the translation factors that people apply are completely arbitrary. Indeed, data that we have reported demonstrate the opposite. In one of our earlier studies57 of punitive damages each case was presented in two versions which differed only in the annual profits of the defendant firm. For example this value was “$10-20 million” in one version and “$100-200 million” in another. The indication of the size of the defendant firm had a large and systematic effect on punitive awards, which were substantially higher for larger firms. The mechanism that produces this effect is most likely are instructed to assign a particular number (the modulus) to that stimulus, and to assign numbers to other stimuli by comparing them to the subjective intensity associated with the standard. The task may appear meaningless, but in fact it is one that people can carry out with fair agreement – much like the consensus they exhibit in judging the severity of harms or the outrageousness of behaviors. In some experiments, however, a modulus is not supplied, and the observers are requested to assign whatever numbers they feel appropriate to report the subjective intensity of their sensations. In such situations of scaling without a modulus, observers spontaneously adopt their own individual standard and apply it consistently. However, different observers choose different moduli for no apparent reason. Thus, two stimuli may be rated as 10 and 2 by one individual, and as 40 and 8 by another, simply because the second individual picked a modulus that is 5 times larger than the first. 55 See Schkade, Sunstein & Kahneman, supra. 56 Id. at Table 5 57 Kahneman, Schkade & Sunstein, supra. the same that produces anchoring of awards on irrelevant factors. In this instance, however, the effect of firm size on awards corresponds to the sensible intuition that a larger financial punishment is required to inflict the same level of “pain” if the defendant firm is large than if it is small. Other anchoring effects could be defended as well: punitive awards have been found to be strongly correlated with compensatory awards in the same case,58 and perhaps anchoring of punitive on compensatory awards could be justified as appropriate, though this would not be an easy task.59 
In this Article we study two manifestations of category-bound thinking that produce incoherence in punishments: (1) the frame of reference for judging harmful actions is linked to a category of harms, and therefore liable to change when cases that involve harms of different kinds are explicitly compared; (2) the commissions that set penalties for categories of misconduct appear to be unconcerned with the penalties already on the books for other categories. In both situations, we suggest that judgments are sensible and coherent within each category separately, but not when the view screen is expanded to include more than one category. To understand this suggestion, and the mechanisms that produce judgment reversals, it is necessary to know something about what categories are and how they operate. 
cognitive science, where it serves to explain how people use categories and category labels in informal reasoning and in everyday language. 60 This concept of categories and categorization is quite different from an approach in which a category is defined by a set of necessary and sufficient conditions for membership. In that system, the boundary between categories are sharp and membership is all-or-none. In everyday language, in contrast, the boundaries of categories are fuzzy and membership is graded. 61 A chicken is surely a bird, but is not quite as good a bird as a robin, or an eagle. And a whale is not a fish, but it 58 Theodore Eisenberg et al., The Predictability of Punitive Damages, 26 J. Legal Stud. 623, 644 (1997). 59 It would not be easy on any theory of punitive damages. On optimal deterrence theory, a key issue is the multiplier; the compensatory award is in some sense an anchor, but a weak one, because a 100% likelihood of compensation should produce a punitive award of 0, an a 10% likelihood of compensation should produce a punitive award ten times that of the compensatory award. On the retributive view, there is no obvious translation formula. 60 See, e.g., Daniel Reisberg, Cognition: Explorin Cognitive Psychology: An Overview for Cognitive Scientists (1992). 61 Eleanor Rosch et al., Basic Objects in Natural Categories, 8 Cognitive Psychology 382 (1976). 
The last years have seen an intense debate about the aspiration to global coherence in law.127 Much of the debate has involved the appropriate conception of legal reasoning, an issue with both normative and descriptive dimensions. Ronald Dworkin has been the most prominent advocate of ambitious thinking, in which judges do not always restrict themselves to small pockets of problems, but sometimes attempt to ensure that all parts of law fit together as a principled whole.128 Others (including one of the current authors) have argued against this idea, on the ground that it would strain judicial capacities, and perhaps tend to produce errors of its own.129 In a discussion of particular relevance to our topic here, Dworkin discusses the “compartmentalization of law into separate departments” and sees that as a “prominent feature of legal practice.”130 Hercules, Dworkin's idealized judge, makes judgments that “expand out from the immediate case before him in a series of concentric circles,” increasingly far afield from the particular case and category at hand.131 Hercules does not take the law’s compartments for granted, and he is willing to reject any idea of “local priority” where ‘traditional boundaries between departments have become mechanical and arbitrary.”132 It seems clear that Hercules is willing to attempt global coherence, as, for example, through “a new unification of private law that blurs even the long-established and once much firmer boundary between contract and tort.”133 Advocates of less ambitious thinking stress that judges are not in a good position to make global sense of multiple areas of the law, and that the effort to try, especially if it is early, might well overwhelm the cognitive capacities of judges.134 
Our findings here do not resolve these issues, which have arisen in a much broader context than those discussed here. We have assessed judgments within and across categories, but in the relatively simple setting of judgments 127 See Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire (1985); Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996); Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999); Edward McCaffery, Inside-Out Freedom’s Law, 85 Cal. L. Rev. 1043 (1997). 128 See Ronald Dworkin, In Praise of Theory, 29 Ariz State L J 353 (1997). 129 See Sunstein, supra note. 130 Dworkin, Law’s Empire, at 251. 131 Id. at 250. 132 Id. at 253. 133 Id. at 254. 134 See Sunstein, supra note; see also Edward McCaffery, Inside-Out Freedom’s Law, 85 Cal. L. Rev. 1043 (1997) (arguing that cognitive limitations might justify a less ambitious approach from courts, and that this less ambitious approach is consistent with Dworkin’s general understanding of legal interpretation as integrity). about penalties rendered in terms of dollars or years. We have not explored how the process of category-bound judgments would affect free speech principles in categories involving pornography, commercial speech, and libel, or tort and contract principles involving medical malpractice, building construction, and prescription drug companies. It would be important to know whether (for example) people’s judgments about the appropriate treatment of false commercial speech and libelous speech would be different in isolation from what they would be if the two categories were considered together. We do not have evidence on that issue. Nonetheless, we think that what we have found casts some fresh light on this debate, giving a more detailed account of why it is hard to produce global coherence, but also providing new support for Dworkin's view, on the ground that local pockets of coherence might well produce an overall pattern that is senseless, or that at least contains what everyone would see as senselessness. 
To be sure, global coherence would be a significant strain on judicial capacities, in part because the mental operations involved do not come naturally. Judicial efforts to provide more limited forms of “local coherence,” through relatively unambitious reasoning by analogy, can be understood as a good way of avoiding cognitive overload – by focusing on the cognitively manageable category, and by failing to investigate problems from other categories. But our larger point cuts the other way, giving strong cognitive ammunition to Dworkin's plea for global coherence. We have provided fresh reason to believe that in law, the various categories showing internal coherence will not fit together -- and that the pattern of outcomes, generated by unambitious judges, will contain what they themselves would see as error and confusion. Referring precisely to this risk, Dworkin suggests that we “must strive, so far as we can, not to apply one theory of liability to pharmaceutical companies and a different one to motorists, not to embrace one theory of free speech when we are worried about pornography and another when we are worried about flag burning.”135 If law is to be coherent, Dworkin is entirely correct. Judges who seek only local coherence, or who proceed one case at a time, are highly likely to produce a pattern of outcomes of which they themselves would disapprove. 
Are values or options commensurable?136 In what sense? Those who object 135 Id. 136 See Joseph Raz, The Morality of Freedom (1985); Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (1993). to the idea of commensurability claim that people lack a shared metric by which to assess an array of qualitatively distinctive options, and that the use of such a metric can do violence to our considered judgments about how such options should be assessed.137 On this view, ideas like “utility” and “efficiency” are quite inadequate, as a way of capturing the operation of practical reason in law or daily life; these ideas are inadequate because they elide qualitative differences that matter when people reason well.138 
We do not attempt to take a stand on any normative issues here, nor do we attempt to give anything like an account of the operation of practical reason. But we do suggest that our findings here help to establish a cognitive basis for part of the experience of “incommensurability” in both law and ordinary thinking. People lack confident judgments about how to rank cases from different categories, and their judgments on this point are not widely shared. Recall the difficulty of comparing a case of tax fraud with an occupational safety and health violation, or of ranking a case of outrageous commercial fraud with one involving a relatively minor physical injury. For those using ordinary intuitions, there is no readily available metric by which to make the relevant comparisons.139 It is in this particular respect that incommensurability is a concrete psychological phenomenon.140 
We have attempted here to identify some pervasive features of human judgment and cognition – features that, we believe, account for significant anomalies in both private and public law. In making many judgments in law, people must translate a moral judgment into numerical terms, involving dollars or years. Moreover, people’s judgments are insistently category-bound. They do not naturally seek coherence across categories. Their assessment of problems, taken in isolation, are often different from their judgments about problems, taken in the context of cases from other categories. This is largely because any judgment, in isolation, is made against a background of a “natural” comparison set, consisting of problems from the same basic category. Much of the time, people will look at problems from other categories only when forced to do so. When a problem from a different category is introduced, the isolated judgment is 137 See Anderson, supra note. 138 See id. at 203-15. 139 Here economics can overcome the incommensurability problem by using the metric of dollars. 140 See also the discussion of ‘taboo tradeoffs” in Philip E. Tetlock, Coping With Trade-Offs: Psychological Constraints and Political Implications, in Elements of Reason 239 (Arthur Lopia et al. eds 2000). unsettled, and people’s judgments will shift, sometimes quite dramatically. The reason is that the introduction of the new problem alters the set of comparison cases, and shifts in judgment are a common consequence of that alteration. 
The most important implication of this phenomenon is that judgments in isolation will predictably produce incoherence from the standpoint of the very people asked to make those judgments. This is true of judgments about punitive damage awards; it is also true of willingness to pay for public goods. Thus judgment shifts are easy to generate in experimental settings. Outside of those settings, we have seen similar results in the domains of regulatory penalties. The pattern of within-category coherence, and global incoherence, is a nearly inevitable product of adjudication, which is defined by one-shot judgments; but the same pattern is embedded in many domains of law and policy. 
These are descriptive points. It is far less clear what to do about the situation. Introduction of a single problem from one separate category may make things worse rather than better. There is a serious risk of manipulation and strategic behavior here; careful selection of the comparison case can drive judgment in predictable directions. Deaths of buffaloes may seem a relatively small problem when presented alongside deaths of human beings; but deaths of buffaloes may seem a relatively large problem when presented alongside injuries to plants. In these circumstances, the ideal solution, for a legal system committed to obtaining people’s reflective judgments, is to move in the direction of ensuring, not attention to one category or two, but simultaneous appreciation of the large number of categories of cases to which any particular case might be compared. 
Coherence is important; it seems to be a minimum requirement of rationality. But coherence is not a trumping value, and a system displaying incoherence may well be better than one that is coherent but pervasively unjust. An incoherent system in which penalties fit together, but are three times as high, or one-third as high, as they ought to be. Nonetheless, we think that any domain of law should aspire to coherence, at least as a presumption, in order to prevent the kinds of arbitrariness and injustice that we have found in both experimental and real-world settings. At the very least, efforts should be made to correct the most conspicuous anomalies – a goal that can be obtained without thinking that it is easy or even possible for people to agree on what full coherence actually requires. 
We have emphasized throughout that for any single person, or jury, the achievement of coherence is an exceptionally difficult cognitive task. But steps in the direction of coherence are far less difficult at the level of institutional design.141 We close with the suggestion that the practical remedies for predictably incoherent judgments are institutional; they involve the creation of frameworks for decision that ensure a pattern of judgments that, when taken as a whole, reflective people could endorse. Perhaps this seems an unrealistically ambitious aspiration. But something of just this sort underlies many of the most impressive institutional innovations of the twentieth century. It should not be too much to expect twenty-first century institutions to build on these precedents, bringing a measure of rationality and sense to areas of the law that now lack them. 141 This is a lesson of the movement to workers” compensation, as described in Fishback & Kantor, supra note. 
In this part of the study, we would like you to imagine that you are a juror for a legal case in a civil court. Civil law suits involve disputes between private individuals, companies, or individuals and companies, in which the plaintiff alleges that the defendant harmed them in some way. The primary purpose of a civil suit brought by a plaintiff is to seek compensation from the defendant for the alleged harm. 
Civil suits involve two different types of potential damages that a defendant could be could be required to pay. Compensatory damages are intended to fully compensate a plaintiff for the harm suffered as a result of the defendant’s actions. Punitive damages are intended to achieve two purposes: (1) to punish the defendant for unusual misconduct, and (2) to deter the defendant and others from committing similar actions in the future. 
Punitive damages should be awarded if a preponderance of the evidence shows that the defendant acted either maliciously or with reckless disregard for the welfare of others. Defendants are considered to have acted maliciously if they intended to injure or harm someone or their property. Defendants are considered to have acted with reckless disregard for the welfare of others if they were aware of the probable harm to others or their property but disregarded it, and their actions were a gross deviation from the standard of care that a normal person would use. 
The case you will consider involves a special procedure that is sometimes used in civil trials, and which requires two different juries: (1) a trial jury, which decides whether the defendant should pay compensatory damages to the plaintiff, and if so in what amount, and (2) if compensatory damages are awarded, a separate punishment jury decides whether the defendant’s conduct also warrants punitive damages. 
Please imagine that you are a member of the punishment jury for this case. Your job is to decide whether and how much the defendant should be punished, in addition to paying compensatory damages. 
In the case you will consider, the trial jury has already ordered the defendant to pay compensatory damages to the plaintiff. This does not necessarily mean that punitive damages must also be awarded. Whether or not punitive damages should be awarded and if so how large they should be is completely separate from compensatory damages. 
Among his other large investments, William Marking owns Canyon Luxury Leasing, a company that leases luxury cars. He bought 1000 cars from Royal Motors, a manufacturer of high-priced automobiles with annual profits of around $150 million. Royal Motors did not disclose the fact that the paint on all 1000 cars was not the original factory paint: all cars had been repainted from an ugly shade of green to the current colors of red and black. 
One month after the purchase, an employee of Royal Motors reported this fact to a local newspaper, and the repaintings received a great deal of national publicity. Mr. Marking believes that people who lease luxury cars demand perfection, and that this negative publicity caused a sharp decrease in business. He has sued Royal Motors for compensation. 
Internal documents of Royal Motors produced at the trial included a management memo: "Marking will not be happy at all when he finds out that the cars have been repainted. He will feel that we took advantage of him, but it was his responsibility to check the cars. Anyway we run almost no risk: it will not be in Marking’s interest to publicize the problem, so he will not dare sue us, no matter how mad he is. The worst that will happen is that he won’t buy from us again.” The trial jury ordered Royal Motors to pay $500,000 in compensatory damages. 
Joan Glover, a five-year-old child, ingested a large number of pills of a nonprescription allergy medicine called Allerfree. The Allerfree bottle carried a label reading "Childproof Cap,” but it did not meet federal regulations for the use of that label. 
Joan’s parents testified that they had been very careful in ensuring that all of their medications had childproof safety caps. Joan found the pills in a kitchen drawer and ingested most of the bottle. The overdose permanently weakened her respiratory system, which will make her more susceptible to breathing-related diseases such as asthma and emphysema for the rest of her life, and may reduce her life expectancy. Joan’s parents sued the manufacturer of Allerfree, the General Assistance company, a drug manufacturer with annual profits of $150 million. Internal company documents showed that General Assistance chose to ignore federal regulations about standards for using the label "childproof cap.” An internal memo presented at trial says that ‘this stupid, unnecessary federal regulation is a waste of our money"; it acknowledges the risk that Allerfree might be punished for violating the regulation but says ‘the punishments are extremely mild; basically we”d be asked to improve the safety caps in the future." The trial jury ordered General Assistance to pay the Glovers $500,000 in compensatory damages. 
What amount of punitive damages (if any) should Royal Motors be required to pay as punishment and to deter them and others from similar actions in the future? Compensatory damages do not count as part of the punishment. Please write the appropriate amount of punitive damages in the blank below. 
$ _____________________ 
How severely should Royal Motors be punished because of their actions, and to deter them and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that they must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please circle the number that best expresses your judgment of the appropriate level of punishment. 
None 0 1 
Mild 2 3 
Substantial 4 5 
Severe 6 7 .4. Response Scales: Comparison We would like you to compare this case (Glover v. General Assistance) to the legal case you saw earlier (Marking v. Royal Motors, which involved repainted cars). 
Less than Royal Motors 
The same as Royal Motors 
More than Royal Motors 
What amount of punitive damages (if any) should General Assistance be required to pay as punishment and to deter them and others from similar actions in the future? Compensatory damages do not count as part of the punishment. Please write the appropriate amount of punitive damages in the blank below. 
$ _____________________ 
OR 
How severely should General Assistance be punished because of their actions, and to deter them and others from similar actions in the future? Note that the compensatory damages that they must pay do not count as part of the punishment. Please circle the number that best expresses your judgment of the appropriate level of punishment. 
None 0 
The next question moves outside the legal context. It involves problems of a more general nature, which concern society as a whole. In this part we are interested in your reaction as a member of society, rather than as a potential juror. 
Dolphins in many breeding locations are threatened by pollution. The threat to breeding locations is expected to result in a decline of the dolphin population. A special fund is needed to clean up and protect dolphin breeding locations. 
Increased funding to provide pollution free breeding locations for dolphins must be supported mostly by private contributions. Consider the possibility of making a voluntary contribution of money to this fund. 
The next question moves outside the legal context. It involves problems of a more general nature, which concern society as a whole. In this part we are interested in your reaction as a member of society, rather than as a potential juror. 
Farm workers, who are exposed to the sun for many hours, have a higher rate of skin cancer than the general population. Frequent medical checkup can reduce the risk. Increased funds are needed to establish programs for more frequent checkups of the threatened groups. 
Increased funding for these programs must be supported mostly by private contributions. Consider the possibility of making a voluntary contribution of money to this fund. 
What amount of money (if any) would you be willing to contribute to the fund to protect dolphins? Please write your amount in the blank below. 
$ ___________ 
OR 
How much personal satisfaction would you expect to get from making a contribution a fund to protect dolphins? (please circle your answer) 
a little 1 less than for most other contributions 2 a great extreme deal satisfaction 5 6 
We would like you to compare this problem (farm workers” skin cancer), to the problem of public concern that you saw earlier (protection of dolphins). Compared to protecting dolphins, how much money would you be willing to contribute to a fund for farm workers” skin cancer? (circle your choice) less than for dolphins the same as for dolphins more than for dolphins 
What amount of money (if any) would you be willing to contribute to a fund to reduce farm workers” skin cancer? Please write your amount in the blank below. $ ___________ 
OR 
How much personal satisfaction would you expect to get from making a contribution a fund to reduce farm workers” skin cancer? (please circle your answer) 
Type of violation Criminal 
Violation of sanitary food transportation act 
Violation of Filled milk act Violation of Filled milk act Violation of a serious nature Violation of non-serious nature Violation of posting requirement Willful violation if non-serious or regulatory Willful violation if serious Repeated violations Violation of record keeping- reporting Fail to make requested forms available Egg products inspection act- violation Above + intent to defraud or distribute adulterated eggs Federal Meat Inspection act violation Above + intent to defraud or distribute adulterated meat Violation of sanitary food transportation act Administrative penalty for CERCLA and EPCRA- class 1 “ “ “ 
class 2 Violation of right to know reporting under EPCRA Frivolous trade secret claim under EPCRA Administrative violation of CWA- class 1 Administrative violation of CWA- class II Hazardous substance discharge violation of 
CWA Agency OSHA FDA EPA 
Civil Civil Civil Civil Civil Civil Civil Civil Up to 1000 Up to 10000 Up to 1000 Up to 10000 Same as hazardous material transport act Same as hazardous material transport act Up to 1000 Up to 1yr prison Up to 25000 a day Up to 75000 a day Up to 10000 a day Up to 25000 Up to 10000 a day 25000 max Up to 10000 a day 25000 max Up to 25000 a day Fish and Wildlife Service Civil Civil Civil Civil Civil Civil Civil 
Above + gross negligence of willful misconduct Violation of FIFRA if for hire applicator or dealer Violation of FIFRA if non hire applicator Knowingly violate FIFRA if registrant or producer Knowingly violate FIFRA if other Knowingly violate FIFRA if private applicator Violation of RCRA Knowingly violate financial disclosure for solid waste disposal See above Violation of compliance requirement for solid waste Knowingly transport, treats or stores haz waste w/o permit See above (except permit) and knows that puts person in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury See above and defendant is organization Violates requirement of solid waste disposal Owner fails to notify or submits false info about underground storage tanks Violation of Wild Bird Conservation Act Violate WBCA 111 a1 or 2 (import in violation of ban )or permit under 112 ( exemptions for sci research and ltd breeding) Knowingly violate and import under WBCA 11a3 ? If non business related and violate WBCA Civil violation of African Elephant Conservation Act Violation of Bald Eagle Protection Act Violation of ESA if knowingly violate/in business of im/export, taking, possessing etc No less than 100000 Up to 500 1st offense then up to 1000 Max 50,000 Max 25,000 Max 1000 Up to 25000 a day Up to 2500 Up to 1 yr prison Up to 25000 a day Up to 50000 a day or 2 yr prison Up to 250,000 or 15 yr prison Up to 1,000,000 Up to 25000 Up to 10,000 Up to 25000 Up to 12000 Up to 500 Up to 5000 Up to 5000 Up to 25000 EEOC Up to 1 yr prison Reinstate, hire, backpay or other approp equit relief Up to 100 Punitive damages Up to 50,000 Up to 100,000 Up to 200,000 Up to 300,000 Up to 10,000 Up to 6 mo prison Liable for wages and liquidated damages Up to 10,000 Up to 1000 Violation of ESA if knowingly violate or ex/import and not enumerated above Otherwise violate ESA Up to 500 Give public info about unlawful employment Up to 1000 practice under T7 during proceeding See above Intentional engagement in unlawful employment practice under T7 Willful failure to post pertinent provisions of T7 Same remedies available as under T7 Discriminatory practice with malice Total damages under t7 for small business (under 100 employees) Total damages under T7 for medium business (over 100 less than 200 employees) Total damages under T7 for large business (Over 200 less than 500) Total damages under T7 for big business (more than 500) Willful violation of section 15 of equal pay act See above Violation of section 6 or 7 of equal pay act Violation of section 212 (child labor) of equal pay act Repeated or willful violation of section 6 or 7 of EPA 
Regulation Agency Unvented Space Heater Ban Aircraft Cabin Fire Protection Standard Auto Passive Restraint/Seat Belt Standards Steering Column Protection Standard Underground Construction Standards Trihalomethane Drinking Water Standards Aircraft Seat Cushion Flammability Standard Alcohol and Drug Control Standards Auto Fuel-System Integrity Standard Standards for Servicing Auto Wheel Rims Aircraft Floor Emergency Lighting Standard Concrete & Masonry Construction Standards Crane Suspended Personnel Platform Standard Passive Restraints for Trucks & Buses (Proposed) Side-Impact Standards for Autos (Dynamic) Children’s Sleepwear Flammability Ban Auto Side Door Support Standards Low Altitude Windshear Equipment & Training Standards Electrical Equipment Standards (Metal Mines) Trenching and Excavation Standards Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance (TCAS) Systems Hazard Communication Standard Side-Impact Standards for Trucks, Buses, and MPVs (Proposed) Grain Dust Explosion Prevention Standards Rear Lap/Shoulder Belts for Autos Standards for Radionuclides in Uranium Mines Benzine NESHAP (Original: Fugitive Emissions) Ethylene Dibromide Drinking Water Standard Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Coke Byproducts) CPSC 
FAA NHTSA NHTSA OSHA-S 
EPA FAA 
FRA NHTSA OSHA-S 
FAA OSHA-S OSHA-S NHTSA NHTSA 
CPSC NHTSA 
FAA MSHA OSHA-S 
FAA OSHA-S NHTSA OSHA-S NHTSA 
EPA EPA EPA EPA Cost per premature 
death averted ($ millions 1990) 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 1.3 Asbestos Occupational Exposure Limit Benzene Occupational Exposure Limit Electrical Equipment Standards (Coal Mines) Arsenic Emission Standards for Glass Plants Ethylene Oxide Occupational Exposure Limit Arsenic/Copper NESHAP Hazardous Waste Listing for Petroleum Refining Sludge Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Inactive Sites) Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Transfer Operations) Cover/Move Uranium Mill Tailings (Active Sites) Acrylonitrile Occupational Exposure Limit Coke Ovens Occupational Exposure Limit Lockout/Tagout Asbestos Occupational Exposure Limit Arsenic Occupational Exposure Limit Asbestos Ban Diethylstilbestrol (DES) Cattlefeed Ban Benzene NESHAP (Revised: Waste Operations) 1,2 Dichloropropane Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Land Disposal Ban (1st 3rd) Municipal Solid Waste Landfill Standards (Proposed) Formaldehyde Occupational Exposure Limit Atrazine/Alachlor Drinking Water Standard Hazardous Waste Listing for Wood-Preserving Chemicals OSHA-H OSHA-H 
MSHA 
EPA OSHA-H 
EPA EPA EPA EPA 
EPA OSHA-H OSHA-H OSHA-S OSHA-H OSHA-H 
EPA FDA EPA EPA EPA 
EPA OSHA-H 
EPA EPA Readers with comments should address them to: Professor Cass R. Sunstein Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 773.702.9498 csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) 
