University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2001 

to the Law: Foreword 
to the Law: Foreword 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

On Academic Fads and Fashions 2001 Survey of Books Relating 
On Academic Fads and Fashions 2001 Survey of Books Relating 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "On Academic Fads and Fashions 2001 Survey of Books Relating to the Law: Foreword," 
99 Michigan Law Review 1251 (2001). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

FOREWORD:
ON  ACADEMIC  FADS  AND  FASHIONS

Cass R.  Sunstein*

I. 

INTRODUCTION

Why  did  critical  legal  studies  disappear?  Will  it  reappear?  Why
does the  Federalist  Society  prosper?  Why,  and  when, do  people  write
books on  constitutional  law, rather  than tort law or antitrust?  Why did
people  laugh  at  the  notion  of  "animal  rights,"  and  why  do  they  now
laugh  less?  Why  do  law  professors  seem  increasingly  respectful  of
"textualism"  and  "originalism,"  ideas  that produced  ridicule  and  con-
tempt  just  two  decades  ago?  How  do  book  reviewers  choose  what
books to review?  Why has law  and economics  had such staying power?
Academics  are  generally  committed  to  truth,  and  they  are  drawn
to  ideas  that  can  be  shown  to  be  good  ones.  The  most  optimistic  an-
swer  to  these  questions  is  that ideas  survive  because  and  to  the  extent
that  they  are  true  or good.  On  this  view,  law  and  economics  has out-
lasted  critical  legal  studies  because  it  has  much more  to  offer.  Textu-
alism  and originalism  have had  a  resurgence  because  much can  be  said
on  their  behalf.  Book  reviewers,  in  the  academic  domain,  tend  to
choose to review the best  books.

In  my view,  these  claims  contain  some  truth,  but  they  are  far  too
optimistic.  Academics,  like  everyone  else,  are  subject  to  cascade ef-
fects. They  start, join,  and  accelerate  bandwagons.  More  particularly,
they  are  subject  to  the  informational signals sent  by  the  acts  and
statements  of others.  They  participate  in  creating  the  very  signals  to
which  they  respond.  Academics,  like  everyone  else,  are  also  suscepti-
ble  to  the  reputational pressures imposed  by the  (perceived)  beliefs  of
others. They respond  to  these  pressures,  and  by so  doing,  they help  to
amplify  them.  It  is  for  these  reasons  that  fads,  fashions,  and  band-
wagon  effects can  be found  in  academia,  including  the  academic  study
of law.  Fortunately,  the  underlying forces  can spark  creativity  and  give
new  ideas  a  chance  to  prosper.  Unfortunately,  these  same  forces  can
also  produce  error and confusion.

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  University  of
Chicago,  Law  School  and  Department  of  Political  Science.  - Ed.  I  am  grateful  to  Jack
Goldsmith,  Tracey  Meares,  Eric  Posner,  and  Richard  Posner  for  helpful  comments  on  an
earlier draft.

1251

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1251 2000-2001

1252

Michigan Law Review

[Vol.99:1251

Sometimes  cascades  have  enduring  effects.  But in  many  fields  aca-
demic  cascades  are  fragile,  with  numerous  people  focusing  on  issues
and  adopting  methods  that  disappear  in  short  order.  Some  cascades
produce  unpredictable  and  seemingly  random movements,  as external
shocks  lead  in  dramatic  directions.  In  social  life,  small  sparks  cause
wildfires;  it is  for this  reason,  among others,  that we  cannot easily  pre-
dict  future  academic  trends,  or  foresee  new  movements  in  the  aca-
demic  study  of law.  (In  1985,  would  it  have  been  possible  to  predict
the  resurgence,  in  the  1990s,  of  interest  in  the  study  of social  norms?1
Or  the  rise  of  interest  in  cyberspace?  In  the  Second  Amendment?)
There  is  even  a  tipping  point  phenomenon  here,  in  which  a  certain
pressure,  from  the  perceived  views  of  others,  can  produce  a  sudden
"rush"  toward  a particular  methodology  or point of view.2

In  this  Essay,  I  attempt  to  cast  light  on  the  general  topic  of  aca-
demic  bandwagons  and  cascades,  with  particular  reference  to  law.
Several  caveats  are  in  order.  First, my  focus  here  is  on  trends  in  aca-
demic  law,  but  informational  and  reputational  signals  are  ubiquitous.
The  same  forces  discussed  here  help  explain  many social  movements,
including  reactions  to environmental  risks,  the rise  and fall  of commu-
nism, the success  or failure of students  and job candidates,  the creation
of ethnic  identifications,  and  the  rise  and  partial fall  of affirmative  ac-
tion.3  Second,  I  do  not mean  to  present  any  criticism  of legal  scholar-
ship  in  general,  or  to  depict  those  who  produce  it  as  especially  prone
to informational  and reputational  influences. A general  attack  on legal
scholarship  would  be  senseless,  if only  because  so  much  of it  is  obvi-
ously  excellent.  Third,  I  aim  only  to  establish  the  existence  of  cascade
effects,  not to give a  clear  test for distinguishing  cascades  from cases  in
which  approaches  and  arguments  have  spread  because  of their  merits
(though  some  of  my  remarks  will  bear  on  that  issue).  Fourth,  my
treatment  will be informal  and  anecdotal, offering  examples  that will,  I
hope,  be  intuitive  and  familiar.  With  respect  to  the  underlying  phe-
nomena,  I  draw  on  some  more  systematic  and  formal  treatments,4

1.  Fueled by  ROBERT  ELLICKSON,  ORDER  WITHOUT  LAW  (1991).

2.  For  a  popular  treatment, see MALCOLM  GLADWELL,  THE TIPPING POINT  (2000).

3.  See,  e.g.,  David Hirschleifer,  The Blind Leading the  Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and
Informational Cascades, in THE NEW  ECONOMICS OF  HUMAN  BEHAVIOR  188,  189  (Mariano
Tommasi  &  Kathryn  Ierulli  eds.,  1995);  TIMUR  KURAN,  PUBLIC  LIES,  PRIVATE  TRUTHS
(1997).

4.  See  supra note  3.  A  helpful overview  is  Sushil  Bikchandani  et  al.,  Learning From the
Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cascades, 12  J.  ECON.  PERSP.  151
(1998).  In  the  social  sciences,  the  analytical  literature  on  cascades  begins  with  Magoroh
Maruyama,  The  Second Cybernetics: Deviation-Amplifying Mutual Causal Processes, 51  AM.
SCIENTIST  164  (1963);  THOMAS  C.  SCHELLING,  MICROMOTIVES  AND  MACROBEHAVIOR
(1978);  and  Mark  Granovetter,  Threshold Models  of Collective  Behavior, 83  AMER.  J.  OF
SOC.  1420  (1978).  For  analysis  of  purely  informational  cascades,  see  Sushil  Bikchandani,
David  Hirshleifer, & Ivo  Welch, A  Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as
Informational Cascades, 100  J. OF  POL.  ECON.  992  (1992);  David  Hirschleifer,  supra note  3;

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1252 2000-2001

May  20011

Foreword

1253

both  general  and  particular,  and  try  to  apply  the  central  ideas  to  the
academic  context.  Obviously  a  great  deal  might  be  said  about  this
topic; my brief treatment here is  intended  only  to be a  start.

II.  A  NOTE ON  ACADEMIC UTILITY FUNCTIONS  AND THE MARKET
FOR IDEAS

To make  progress  on  this  topic, it  is  necessary  to have  some  sense
of what  academics  care  about,  and  also  to know  something  about the
nature  of the market  for academic  ideas.  On these  subjects,  I hope  not
to say  anything  controversial.  But  because  some  account  is  implicit in
any description of cascades,  I  offer some  brief notations.'

Most  academics  care  about  what  most  people  care  about.  They
seek  to  retain  their  jobs  and  to  have  the  good  opinion  of  (relevant)
others. Few of them  are indifferent  to status.  But they  also care,  more
than  most, about ideas, and  they  are willing  to forego  various  benefits
in  order to  be able  to  think  and  talk about  issues suitable  for  teaching
and  academic  research.  Many  academics  are  interested  in  pursuing
truth  as  such.  Those  who  do  or  use  empirical  work  often  fall  in  this
category,  and  the  same  is  true  for  those  whose  basic  goal  is  to  help
produce  clarity  and  coherence  in  the  law.  In the  context  of law,  there
is  an  additional  point: Many  academics would like to  contribute  to im-
provements  in  law  and  society  by  helping  to  make  law  better  in  the
domains  of, for  example,  antitrust  law,  race  or sex  equality,  and  free-
dom  of speech.  Of course  academics  are  a  diverse  lot on  these  counts.
For  some,  reputation  matters  a  great  deal;  for  others,  the  pursuit  of
truth  or justice  is  especially  important.

There  is  also  a  market  for  academic  ideas,  and  this  market  will
have  significant  effects  on  what  academics  do.  In  this  market,  aca-
demics  are  the  producers,  while  consumers  include  other  academics,
students,  government  officials,  judges,  and  law  clerks.  The  extent  of
interest  from these  groups  will of course  vary  with  the material;  some
academic  work,  for  instance,  is  of  direct  interest  only  to  other  aca-
demics.  The  market  here  is  unusual  in  many  ways,  above  all  because
no  one  pays directly  for what  academics  produce.  Law  reviews usually
do  not compensate  contributors  for articles  and essays, and  the same is
true  for  other journals  (in economics  and  philosophy,  for  example)  in

Lisa  Anderrson  &  Charles  Holt,  Information Cascades in  the  Laboratory, 87  AM.  ECON.
REV.  847  (1997);  Abhiijit Banerjee,  A  Simple Model of Herd Behavior, 107  Q.  J.  ECON.  797
(1992).  See  also B.  Douglas  Bernheim,  A  Theory  of  Conformity,  102  J.  POL.  ECON.  841
(1994)  (discussing similar mechanisms).

5.  This  section  was  not  included  in  the  initial  drafts  of the  paper.  It  was  suggested  by
several  commentators  on an  earlier draft, who urged  an elaboration  of the utility  function  of
law  professors  and of the  market  for  academic  ideas. Obviously  I think that  the commenta-
tors  are  right,  but  the fact  that  these  topics  are  discussed  here  is  itself  an  illustration  of  the
forces  I discuss  in this  Essay.

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1253 2000-2001

1254

Michigan Law Review

[Vol.99:1251

which  law  professors might publish.  Publishers  will pay  for the right  to
publish  books,  and  professors  receive  royalties,  but  little  money  is
usually  involved,  and  hence  the  motivation  for  writing books  is  rarely
material  for  academics.  On  the  other  hand,  indirect  compensation  -
monetary  and  nonmonetary -
is  omnipresent. Job opportunities  are a
direct  function  of what  academics  produce,  and  at  many  schools,  sal-
ary  is partly a  reflection  of quality and  quantity  of publications.  Invita-
tions  to  conferences  and  the  like  -
dreaded  by  some,  welcomed  by
many -
are  also  affected  by  the  perceived  quality  of academic  work.
It  is here,  above  all,  that the market disciplines  academic  activity.

In a well-functioning  market, only  or mostly  valuable  ideas will  be
produced  -
although  of  course  some  ideas  will  be  valuable  even  if
they  are misleading  or  incorrect.  But  it is  not  at  all  clear that  an  ordi-
nary  economic  market,  based  on  the  willingness-to-pay  criterion,  is  a
good  way  to produce  valuable  ideas  in  law  or  elsewhere.  Such  a  mar-
ket  might  well  cater  unduly  to  existing  tastes  or  to  the  interests  of
those  with  a  great  deal  of money  to  pay;  research  funding  by  groups
with  a  large  financial  stake  in  outcomes  is  therefore  a  problem.  The
complex  system  of  indirect  compensation,  alongside  the  tenure  sys-
tem,  is  commonly  defended  as  a  way  of insulating  the  production  of
ideas  from  ordinary  markets.  If this  complex  system  works  extremely
well  (by  the appropriate  criteria),  it will lack  "bad  cascades"  -
that is,
cascades  in  which  valueless ideas  travel  not because  they  are  valuable,
but because  of the mechanisms  that I  will be discussing  here. But  I will
suggest  that  in  many  contexts,  an  absence  of private  information,  to-
gether  with  a  concern  for  reputation  and  various  features  of  human
cognition,  can produce  academic  cascades  that are bad  as well  as good.

III.  INFORMATION-INDUCED  ACADEMIC  CASCADES

Academic  cascades  take  two  forms:  informational  and  reputa-

tional. Let  us begin  with  the role of information.

Most  people,  in  most  domains,  lack  reliable  information  about
what  is  true  and  what  is  right.  For  this  reason,  they  are  interested  in
the  signals  of others. The  point  holds  for  the  selection  of movies  and
restaurants  and  carpets;  it  holds  for  ideas  as  well.  If you  are  unsure
whether  textualism  is  a  sensible  or  pernicious  approach  to  constitu-
tional interpretation,  you  might care  a  great deal  about other  people's
views.  Of  course  academics,  especially  older  ones,  are  sometimes  set-
tled  in  their  views.  Often  they  are  confident  that  they  know  what  to
think,  and to  that  extent,  they  are  not terribly  susceptible  to  the views
of others.  (Notice  here  that the precondition  for  immunity  to informa-
tional influences  is  confidence  about one's  preexisting  views,  not  ade-
quate  or accurate  information.)  But  among  some groups,  and  in  some
fields,  any  settlement  is  provisional  and  somewhat  fragile.  In  many
fields,  including law,  young  people in particular  can  both influence  and

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1254 2000-2001

May  2001]

Foreword

1255

be influenced  by informational  signals.  If many  people  are  susceptible
to  influence,  cascades  can  readily  develop.  The  significant  swings  in
legal  scholarship  over  the  last  decades  suggest  that  academic  lawyers
are indeed  susceptible.

Suppose,  for example,  that John, a young  academic,  does  not know
whether  textualism  is  a  sensible  approach  to constitutional  interpreta-
tion, but that Mary, a slightly  older  academic,  is  in favor  of it.6 If John
is  otherwise  in  equipoise,  but  attaches  value  to  what  Mary  thinks  be-
cause  she  seems  wise  or  has often  been  right  in  the  past,  it  is  easy  to
see  how  John  might  come  to  Mary's  view.  If John  and  Mary  believe
that  textualism makes  sense,  Sally,  a  contemporary  of John, might  be
moved  to  agree,  at  least  if she  lacks  any  reason  to  be  confident  that
they  are  wrong.  And  once  John,  Mary,  and  Sally  come  to  a  certain
view,  David,  a  recently  hired  faculty  member,  will  likely  agree  with
them  unless  he  has  enough  private  knowledge  - or,  more  precisely,
about  his  antecedent  view  to  stand  in  their  way.  At
confidence  -
some  point  one  or more  of these  people might  even produce  an article
or book in  defense of textualism.

As  stylized as  this  example  seems,  I believe  that it  captures a  great
deal  about academic  movements,  in  law  and  elsewhere.  Consider, for
example,  the rise  of  feminism within  the  law  schools,  starting  roughly
in the  mid-1980s.  In many places,  feminism  appears to  have succeeded
through  a  kind  of informational  cascade,  as  people  who  would  other-
wise be skeptical  or unsure came  to think that feminist approaches  had
something to offer - not (in many cases)  because  they  carefully inves-
tigated  the underlying  claims and  believed  that they  were  illuminating
or  right,  but  because  the  beliefs  of  others  seemed  hard  to  resist  for
those  lacking  a  great deal  of confidence  in  their  own (skeptical)  judg-
ments.  If so  many people  seemed  to think  feminist  approaches  to law
were valuable,  mustn't they be right?7

Or  consider  the  life and  apparent death  of the  critical  legal  studies
movement,  which  flourished  (again  speaking  roughly)  from  1977  to
1989. When  I was  a  visiting  professor  at  Harvard Law  School  in  1987,
critical  legal  studies  powerfully  influenced  both students  and  younger
faculty.  A significant  number of  students  appeared  to sense  what criti-
cal legal  studies was  about, and  they  seemed  to agree with  it. A  signifi-
cant  number  of  assistant  professors  (some  of  them  now  professors,
with  apparently  little  continuing  interest in  critical  legal  studies) were
in  the  same  category.  Within  both  groups,  the  informational  signals
sent  by  the  large  number  of  critical  legal  studies  members  were  ex-
tremely  important.

6.  The example adapts  from  the treatment in Bikchandani, supra  note 4.
7.  In  some contexts,  a  possible  answer is  that they might be  wrong,  especially  if  they are

participating  in  a cascade,  rather than acting independently.

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1255 2000-2001

1256

Michigan Law Review

[Vol.99:1251

At  the  University  of  Chicago  Law  School,  much  the  same  can  be
said,  then  and  now, about  the  economic  analysis  of law.  Many  faculty
members  engage  in  economic  analysis  of  law,  and  a  majority  of  the
faculty shows  considerable  interest in  the basic  approach.  As a  general
rule,  younger  faculty  members  are  especially  interested  in  the  infor-
mational  signals  sent  by  their  colleagues,  and  at  Chicago,  many  of
them  end  up  doing work  that  is  influenced  by economics.  Cascade  ef-
fects  are  even  easier  to  observe  within  the  student  body,  as  certain
concepts  (involving,  for  example,  the  value  of efficiency,  the  implica-
tions  of  the  Coase  theorem,  and  the  futility  of redistributive  regula-
tion)  spread as if by contagion.  Of course it  is  true that many students,
and  some  faculty  members,  show  no  interest  in  the  economic  analysis
of  law.  But  mere  exposure  to  economic  thinking,  voiced  in  many set-
tings  (including  workshops,  lunch  discussions,  and  comments  on  arti-
cles),  leads in  the expected  directions.

As  informational  cascades  develop,  people  end  up  amplifying  the
very  informational  signals  to which  they have  responded.  Scholarship,
including  the  production  of  articles  and  books,  is  much  affected  by
processes  of this kind.  If this is  so,  it  is  possible  to predict,  with  some
confidence,  that  the  publication  of  books  on  various  topics  or  with
various  methodologies  often  will  be  highly  concentrated  over  time,
showing  that  fads  and  fashions  play  a  role  in  the  academic  world  as
elsewhere.

In  making  these  claims,  I  do  not  mean  to  make  any  normative
claims  about  feminism,  critical  legal  studies,  or  economic  analysis  of
law.  Nor do  I  mean  to  suggest that  those who  are  vulnerable  to infor-
mational  pressures are  weak  or irrational. People  who know  that they
have  limited  information  certainly  should pay  attention  to the  signals
given  by others. And  whether  pressures  of this  kind will  lead in  desir-
able  directions  cannot  be  decided  in  the  abstract.  All  that can  be  said
is  that the underlying mechanisms  give  little reason for  confidence  that
academic  "movements"  will  be  good  ones.  Ideas  can  spread,  even
among people  with  some  expertise,  despite  the  fact  that little  is  to  be
said on their  behalf.

From  these  examples,  we  can  also see  the  possibility  of purely  or
mostly  local  informational  cascades.  Outside  the  academic  world,
some  communities  come  to  believe  that  abandoned  hazardous  waste
dumps  are  extremely  dangerous,  whereas  others  think  that  they  pose
no  hazard  at all.  So, too, some law  schools  might come  to embrace  the
economic  analysis  of  law,  whereas  others  might  see  enthusiasm  for
traditional  doctrinal  analysis  -
not  because  of a  large  number  of in-
dependent  judgments,  but  because  of mutual  interactions  and  influ-
ences.

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1256 2000-2001

May  20011

Foreword

1257

IV.  REPUTATION  AND REPUTATIONAL  CASCADES

It should be  clear that something  important is  missing from  the pic-
ture:  people's concerns  about their reputations.'  Generally  people care
about  what  others  think  of  them,  and  most  academics  are,  on  this
count,  like most other people.

In many law  schools  and economics  departments,  an  effort to show
that centralized  planning  really  can  work  well,  or  to  vindicate  social-
ism, or to show that  people  are irrational, would be very  risky, no  mat-
ter  the  quality  of  the  relevant  work.  People  might  be  ridiculed.  They
might  well  jeopardize  their  careers.  At  many  law  schools,  the  same
would  be  true  for  people  who  attempted  to  show  that  current  differ-
ences  between  men  and  women  are  biological  rather  than  social,  and
to bring evidence  to that effect to bear on  legal issues.

or  at  least  not  ill  -

Reputational  considerations  influence  the public  behavior  of most
people,  not  excluding  academics.  This  is  not  because  people  lack  in-
tegrity, or  are  sycophantic,  or are  unwilling  to  follow  their  own  paths.
It  is  simply  because  most  people,  most  of  the  time,  want  others  to
think  well  -
of  them.  Of  course,  people  have
varying  susceptibility  to reputational pressures.  Some people  can with-
stand  a  great  deal;  others  will  be  inclined  to  take  the  safe  course,
showing  reluctance  to say, or especially  to publish,  anything  that could
create  trouble  for  them in  the  future.  And  of course  sometimes  those
who incur reputational sanctions  in  one place  (the nonacademic  world,
for  example)  will  reap  reputational  benefits  elsewhere  (perhaps  their
local  academic  community).  Those  who  seem  to  be  venturing  out  on
their own,  and to be  "brave,"  might in fact  be motivated  by the goal  of
gaining status within a  particular group.

Because  most  people  care  about the  views  of others,  and  because
people  have  varying,  rather  than  uniform,  susceptibility  to  reputa-
tional  pressures,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  reputational  cascades  with  re-
spect to  actions  or stated beliefs.9  Suppose,  for  example,  that A  and  B
would  think  ill  of anyone  who  argues  that  the  minimum  wage  should
be  significantly  increased.  C, who  is  not  sure  what  to  think  about  a
higher minimum wage,  might  be  unmoved privately  by the  views  of A
and  B, but nonetheless  might  not want to  incur the  wrath  of A  and  B,
or to  seem  ignorant  of basic  economic  principles,  or  to  appear  indif-
ferent  to  economic  efficiency.  If so,  C might  show  no  enthusiasm  for
an increase  in  the  minimum wage,  or might  even  agree  with A  and  B
that  an increase  would  be  a  bad  idea.  If D  is  otherwise  in  equipoise,
she might be most reluctant  to oppose A,  B,  and  C publicly.  Mounting
reputational pressures  might well lead E, F, G, and H, and  many more,

8.  On reputation  and signaling  in general,  see ERIC POSNER,  LAW  AND  SOCIAL NORMS

(2000).

9.  See KURAN,  supra note 3.

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1257 2000-2001

1258

Michigan Law Review

[Vol.99:1251

to  join  the  bandwagon.  Eventually  a  large  number  of  people  might
speak  as  if  the  minimum  wage  should  not  be  increased.  The  result
would  be to  affect  academic  discussion  of government's  role  in  the  la-
bor  market, including the treatment  of this topic in  articles  and  books.
Here,  too,  a  highly  stylized  example  seems  to  help  account  for
many  shifts  in  the  academic  world.  The  rise  of  feminism  within  legal
academia  undoubtedly  has a great deal to  do with  reputational  and  in-
formational  incentives.  In  the  early  1980s,  those  who  expressed  con-
tempt  for  feminist  scholarship  were  rarely  punished  for  doing  so,  and
were  sometimes  rewarded.  Currently  those  who  express  contempt  for
feminist  scholarship  generally  (of course not  always)  put their  reputa-
tion  in  considerable  danger:  If  a young  academic  chooses  to  write  on
certain  topics,  or  from  certain  points  of  view,  the  reputational  sanc-
tions might  be quite severe. At  the University  of Chicago  Law  School,
I  cannot  recall  many  faculty  members  expressing  public  support  for  a
substantial  increase  in  the  minimum wage,  though  I would  not be  sur-
prised  if more  than  one  faculty  member  actually  believes  that such  an
increase  would  be  a  good  idea.  Five  years  ago,  those  who  borrowed
from  behavioral  economics  were  viewed  with  considerable  suspicion
inside  the world of law  and economics;  through  a  cascade  effect, this is
decreasingly  true.

It follows  that  "political  correctness"  is  hardly  a  narrow  phenome-
non involving  the  practices  of  left-leaning  academics.  Wherever  repu-
tational  pressures  are  in  place,  a  form  of  "political  correctness"  will
discipline  action  and  public  statements.  Reputational  cascades  are  a
possible consequence.

V.  GROUP POLARIZATION  AND  ACADEMIC  "SCHOOLS"

A  closely  related  phenomenon  helps  explain  the  initial  growth  of
academic  fashions  and  gives some  guidance on  how to create,  and how
not to create, an  academic  "school."  The  phenomenon  is that of group
polarization." In brief, the  idea  behind group  polarization  is  that when
a  group  of people  engages  in  deliberation,  group  members  will move
toward a more extreme position in line with  their predeliberation incli-
nations. This  is  the  typical  pattern  among  deliberating  bodies.  Thus,
for  example,  a  group  of  Federalist  Society  members,  inclined  to  sup-
port  originalism,  is  likely  to  be  extremely  enthusiastic  about  origi-
nalism  after  discussing  it  with  one  another.  So,  too,  a  semiformal  or-
ganization  of law professors,  meeting once a  month, is  likely  to emerge
with  a  stronger  commitment  to  critical  race  theory  if its  members  are
inclined,  before  discussion,  to  be  favorably  disposed  toward  critical
race  theory. It would  be easy  to multiply examples.

10.  See  ROGER  BROWN,  SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY  (2d  ed.  1986);  Cass R.  Sunstein,  Delib-

erative Trouble: Why Groups Go to Extremes, 110  YALE L.J. 71  (2000).

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1258 2000-2001

May 2001]

Foreword

1259

Massive  evidence,  from many  different  countries,  supports  the ba-
sic prediction. Why does group polarization  occur?  Though no  cascade
need be  involved,1  the  two  principal  explanations  are  close  to the  ex-
planations  for  informational  and  reputational  cascades.  The  first  in-
volves  informational  influences.  In a  deliberating  group  with  an  initial
tendency  in  favor  of X  and  against  Y,  there  will be  a  disproportionate
number  of  arguments  in  favor  of X, simply  because  most  people  will
speak out  on behalf  of X.  Group  members  will  have  thought  of some,
but  not  all,  of  the  arguments  in  that direction.  After  deliberating,  the
arguments for X  will  seem stronger  to individual members,  and  the ar-
guments for  Y  will seem  even weaker. It  is  to be  expected  that discus-
sion will  move  people  to  a more  extreme  form  of their  original  enthu-
siasm for X.

The  second  explanation  for  group  polarization  points  to social  in-
fluences.  Most  people,  emphatically  including  professors  of law,  care
about  their  reputations  and  their  self-conception.  Suppose,  for  exam-
ple,  that you  are inclined  to  think  that  affirmative  action  does  not  of-
fend  the  Constitution,  but  you  are  not  entirely  sure;  suppose  too  that
you  find yourself  in  a group  that also  rejects  the  idea  that  affirmative
action  offends  the Constitution.  If you  think  of yourself  as  the sort  of
person  who is,  more  than  most, inclined  to  support  the  constitutional-
ity  of affirmative  action  programs,  you  might  move  a  bit,  if  only  to
maintain your reputation  within the group  and your self-conception  on
the  issue  at  hand. The  evidence  strongly  supports  the  proposition  that
this happens. 2

In  the  academic  context,  the  lesson  is  simple.  A  group  of  like-
minded  people,  thinking  about  some  issue  or  topic, is  highly  likely  to
move  toward  a  more  extreme  position,  not  merely  fortifying  but  am-
plifying  their predeliberation  inclinations.  Through this  route,  it is pos-
sible  to make  some  progress  in  understanding  the creation  and  effects
of academic  "schools."  In the  early  1980s,  for  example,  the critical  le-
gal  studies  movement flourished  at Harvard  Law  School  in  particular,
no  doubt  in  part  because  of the  presence  of members  who  talked  a
great  deal  with  one  another  and  fueled  their  predeliberation  inclina-
tions.  Several  influential  books  emerged  from  these  discussions."3  In
roughly the same period, the Federalist  Society was  created  at Chicago
and  Yale,  and  the  existence  of  a  group  of  like-minded  people  un-
doubtedly  helped  to fuel  certain commitments.  In fact, it  is  reasonable
to  speculate  that the growth of conservative  legal thought, within  both
faculties  and  student  groups,  has had  a great  deal  to do  with  the  exis-

11.  This  is  because  group  polarization  can  result  from  simultaneous  independent  influ-

ences on group  members.

12.  See  BROWN,  supra note  10.

13.  See,  e.g.,  ROBERTO UNGER,  THE CRITICAL  LEGAL STUDIES  MOVEMENT  (1985).

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1259 2000-2001

1260

Michigan Law Review

[Vol.99:1251

tence  of a  collection  of people  who  are  relatively  well-organized  and
who  are able  to ensure  that like-minded  people  can find  some  kind  of
home.

VI.  QUALIFICATIONS,  EXTENSIONS,  IMPLICATIONS

Informational  and  reputational  influences,  as well  as group  polari-
zation,  play a  significant  role  in academic  life.  Cascade  effects  are pre-
sent  here as elsewhere.  For  this reason, we  should expect  a  large  num-
ber of fads and  fashions in  the  academic  study  of law.  I  would  predict,
for example,  that  a citation  analysis  would  show many academic  "bub-
bles"  -
rapid  rises  and  declines  in  references  to  certain  ideas  and
people.14 But  this basic sketch  omits important parts  of the  overall  pic-
ture.

A.  Leaders, Followers, Polarizers

With  respect  to  both  informational  signals  and  reputational  pres-
sures,  all  people  are  not created  equal.  Some  carry  more  weight  than
others.  For  example,  the  signals  sent  by  well-known  academics,  and
academics  at  well-known  schools,  are  likely  to  be  especially  loud.  If
faculty  members  at Yale  end  up  endorsing  a  new  method  for  under-
standing  law,  there  might seem  to be  particularly  good  reason  to take
that  method  seriously.  And  it  is  less  likely  that  people  who  embrace
the  method  will  face  the  kind  of reputational  sanction  that  could  be
imposed if the method were  being used  at  a  little-known  school. Those
who are  in a  position  to  start cascades  operate  as leaders, above  all be-
cause  of the social  amplification  of their  voices.15  Note  that  this ampli-
fication  can  occur  independently  of the  merits  of the  argument  being
made.  In listening carefully  to well-known  people,  or to people  at well-
known  schools,  followers  are  probably  behaving  rationally,  because
such  people  are  unusually likely  to  be  interesting  or correct,  simply  as
a  statistical  matter.  But  there  are  no  guarantees  here,  and  hence  ar-
guments  can  be  amplified  even  if they  are  meritless.  (Perhaps  the  re-
sulting bubble will  eventually pop, as discussed below.)

Some  of the  relevant  leaders  are  simply  saying  what  they  think  to
be  true;  others  affirmatively  want  followers,  perhaps  because  they
seek  status,  or  perhaps  because  they  want  to  ensure  that  their  ideas
are  disseminated.  Such  people  take  steps  self-consciously  to  promote
cascade  effects,  perhaps  by organizing  conferences,  reading  groups,  or
even journals.  More  specifically,  we  can  describe  as  "polarization  en-
trepreneurs"  those  people  who  foster  deliberative  groups  of  like-

14.  Some  support can be  found in  Robert  Ellickson,  Trends in Legal Scholarship: A  Sta-

tistical Study,  29 J.  LEGAL STUD.  517,  527  (2000).

15.  Cf. GARY  BECKER  & KEVIN  MURPHY,  SOCIAL ECONOMICS  140-43 (2001).

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1260 2000-2001

May  2001]

Foreword

1261

minded  people  and  ensure  that  participants  share  a  common  method-
ology or point  of view. Exclusion  of outsiders, and  inclusion  of a  large
number  of insiders, is  an important  component  of this strategy.

An  obvious  implication  is  that  if the  goal  is  to  spread  ideas,  it  is
probably  best  to begin by promoting  discussion  among  groups  of like-
minded  people.  If  members  of  such  groups  speak  mostly  or  only  to
one  another, views  might  become  entrenched,  and  the  entrenchment
among the  views  of increasingly  large  groups  might  initiate  a  cascade
effect. A much worse  strategy - often  a  doomed  strategy -
is  to en-
sure  that  people  with  new  ideas  are  placed  in  heterogeneous  groups,
where  their  ideas  are  unlikely  to  travel,  or  might  be  squelched,  or
might  even be subject to self-silencing.

In fact,  the  forces  here  are  compounded  by another:  the  availabil-
ity  heuristic.  It is  well  known  that  certain  facts  and  ideas  are  cogni-
tively "available,"  or  highly  salient, and  that this  cognitive  availability
can  exert a  large  influence  on beliefs  and  decisions.16 If a  leader,  or an
idea,  ends  up  widely  known,  through  independent  decisions  or
through  cascade  effects,  dramatic  changes  in  scholarly  paths  can  be
expected.

B.  Starting and Stopping Cascades

Some  people  are  relatively  immune  to  the  influences  discussed
here.  As I have  suggested,  people who  are confident  about their  views
are especially  likely to resist informational  and  reputational incentives.
The  point  suggests  that  in  some  arenas,  cascades  are  likely  to  arise
quite  infrequently.  Academic  areas  are  highly  variable  on  this  count,
and academics  in some  domains have a great deal of confidence,  which
immunizes  themselves  from  cascade  effects.  In  fields  with  well-
established  methods  and  goals,  we  should  expect  cascades  to  be  un-
common.  In  the  sciences,  for  example,  large-scale  shifts  certainly  oc-
cur,  but  the  existence  of  settled  methods  makes  cascade  effects  un-
likely 7  -
than  in,  for  example,  comparative
literature.  Law,  economics,  and  psychology  are  perhaps  intermediate
cases.

far  less  probable 

This  point  raises  an  important  question:  When  and  why  do  aca-
demic cascades  start and stop?  A crucial reason has to do with  external
shocks.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  group  of people  believes  some
fact.  Suppose  that  evidence  shows  that  the  belief  is  false.  The  belief
will  fade because  it has been  demonstrated  to be wrong.

But  external  shocks  can  take  many  different  forms.  Sometimes
academic  trends,  especially  in  law,  have  nothing  to  do  with  demon-

16.  See JONATHAN  BARON, THINKING AND  DECIDING  (3d ed.  2000).

17.  This  is  a  possible  reading  of  THOMAS  KUHN,  THE  STRUCTURE  OF  SCIENTIFIC

REVOLUTION  (1970).

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1261 2000-2001

1262

Michigan Law Review

[Vol.99:1251

strated  fact,  but  are  greatly  affected  by  what  happens  outside  of  the
academic  domain. For  example, the selection  of Antonin  Scalia to be a
member  of  the  Supreme  Court  undoubtedly  had  a  great  deal  to  do
with  the  legitimation  of originalism  and  textualism,  methods  favored
by Justice  Scalia.  This  is  partly  because  Justice  Scalia's  opinions  pro-
vided  a  kind  of focal  point  for  academic  debate;  it  is  also  because  his
office  conferred  a  kind  of legitimacy  on  arguments  that  might  other-
wise  be  easy to  dismiss. Nor is it irrelevant that some  of Justice  Scalia's
law  clerks  became  academics.  In  fact,  a  significant  source  of informa-
tional  and  reputational  influences  will  come,  directly  and  indirectly,
from  the  selection  of  Supreme  Court  clerks,  and  from  the  choice,
among clerks  of particular justices,  to become  law  professors.  In a  pre-
vious  generation,  the  law  clerks  of  Felix  Frankfurter,  greatly  influ-
enced by Frankfurter, became  influential  academics;  the same  appears
to be true  of Scalia clerks  today.

More  generally,  the  1980  election  of  President  Reagan  made  it
most  unlikely  that  the  Supreme  Court  would  continue  to  use  the
Equal Protection  and  Due  Process  Clauses  as bases  for  announcing  a
series  of  new  rights  for  disadvantaged  people.  Sensibly  enough,  aca-
demics interested in social  reform showed  decreasing  interest in  elabo-
rating  legal  doctrine  for  that  purpose.  Perhaps  the  rise  of interest  in
constitutional  deliberation  outside  of the  courtroom had  something to
do  with  the  Court's  lack  of  receptivity  to  the  professors'  arguments.
Perhaps  diminished  interest  in  judicial  review  had  something  to  do
with  the  changing  composition  of  the  Court.18  Highly  visible  public
events  with  legal  dimensions,  such  as  the  1998  Clinton  impeachment
and  the  2000  postelection  struggle  between  George  W.  Bush  and  Al
Gore,  will  inevitably  affect  people's  choice  of  what  to  write  about.
(Perhaps  Bush v.  Gore will inaugurate  a new  era  of neorealism,  ques-
tioning the division  between  law  and  politics.)  Academics  may or may
not follow  the election  returns,  but in  law, the  election  returns  can  set
the academic  agenda.

Other  external  shocks  can  come  from  developments  in  adjacent
fields.  If,  for  example,  economists  show  a  great  deal  of interest  in  the
idea of  spontaneous  ordering,  academic  lawyers  are  likely  to  show an
interest  in  that topic,  too.  Part of the  reason  is  informational:  the  fact
that  a  certain  topic  interests  economists  is  likely  to  be  important  to
academic  lawyers, many  of whom  care  about what economists  think. If
there  is  a  resurgence  of  interest  in  utilitarianism  within  philosophy,
law  professors  are  likely  to  write  about  utilitarianism.  The  extraordi-
nary  interest  in  the  work  of  John  Rawls  confirms  this  point.  Critical
theory  provides  another  case  in  point,  with  Jurgen  Habermas  and
Michel Foucault,  for  example,  exerting  a  significant  influence  on  legal

18.  See MARK  TUSHNET,  TAKING  THE CONSTITUTION  AWAY FROM  THE COURT  (1999).

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1262 2000-2001

May  20011

Foreword

1263

scholarship  by virtue  of  their prominence  within  closely  related  fields.
Of  course,  developments  within  adjacent  fields might  well  be  a  prod-
uct  of the kinds of influences  discussed here.

There is  a final issue,  perhaps  in  tension  with  the general  argument
offered  thus far.  It  is  useful  to  distinguish  between  ideas and  methods
on  which  multiple  people  can  build  for  a  long  time,  and  ideas  and
methods  that  do  not  lead  to  much  in  the  way  of  further  work.19  The
notion  that people are  rational,  self-interested  profit  maximizers  is fer-
tile,  in  the  sense  that  it  has  applications  to  many  domains  of  law,
helping  to produce  predictions  that can  be  tested and  used.  Though  it
is  too  early  to  say,  I believe  that  the  same  is  true  for  the  notion  that
people  are  boundedly  rational,  and  also  for the  claim  that people  are
not  only  self-interested. 20  The  idea  that  law  is  pervasively  based  on
male  practices  and  understandings  is  also  easily used  as  a  basis  for  as-
sessing,  or reassessing,  many  domains  of law. But  some  claims  tend to
"burn out,"  in  the sense  that once  they have  been voiced,  there  is  little
that  can  be  done  with  them, even  if  they  are  true.  Perhaps  this  is  the
case  for the contention  that law  is  "political,"  an important and  illumi-
nating  partial  truth, but  one  with which  it  is  not easy,  in  the  aftermath
of legal  realism, to do  a  great deal of illuminating  further work.

CONCLUSION:  THE  MARKETPLACE  OF IDEAS

Academics,  like  everyone  else,  are  susceptible  to  informational
and  reputational  influences,  and  cascade  effects  are  as  likely  to  be
found  in  the  academic  domain  as  elsewhere.  Notwithstanding  the  ex-
pertise  and  confidence  of  many  academics,  academic  life  has  its  own
fads  and  fashions,  and  the  factors  discussed  here  play  a  role  in  their
development.  I  believe  that  these  factors  have  played  a  role  in  many
trends  in  legal  theory, including  critical  legal  studies,  economic  analy-
sis  of  law,  feminism,  textualism  and  originalism  in  constitutional  law,
critical  race  theory,  rights-based  accounts  associated  with  Ronald
Dworkin  and  others  (many  at  New  York  University),  law  and  litera-
ture, and  (more recently)  behavioral  law and economics.

By  way  of  conclusion,  it  is  worth  emphasizing  that  the  basic  ac-
count  contains  both  a  prescription  and  a  cautionary  note.  The  pre-
scription  is  that  those  who  seek  to  promote  ideas  will  do  best  to  en-
sure,  above  all,  that  those  ideas  have  an  opportunity  to  develop
through  frequent  discussions  among  like-minded  people.  Most would-

19.  Cf. the  discussion of progressive  and degenerate  research  programs in  Imre  Lakatos,
Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes, in CRITICISM  AND  THE
GROWTH  OF KNOWLEDGE  (Imre  Lakatos  & Alan  Musgrave  eds.,  1970).

20.  See  RICHARD  THALER,  QUASI-RATIONAL  ECONOMICS  (1991);  BEHAVIORAL  LAW

AND  ECONOMICS  (Cass  R. Sunstein  ed., 2000).

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1263 2000-2001

1264 

Michigan Law Review 

[Vol.99:1251

be "schools"  fail,  but those that succeed  often  transform  the field;  and
when they do  so, group polarization  is part of the reason.

The  cautionary  note  is that  in law  and  many other  academic  fields,
ideas may spread  and  prosper, not because  they are  good, but because
dozens,  hundreds,  or  even  thousands  of imperfectly  informed  people
have  fortified  the  very  signals  by  which  they  have  been  influenced.
Whether  bad  ideas can  prosper for a  long  time is  another  matter. Fre-
quently  good  arguments  and  good  evidence  will  puncture  them,  at
least when  there  is  agreement  about the  underlying  criteria. But if the
account  here  is  correct,  longevity,  even for  bad  ideas,  is  hardly  out  of
the question.

HeinOnline  -- 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1264 2000-2001

