University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2002 

on Terrorism 
on Terrorism 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Why They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics Law and the War 
Why They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics Law and the War 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Why They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics Law and the War on Terrorism," 25 
Harvard Journal of Law and Public Policy 429 (2002). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

WHY THEY HATE US:  THE ROLE
OF SOCIAL DYNAMICS

CASS  R. SUNSTEIn*

I.  THE THESIS

toward  extreme  positions.  The  effect 

My  goal  in  this  brief  Essay  is  to  cast  some  new  light  on  a
question that has been much discussed  in the  aftermath of the
attacks  of  September  11.  The  question  is  simple:  Why  do  they
hate us? I  suggest  that a  large  part  of  the  answer  lies,  not  in
anything  particular  to Islam, to religion, or  even to the ravings
of  Osama  bin Laden, but  in  social  dynamics  and especially  in
the process  of group  polarization.  When group  polarization  is
at work,  like-minded  people,  engaged  in discussion  with  one
is
another,  move 
especially  strong with  people  who  are  already  quite  extreme;
such  people  can  move  in  literally  dangerous  directions.  It  is
unfortunate  but  true  that  leaders  of  terrorist  organizations
show  a  working  knowledge  of  group  polarization.  They
sharply  discipline  what  is  said.  They  attempt  to  inculcate  a
shared  sense  of  humiliation,  which  breeds  rage,  and  group
solidarity,  which  prepares  the  way  for  movement  toward
further  extremes  and  hence  for  violent  acts.  They  attempt  to
ensure  that  recruits  speak  mostly  to  people  who  are  already
predisposed in the preferred direction. They produce a cult-like
atmosphere.

With  an  understanding  of  group  polarization,  we  can  see
that when "they hate us," it is often because  of social  processes
that  have  been  self-consciously  created  and  manipulated  by
terrorist  leaders.  These  social  processes  could  easily  be
otherwise. If they were, terrorism would not exist,  or at least  it

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  Law

School  and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago.

1.  See discussion  infra Part II; see generally ROGER BROWN,  SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY:
THE SECOND EDITION  (1986); Cass  R. Sunstein, Deliberative Trouble? Why  Groups Go
To Extremes, 110 YALE  L.J. 71  (2000).

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 429 2001-2002

430

Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy

[Vol.  25

is  no  natural  predisposition 

would  be  greatly  weakened  and  its  prospects  would  be
diminished.  There 
toward
terrorism,  even  among  the  most  disaffected  people  in  the
poorest  nations. When  terrorism  occurs,  it  is  typically  a result
of emphatically  social  pressures 2  and indeed  easily identifiable
mechanisms  of interaction.  More  broadly,  ethnic  identification3
and  ethnic  conflict  are  a  product  of  similar  pressures;  an
understanding  of "why  they hate  us" is thus  likely  to promote
an increased understanding  of social hatred in general.

We  can  draw  some  conclusions  here  for  the  law  of
conspiracy,  for freedom  of association, for the  idea of "political
correctness,"  for  the  system  of  checks  and  balances,  and  for
possible  responses  to terrorist  threats. Thus  I  shall  identify  the
distinctive  logic  behind  the  special  punishment  of conspiracy:
those  who  conspire  are  likely  to  move  one  another  in  more
extreme  and hence more  dangerous  directions.  I  shall also  urge
that  freedom  of association helps to fuel group  polarization-a
healthy  phenomenon  much  of  the  time,  but  a  potentially
dangerous  one  in  some  contexts.  I  shall  urge,  finally,  that  an
especially  effective  way  to  prevent  terrorism  is  to  prevent
"terrorist  entrepreneurs"  from creating special  enclaves  of like-
minded  or  potentially  like-minded  people.  It  might  seem
tempting  to  object  to  such  efforts  on  the  ground  that  they
interfere  with associational  liberty, which is  of course  prized in
all  democratic  nations.  But  we  are  speaking  here  of  terrorism
and  conspiracy  to  kill  American  citizens;  in  such  cases,  the
claims  for associational liberty  are very weak.  Conspiracy is the
dark  side  of  freedom  of  association,  and  it  is  a  form  of
conspiracy  that I am discussing here.  One of my largest goals  is
thus  to  provide  a  window  on  the  nature  and  consequences  of
conspiracy in the particular context of terrorism.

2.  I do not mean  to deny the possibility  of lone  terrorists, or  the potential role of

individual  hatred, even mental illness, in some  terrorist activity.

3.  See  Timur  Kuran,  Ethnic Norms and Their Transformation Through Reputational

Cascades, 27 J.  LEGAL STUD.  623  (1998).

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 430 2001-2002

No.2]  Why  They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics 

431

II.  THE BASIC PHENOMENON

A.  What Groups Do

Let  us  begin  with  some  social  science  research  that  seems
very far afield from the area  of terrorism. In 1962, J.A.F.  Stoner,
an  enterprising  graduate  student,  attempted  to  examine  the
judgments  and  group
individual 
relationship  between 
judgments.4  He did so against  a background  belief that groups
tended  to  move  toward  the  middle  of  their  members'  pre-
deliberation  views. Stoner  proceeded  by asking people  a range
of questions involving risk-taking behavior. People were asked,
for  example,  whether  someone  should  choose  a  safe  or  risky
play  in the  last  seconds  of  a  football  game;  whether  someone
should  invest  money  in  a  low-return,  high-security  stock  or
instead  a  high-return,  lower  security  stock;  whether  someone
should  choose  a  high  prestige  graduate  program  in  which  a
number  of  people  fail  to  graduate  or  a  lower  prestige  school
from which everyone graduates.

In  Stoner's  studies,  the  subjects  first  studied  the  various
problems  and  recorded  an  initial  judgment;  they  were  then
asked  to reach  a unanimous  decision  as  a  group.  People  were
finally  asked  to  state  their  private judgments  after  the  group
judgment  had  been  made;  they  were  informed  that  it  was
acceptable  for  the  private judgment  to  differ  from  the  group
judgment. What happened?  For twelve  of the  thirteen  groups,
the group  decisions  showed  a repeated  pattern  toward  greater
risk-taking.  In addition,  there  was a  clear  shift toward  greater
risk-taking in private opinions  as well. Stoner therefore found a
"risky  shift,"  in  which  the  effect  of  group  dynamics  was  to
move  groups,  and  the  individuals  that  composed  them,  in
favor of increased risk-taking.

What  accounts  for  this  remarkable  result?  The  answer  is
emphatically not that groups always  move toward  greater  risk-
taking. Some  groups-asking, for  example,  about whether  and
when someone  should  get married,  or travel  despite a possibly
serious  medical  condition-tend  to  move  toward  greater

4.  See  J.A.F.  Stoner,  A  Comparison  of  Individual  and  Group  Decisions
Including  Risk  (1961)  (unpublished  master's  thesis,  Massachusetts  Institute  of
Technology, School of Industrial Management)  (on file with author); see also J.A.F.
Stoner,  Risky  and  Cautious Shifts  in  Group  Decisions, 4  J.  EXPERIMENTAL  SOC.
PSYCHOL. 442 (1968).

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 431 2001-2002

432

Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy

[Vol.  25

caution.  Subsequent  studies  have  shown a  consistent  pattern,
one  that  readily  explains  Stoner's  own  findings:  deliberating
groups tend  to move  toward  a more  extreme point in line  with
•  6
If  like-minded  people  are
their  pre-deliberation  tendencies. 
talking  with  one  another,  they  are  likely  to  end  up  thinking  a
more  extreme  version of what they thought  before  they started
to talk. It follows that, for example,  a group of people who tend
to  approve  of  an  ongoing  war  effort  will,  as  a  result  of
discussion, become  still more enthusiastic  about that effort; that
people  who  think  that  environmentalists  are  basically  right,
and  that  the  planet  is  in  serious  trouble,  will  become  quite
alarmed  if they  talk  mostly  with one  another;  that  people  who
tend  to  dislike  the  Rehnquist  Court  will  dislike  it  quite
intensely  after  talking  about  it  with  one  another;  that  people
who  disapprove  of the  United  States,  and  are  suspicious  of its
intentions,  will increase  their  disapproval  and  suspicion if they
exchange  points  of  view.  Indeed,  there  is  specific  evidence  of
the  latter  phenomenon  among citizens  of France.  It should  be
readily  apparent  that  enclaves  of  people,  inclined  to  terrorist
violence,  might  move  sharply 
that  direction  as  a
consequence  of internal  deliberations.

in 

7

Three aggravating  factors  are of special relevance  to the issue
of terrorism. First, if members of the group think that they have
a  shared  identity, and  a high  degree  of solidarity,  there will  be
heightened  polarization.  One  reason  is  that  if  people  feel
united  by  some  factor  (for  example,  politics  or  necessity),
internal  dissent  will  be  dampened.  Second,  if  members  of  the
deliberating  jroup  are connected  by  affective  ties, polarization
will  increase.  If they  tend  to perceive  one another  as friendly,
likable,  and  similar  to them,  the size and  likelihood  of the  shift
will  increase.'0  These  points  obviously  bear  on  the  cult-like

5.  See BROWN, supra note 1, at 208-10.
6.  See id. at 200-48.
7.  See id. at 223-24.
8.  Dominic  Abrams  et al.,  Knowing What  To  Think By Knowing  Who  You Are:  Self-
Categorization and the Nature of Norm  Formation, Conformity and Group Polarization,
29 BRrr. J. Soc. PSYCHOL.  97,116  (1990).

9.  See  Brooke  Harrington,  The  Pervasive  Effects  of  Embeddedness 

in

Organizations 24 (2000)  (unpublished  manuscript, on file with author).

10.  See Hermann  Brandsttter, Social Emotions in Discussion Groups, in DYNAMICS
OF  GROUP  DECISIONS  93  (Hermann  Brandstaitter  et  al.  eds.,  1978).  In  JOHN
TURNER  Er  AL.,  REDISCOVERING  THE  SOCIAL  GROUP:  A  SELF-CATEGORIZATION
THEORY  154-59  (1987),  Turner  and his  co-authors  argue  for  a new synthesis,  one

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 432 2001-2002

No.2]  Why They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics

433

features  of  terrorist  organizations,  in  which  shared  identity
helps  fuel  movement  toward  extremes.  Third,  extremists  are
especially  prone  to  polarization.  When  they  start  out  an
extreme  point,  they  are  likely  to  go  much  further  in  the
direction  with  which  they  started.  Note  in  this  regard  that,
burglars  in  a  group  act  more  recklessly  than  they  do  as
individuals.

B.  Why Polarization?
What  explains  these  movements?  And  what  explains  the
aggravating  factors?  It  is  tempting  to  think  that  conformity
plays  a  large  role.  Conformity  may  be  at work,  but  the  data
make  clear  that  group  polarization 
is  not  a  matter  of
conformity;  people  do  not  simply  shift  to  the  mean  of  their
respective  initial  positions.13  In  fact  there  are  two  principal
explanations  for  group  polarization,  involving  two  different
mechanisms.14   Each  of  the  mechanisms  plays  a  role  in
producing  group  polarization  and,  as  we  shall  see,  each  of
them plays a role in terrorist organizations.

The  first  is  based  on persuasive arguments. The  simple  idea
here is that people respond  to  the arguments  made  by  others,
and  the  "argument  pool,"  in  a  group  with  some  initial
disposition  in one  direction,  will inevitably be  skewed  toward
that  disposition.  A  group  whose  members  tend  to  think  that

that they call "a  self-categorization  theory of group polarization."  Id. at 154. In this
account,  "persuasion  is  dependent  upon  self-categorizations  which  create  a
common  identity  within  a  group,"  and  polarization  occurs  "because  group
members  adjust  their  opinion  in  line  with  their  image  of  the  group  position
(conform) and more  extreme, already polarized, prototypical responses  determine
this  inage." Id. at 156.  The  key  point here is  that when  a  group  is tending  in  a
certain direction,  the perceived  "prototype"  is  determined  by  where the group  is
leaning,  and  this  is  where  individuals  will  shift. See  id.  at 156.  As  the  authors
acknowledge, 
their  account  shows  "overlap  with  many  aspects  of  social
comparison  and  persuasive  arguments  models,"  id. at  158,  and  because  of  the
overlap, I  do not discuss  it as  a separate account here. For possible  differences  in
predictions and supporting evidence, see id. at 158-70.

11.  See id. at 157-58.
12.  See  Paul  F. Cromwell et al.,  Group Effects on Decision-Making by Burglars, 69

PSYCHOL. REP. 579,586 (1991).

13.  See BROWN, supra note 1, at 207.
14.  For  a review  of  the literature,  see BROWN,  supra note 1,  at 210-17;  Daniel  J.
Isenberg, Group Polarization: A  Critical Review and Meta-Analysis, 50 J. PERSONALITY
AND  SOC.  PSYCHOL.  1141  (1986).  For  an  overview  and an  attempt  to  generate  a
new  synthesis,  see  TURNER  E'  AL.,  supra note  10,  at  142-70.  See  also  Russell
Hardin,  The  Crippled Epistemology of Extremism,  in  POLITICAL  EXTREMISM  AND
RATIONALrIY (Albert Breton et al. eds.,  forthcoming 2002).

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 433 2001-2002

434

Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy

[Vol.  25

the  United  States  is  engaged  in  a  general  campaign  against
Islam,  or  that  it  seeks  to  kill  and  humiliate  Muslims  as  such,
will  hear  many  arguments  to  that  effect,  and  few  opposing
arguments,  simply  as  a  result  of  the  initial  distribution  of
positions  within  the  group.  If  people  are  listening,  they  will
have  a stronger  conviction,  in  the  same  direction  from  which
they  began,  as  a  result  of  deliberation.  The  phenomenon  is
general.  A  group  whose  members  tend  to  oppose  affirmative
action  will  hear  a  large  number  of  arguments  in  favor  of
abolishing  affirmative  action,  and  a  comparatively  fewer
number  of  arguments  for  retaining  it.  There  is  considerable
empirical  support for  the view  that  the argument  pool  has this
kind of effect on individual views.1 5

The  second  mechanism  has  to  do  with  social influence.  The
central  idea  here  is  that  people  have  a  certain  conception  of
themselves  and a corresponding  sense  of how  they would like
to  be  perceived  by  others.  Most  people  like  to  think  of
themselves  as not identical  to but as  different  from others,  but
only in  the right  direction  and  to the right extent.  If you  think
of yourself  as the sort of person  who opposes  gun control more
than  most  people  do  (because,  hypothetically,  you  think  that
you  are  unusually  disposed  to  reject  liberal  homilies),  you
might shift your position once you find yourself in a group  that
is very strongly  opposed  to gun control.  If you  stay where  you
were,  you  may  seem  more  favorably  disposed  toward  gun
this  may  be
control 
disconcerting,  thus  producing  a  shift.  If  you  are  ill-disposed
that  President  Bush  has
toward 
imperialistic  ambitions, and find yourself in a group  with those
same  beliefs,  you  might  well  move  toward  a  more  extreme
point,  simply in  order  to maintain  your  preferred  relationship
to  the  views  of  others.  Or  if  you  believe  that  you  have  a
comparatively  favorable  attitude  toward  affirmative  action,
discussion  with  a  group  whose  members  are  at  least  as
favorable  as  you  are  might  well  push  you  in  the  direction  of
greater  enthusiasm  for  it.  Having  heard  group  members,  you
might move your  stated position, simply in order  to maintain  a
certain  self-conception  and  reputation,  as  one  who  likes
affirmative  action  a  bit  more  than  most  people  do.  There  is

than  most  group  members,  and 

the  West,  and  believe 

15.  See BROWN, supra note 1, at 200-45.

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 434 2001-2002

No. 2]  Why  They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics 

435

evidence  that social  influence  is an independent  factor  behind
group  polarization;  consider  in  particular  the  fact  that  mere
exposure  to  the  views  of  others  can  have  this  effect,  even
without any discussion at all. 16

There  is another  point, not stressed in social science  research
on  group  polarization,  but  much  bearing  on  the  general
phenomenon  and  in  particular  on  the  nature  and  rise  of
terrorism. Many  people, much of  the time, lack full  confidence
in  their  views;  such  people  offer  a  moderate  version  of  their
views,  for fear of being marginalized or ostracized. Many other
people have more confidence  than they are willing to show, for
fear  of being proved foolish;  such people  moderate their views
in  public.  In  either  case,  group  dynamics  can  push  people
toward  a  more  extreme  position.  Moderate  skepticism  about
the  problem  of  global  warming  might  turn  into  full-blown
disbelief,  if  the  moderate  skeptic  finds  himself  in  a  group  of
people  who  also  tend  toward  skepticism.  I  believe  that  this
phenomenon  plays  an  important  role  in  terrorist  enclaves,
which  often  involve  young  men  who  could  not  possibly
maintain 
if  not 
the  support  and
encouragement  of  like-minded  others.  I  now  turn  to  some
details.

their  position 

for 

III.  TERRORIST  LEADERS AS POLARIZATION  ENTREPRENEURS
Terrorist  leaders  act  as  polarization  entrepreneurs.  They
create  enclaves  of  like-minded  people.  They  stifle  dissenting
views  and  do  not  tolerate  internal  disagreement.  They  take
steps  to  ensure  a  high  degree  of  internal  solidarity.  They
restrict  the relevant  argument  pool  and  take full  advantage  of
reputational  forces,  above  all  by using  the incentive  of  group
approval.  Terrorist  acts  themselves  are  motivated  by  these
forces  and  incentives.  Consider,  for  example,  the  following
account:

Terrorists  do not even consider that they may be wrong and
that others'  views may have  some merit...  They  attribute
only evil motives to anyone outside their own group. The...
common  characteristic  of  the  psychologically  motivated
terrorist  is the  pronounced  need  to  belong  to  a  group....

16.  See Allan.  I.  Teger  & Dean G.  Pruitt, Components of Group Risk-Taking, 3  J.

EXwPRENTAL Soc. PsYCHOL. 202  (1967).

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 435 2001-2002

Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy

[Vol.  25

Such  individuals  define 
acceptance.

their  social  status  by  group

Terrorist  groups  with  strong  internal  motivations  find  it
necessary  to  justify  the  group's  existence  continuously.  A
terrorist  group  must  terrorize.  As  [sic]  a minimum,  it must
commit  violent  acts  to  maintain  group  self-esteem  and
legitimacy.  Thus, terrorists  sometimes carry  out attacks  that
are  objectively  nonproductive  or even counterproductive  to
their  announced  goal.'7

In 

fact, 

terrorist  organizations 

impose  psychological
pressures  to  accelerate  the  movement  in  extreme  directions.
Here too group  membership  plays a key role:

Another  result of psychological  motivation is the intensity  of
group  dynamics  among  terrorists.  They  tend  to  demand
unanimity  and  be  intolerant  of  dissent.  With  the  enemy
clearly identified  and unequivocally  evil, pressure  to escalate
the  frequency  and  intensity  of  operations  is  ever  present.
The  need  to  belong  to  the  group  discourages  resignations,
and  the  fear  of  compromise  disallows  their  acceptance.
Compromise  is  rejected,  and  terrorist  groups  lean  toward
maximalist  positions.  .
. . In  societies  in  which  people
identify  themselves  in  terms  of  group  membership  (family,
clan,  tribe),  there  may,  be  a  willingness  to  self-sacrifice
seldom seen elsewhere.

Training  routines  specifically  reinforce  the  basic  message  of
solidarity  amidst  humiliation.  Hitler  similarly  attempted  to
create  group  membership,  and  to  fuel  movements  toward
extremes,  by stressing  the  suffering  and  the  humiliation  of  the
German  people. This  is  a  characteristic  strategy  of terrorists  of
all stripes, for humiliation fuels rage.  "Many  al-Qaida  trainees
saw  videos..,  daily  as  part  of their training routine. Showing
hundreds  of hours  of  Muslims  in dire  straits -Palestinians...
Bosnians...  Chechens... Iraqi children- 
[was]  all  part of  al-
Qaida's  induction  strategy." 
In  the  particular  context  of  Al
Qaeda,  there  is  a  pervasive  effort  to  link  Muslims  all  over  the
globe,  above  all  by  emphasizing  a  shared  identity,  one  that

17.  Terrorism Research  Center,  The Basics of Terrorism: Part 2:  The  Terrorists, at

http://www.geocities.com/CapitolHill/2468/bpart2  (Dec. 16, 2001).

18.  Id.
19.  On  humiliation,  see  generally  AVISHAI  MARGALIT,  THE  DECENT  SOCIETY

(Naomi Goldblum trans., 1996).

20.  Giles  Foden,  Secrets of a  Terror Merchant, MELBOURNE  AGE,  Sept. 14,  2001,
available  at  http://www.theage.com.au/news/world/2001/09/14/FFXIONZFJ
RC.html.

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 436 2001-2002

No.2]  Why  They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics 

437

includes  some  and  excludes  others.  Thus  Osama  bin  Laden
"appeals  to a pervasive sense of humiliation and powerlessness
in  Islamic  countries.  Muslims  are  victims  the  world  over...
Bosnia, Somalia, Palestine, Chechnya,  and...  Saudi Arabia  ....
[HI]e  makes  the  world  simple  for  people  who  are  otherwise
confused, and gives them a sense  of mission."  Hence there are
unmistakable  cult-like  features  to  the  indoctrination  effort:
"[Tihe  military  training  [in  Al  Qaeda  camps]  is  accompanied
by  forceful  religious  indoctrination,  with  recruits  being  fed  a
stream  of  anti-western  propaganda  and  being  incessantly
reminded about their duty to perform jihad."22
In addition, the Al  Qaeda terrorists are taught  to believe that

s21

• 

.

.

they are

not  alone...  but sacrificing  themselves  as  part of  a  larger
group for what  they believe  is  the  greater  good.  [The  men
are] recruited  as teenagers, when  self-esteem and separation
[The
from 
indoctrination]  involves not only lessons in weaponry but an
almost  cult-like  brainwashing  over  many  months.  Among
Muslims, the regimen  typically inclu29es extended periods  of
prayer and a distortion of the Koran.

family  are  huge  developmental 

issues. 

Intense  connections  are  built  into  the  structure:  "The
structure  of Al  Qaeda,  an all-male  enterprise...  , appears  to
involve  small  groups  of  relatively  young  men  who  maintain
strong  bonds  with  each  other,  bonds  whose  intensity  is
dramatised  and heightened  by  the secrecy  demanded  by their
missions and the danger of their projects. "W

4

This discussion, brief as it is, should be sufficient  to show the
central  role  of  group  dynamics  in  producing  terrorists,  and
indeed  in  answering  the  question  "why  they  hate  us."
Terrorists  are  made, not born.  More  particularly, terrorists  are
made  through  emphatically  social  processes.  Things  could
easily be otherwise. With respect to social concern with risks, it
is  possible  to  imagine  multiple  equilibria-  different  social
situations,  all  of  them  stable,  in  which  people  are  concerned

21.  Jeffrey Bartholet, Method To the Madness, NEWSWEEK,  Oct. 22,2001, at 55.
22.  Stephen  Grey  &  Dipesh  Gadher,  Inside Bin  Laden's Academies  of Terror,

SUNDAY TIMES (LONDON),  Oct. 7,2001,  at 10.

23.  Margery  Eagan, Attack on America: It Could be the Terrorist Next Door-Zealot

Hides Behind His Benign Face, BOSTON  HERALD, Sept. 13, 2001, at 30.

24.  Vithal C Nadkarni, How to  Win  Over Foes and Influence Their Minds, TIMES  OF

INDIA, Oct. 7,2001, available at 2001 WL 28702843.

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 437 2001-2002

Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy

[Vol.  25

with some risks but not  others.25 People in France  are not much
concerned  about  nuclear  power,  which 
frightens  many
Americans;  people  in  America  are  not much  concerned  about
genetically  engineered food,  which frightens  Europeans. Timur
Kuran  has  shown  that  "ethnification"  -close 
identification
with  one's  ethnic  group,  in  a  way  that  involves  hatred  of
others-is  not  a  matter  of  history  but  of  current  social
processes, closely akin to those discussed here.  With relatively
small  changes,  a  nation  that  suffers  from  intense  ethnic
antagonism  could  be  free  from  that  scourge.  So  too,  I  am
suggesting,  for  terrorism.  If  enclaves  of  like-minded  and
susceptible  people  are  an  indispensable  breeding  ground  for
terrorism,  then  it  is  easy  to  imagine  a  situation  in  which
nations,  not  radically  different  from  the  way  they  are  today,
could be mostly  free from terrorist threats.

IV. IMPLICATIONS  AND LESSONS
What  are  the  lessons  for  policy  and  for  law?  The  simplest
and most important is  that if  a nation aims  to prevent  terrorist
activities,  a  good  strategy  is  to prevent  the rise  of enclaves  of
like-minded  people.  Many  of  those  who  become  involved  in
terrorist  activities could end up doing something  else with their
lives.  Their interest  in terrorism  comes, in many  cases,  from an
identifiable  set of social  mechanisms  (generally  from particular
associations).  If  the  relevant  associations  can  be  disrupted,
terrorism  is far less likely to arise.

The  second  lesson  has  to  do  with  the  idea  of  "political
correctness."  That  idea is  far  more  interesting  than  it seems.  It
is  true  that  some  groups  of  left-leaning  intellectuals  push one
another  to  extremes,  and  tow  a  kind  of  party  line,  in  part
through  a  limited  argument  pool,  and 
in  part  through
imposing  reputational  sanctions  on  those  who  disagree,  or
even  ostracizing 
is  hardly
limited  to left-leaning  intellectuals. It  plays  a role  in groups  of
all  kinds.  In  its  most  dangerous  forms,  it  is  a  critical  part  of
groups  that  are  prone  to  violence  and  terrorism,  simply
because such groups stifle  dissent.

them.  But  political  correctness 

25.  See  Timur  Kuran  &  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Availability  Cascades  and  Risk

Regulation, 51 STAN.  L. REV.  683,712 (1999).

26.  See Kuran, supra note 3.

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 438 2001-2002

No.2]  Why They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics 

439

The  third  lesson  has  to  do  with  the  system  of  checks  and
balances  and even constitutional  design. Citizens  in democratic
nations  are  hardly  immune  from  the  forces  discussed  here.
Within legislatures, civic  organizations,  and even courts,  group
polarization  might  well  occur.  Nor  is  this  necessarily  bad.  A
movement  in  a  more  extreme  direction  might  well  be  a
movement  in a better direction.  But serious problems  can  arise
when  extremism  is  a  product  of  the  mechanisms  discussed
here,  and  not  of  learning  through  the  exchange  of  diverse
opinions.  The  institutions  of  checks  and  balances  can  be
understood  as  a  safeguard  against  group  polarization,  simply
because  those  institutions  ensure  that  like-minded  people,
operating within a  single  part of  government,  will  not be  able
to  move  governmental  power  in  their  preferred  direction.
Consider, for example,  the idea of bicameralism  and the power
of the  president  to  veto  legislation;  through these  routes,  it is
possible  to  reduce  the  risk  that  government  policy  will  be  a
product of the forces I have  discussed.

The fourth lesson has to do with the treatment of conspiracy,
including  but  not  limited  to  terrorist  conspiracies.  Why  does
the law  punish  conspiracy  as  a  separate  offense,  independent
of the  underlying  "substantive"  crime?  It is  tempting  to  think
that  this  kind  of  "doubling  up"  is  indefensible,  a  form  of
overkill.  But  if the  act  of  conspiring  leads  people  moderately
disposed  toward criminal behavior to be more  than moderately
disposed,  precisely  because  they  are  conspiring  together,  it
makes sense, on grounds  of deterrence,  to impose independent
penalties.  Some  courts  have  come  close  to  recognizing  this
point.27  The  key  point  is  that  the  act  of  conspiracy  has  an
independent  effect,  that  of  moving  people  in  more  extreme
directions.  The point holds for terrorists  as well as for  everyone
else.

The  discussion  also  offers  some  lessons  about  freedom  of
association  in general,  showing some  of its many  complexities.
Associational  freedom  is  of  course  an  indispensable  part  of
democracy.  No  one  should  deny  that  point.  But  when
associational  freedom  is  ensured,  group  polarization  will

27.  See  Callanan v. United States, 364  U.S. 587, 593-94  (1961)  ("Concerted action
...  decreases  the  probability  that  the individuals  will  depart  from  their  path of
criminality."). I am grateful to Dan Kahan for helpful discussion.

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 439 2001-2002

Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy

[Vol. 25

this 

the  standpoint  of  liberty, 

inevitably  ensue,  as  people  sort  themselves  into  groups  that
seem  congenial.  From 
is
extremely  important. It is  also valuable  from the standpoint  of
democracy,  not  least  because  any  society's  "argument  pool"
will  be expanded  by a  wide  variety  of  deliberating  groups.  If
groups  move  to  extremes,  then  social  fragmentation  may  be
desirable insofar  as it ensures that society  as a whole will hear a
wide range of positions  and points of view. On the  other hand,
freedom  of  association  can 
the  risk  of  social
fragmentation,  and  social  antagonisms,  potentially  even
violence,  can result.

increase 

Almost  all of the time, the risk is worth tolerating.  But when
we  are  dealing  with  conspiracies  to  kill  American  citizens,
freedom  of  association  is  literally  dangerous.  Hatred  itself  is
hardly  against  the  law.  By  itself  it  is  no  reason  for  war.  But
when hatred is a product of the social  forces outlined here, and
when  it  makes  terrorism  possible,  there  is  every  reason  to
disrupt associations  that  drive  people  to violent  acts. The  line
between  associational  freedom  and  conspiracy  is  not  always
crisp and certain. But in the  cases I am  emphasizing, there is no
real  puzzle.  When  they  hate  us,  it  is  not  a  product  of
deprivation, 
rage,  or 
religiously  grounded
predisposition;  it  is  a  result  of  social  forces  and,  much  of  the
time,  self-conscious  conspiracies  to  fuel  hatred.  A  nation  that
seeks  to win  a war  against  terrorism  must try  to  disrupt those
conspiracies.

individual 

HeinOnline  -- 25 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol'y 440 2001-2002

