Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
American Academy of Arts & Sciences and MIT Press are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Daedalus.
This content downloaded from 129.93.16.3 on Sat, 31 Oct 2015 14:35:28 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
This content downloaded from 129.93.16.3 on Sat, 31 Oct 2015 14:35:28 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Imagine the following situations : Affirmative action is under attack in the state of Texas. A number of profes sors and students at a branch of the University of Texas are inclined to be supportive of affirmative action they meet to exchange views and to plan further action, if necessary. What are these professors and students likely to think, and do, after they talk?
Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Llewellyn Distin guished Service Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago. A Fellow of the American Academy since 1992, he is the author of numerous articles and books, including "Free Markets and Social Justice
"
(1997), "Designing Democracy : What Constitutions Do" (2001), "Republic.com"
Sunstein has testified before congressional commit tees on many subjects, and he has been involved in constitution-making and law reform activities in a number of nations, including Ukraine, Poland, China, South Africa, and Russia. He is currently working on various projects involving the relation ship between law and human behavior.
After a highly publicized shooting at a
local high school, a group of people in the community, most of them tenta
tively in favor of greater gun control,
comes together to discuss the possibili ty of imposing new gun control meas
ures. What, if anything, will happen to individual views as a result of this dis
cussion?
A jury is deciding on an appropriate punitive damage award in a case of
misconduct by a large company the behavior resulted in a serious injury to a small child. Before deliberating as a
group, jurors have individually consid ered the appropriate award, leading to an average of $1.5 million and a median
of $1 million. As a statistical general ization, how will the jury's ultimate award tend to compare to these fig ures?
these situations reveals a striking but much neglected phenomenon : that of
group polarization. This phenomenon rais es serious questions about the potential dangers of deliberation, even in some
democratic settings. In brief, the phenomenon of group po
larization means that the members of a
deliberating group predictably move toward a more extreme point in the di
rection of their pre-deliberation views. Thus, the Texas group that meets to
debate affirmative action is likely to be
come more firmly committed to that
The community group concerned about the shooting at a local high school is likely to conclude its meeting enthusi
astically in favor of gun control.
And, as a new study by David Schkade,
Daniel Kahneman, and myself has shown, the jury will probably award punitive damages in excess of the medi
an, perhaps higher than the mean as
that people tending to believe in the inferiority of a certain racial group will become more entrenched in this belief as a result of discussion that those tend ing to condemn the United States will, as a result of discussion, end up condemn ing the United States with even more intensity. Why does group polarization occur? There are three main explanations. The first is based on persuasive arguments. The simple idea here is that people respond to the arguments made by other people - and that the 'argument pool,' in a group with some initial disposition in one direction, will inevitably be skewed toward that disposition. Thus a group whose members tend to think that Israel is the real aggressor in the Mideast con flict will tend to hear many arguments to that effect, and relatively few opposing views. A group whose members tend to oppose affirmative action will hear a large number of arguments in favor of abolishing affirmative action and com paratively fewer arguments for retaining it. If people are listening, they will have a stronger conviction, in the same direc tion from which they began, as a result of deliberation. The second mechanism has to do with social influence. The central idea here is that people have a certain conception of themselves and a corresponding sense of how they would like to be perceived by others. If you think of yourself as the sort of person who favors gun control more than most people do, you might shift your position once you find your self in a group that is very strongly in favor of gun control. If you stay where you were, you may seem less favorably disposed toward gun control than most group members, and, possibly finding your distance from the others discon certing, you might shift more towards the group. Or if you believe that you
This content downloaded from 129.93.16.3 on Sat, 31 Oct 2015 14:35:28 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
well, and very possibly as high as or higher than the highest award selected in advance of deliberation by any indi vidual juror. Several factors increase the likelihood and extent of group polarization. For ex ample, groups consisting of individuals with extremist tendencies are more like ly to shift, and likely to shift more - a point that bears on the wellsprings of hatred, violence, and terrorism. The same is true for groups with some kind of salient shared identity - like Republi cans, Democrats, and lawyers, but un like jurors and experimental subjects.
It follows that when like-minded peo ple meet regularly, without sustained ex posure to competing views, extreme movements are all the more probable. Here, for example, are some empirical examples of group polarization, based on research in over a dozen nations : After discussion, a group of moderate
ly profeminist American women be
comes more strongly profeminist. After discussion, a group of French cit
izens becomes more critical of the United States and its intentions with
respect to economic aid. After discussion, a group of whites pre disposed to show racial prejudice offers more negative responses to the question whether white racism is re
sponsible for conditions faced by Afri can Americans in American cities. After discussion, a group of whites pre disposed not to show racial prejudice offers more positive responses to the
same question. We may confidently predict, then, that those moderately critical of an ongoing war effort will, after discussion, sharply oppose the war that those who believe that global warming is a serious problem are likely, after discussion, to hold that belief with considerable confidence
A danger of
deliberative
have a comparatively favorable attitude toward current policies of the Bush ad ministration, discussion with a group whose members are at least as favorable as you might well push you in the direc tion of greater enthusiasm for it. Consid erable evidence supports the view that social influences produce changes of this kind. The third explanation begins by not ing that people with extreme views tend to have more confidence that they are right, and that as people gain confidence they become more extreme in their be liefs. If other people seem to share your view, you are likely to become more con fident that you are right. Hence it is pre dicted that if people learn that others agree with them, they are likely to move in a more extreme direction. In a variety of experimental contexts, reported by Robert Baron et al. in a 1996 article on "Social Corroboration and Opinion Ex tremity," people's views have been shown to become more extreme simply because they have been informed of the shared views of others.
In the context of punitive damage awards by juries, an especially striking phenomenon has been uncovered, one with quite general implications. Those arguing for higher awards seem to have an automatic 'rhetorical advantage' over those arguing for lower awards. The ef fect is so dramatic that the dollar awards of any particular jury are likely to be sys tematically higher than the amount cho sen by the median juror before delibera tion - resulting in jury awards as high as or higher than that of the highest individ ual juror in 27 percent of cases !
It is easy to imagine other contexts in which one or another side has an auto matic rhetorical advantage. Consider, as possible examples, those arguing for higher penalties for those convicted of drug offenses, or those seeking to reduce
This content downloaded from 129.93.16.3 on Sat, 31 Oct 2015 14:35:28 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
Note by Cass R.
tax rates. When
involved, group
duce significant
a rhetorical advantage deliberation will pro shifts in individual judg
Group polarization is inevitably at work in feuds, ethnic and international
strife, and war. One of the characteristic
features of feuds is that members of
feuding groups tend to talk only to one
another, fueling and amplifying their outrage and solidifying their impression of the relevant events. It is not too much
of a leap to suggest that these effects are
sometimes present within ethnic and re
ligious groups and nations, even if there
is a high degree of national heterogene ity. In America, sharp divergences be tween whites and African Americans, on
particular salient events or more gener ally, can be explained by reference to
group polarization. The same is true for
sharp divergences of viewpoints within and across nations. Group polarization
occurs every day within Israel and
among the Palestinian Authority it oc
curs within the United States and among those inclined to support, or at least not
to condemn, terrorist acts. A large part
of the perennial question
*
Why do they hate us?' lies not in ancient grievances or individual consciences but in the so
cial influences emphasized here. Of course the media play a large role,
simply by virtue of the arguments they
repeat. It follows that if certain people are listening to stations that promote only one point of view, or reading only
one set of opinions, extreme movements
are possible. As I have argued in my bookRepublic.com, the phenomenon of group polarization explains why a frag mented communications market may create problems. The psychologist Patri cia Wallace explains in her The Psychology of the Internet that a "plausible hypothe
sis is that the Internet-like setting is most likely to create a strong tendency
America's victory in World War II (Administrative Reflections from World War II, by Luther Gulick), it is urged that demo cratic systems have a built-in advantage during war over their nondemocratic adversaries, simply because in demo cratic systems possible courses of action are discussed by diverse people in ad vance, and errors are publicized as they occur, making them more likely to be
It follows that an obvious response to the dangers of group polarization is to ensure that members of deliberating groups, whether small or large, will not isolate themselves from competing views. This point has implications for freedom of association, bureaucratic structure, and the architecture of the Internet. Indeed, the framers of the Con stitution understood the system of bi cameralism as a check on the risk that passions, in the form of group polariza tion, would lead to ill-considered deci sions from one or another house. It is important to ensure that deliberation occurs within a large and heterogeneous public sphere, and to guard against a sit uation in which like-minded people are walling themselves off from alternative perspectives.
But there is a difficulty with this re sponse : a certain measure of isolation will, in some cases, be crucial to the de velopment of ideas and approaches that would not otherwise emerge and that deserve a social hearing. Members of low-status groups are often quiet within heterogeneous bodies, and thus deliber ation in such bodies tends to be domi nated by high-status members. A good democracy makes space for enclaves in which otherwise silent people are will ing to speak and likely to be heard. Here, then, is a dilemma : any shift - in technology, norms, or legal practice
that increases the number of deliberat
This content downloaded from 129.93.16.3 on Sat, 31 Oct 2015 14:35:28 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions
toward group polarization when the members of the group feel some sense of group identity." If certain people are de liberating with many like-minded oth ers, views will not merely be reinforced, but instead shifted to more extreme points. This cannot be said to be bad by itself- perhaps the increased extremism is good - but it is certainly troublesome if diverse social groups are led, through predictable mechanisms, toward in creasingly opposing and ever more ex
How does all this bear the theory of democracy? We might approach that question by noting that the framers of the American Constitution attempted to create a delib erative democracy, that is, a system that combines accountability with a measure of reflection and reason-giving. From the standpoint of political deliberation, the central problem is that widespread error and social fragmentation are likely to result when like-minded people insu lated from others move in extreme di rections simply because of limited argu ment pools and parochial influences. Compare a system of one-party domina tion, which stifles dissent in part be cause it refuses to establish space for the emergence of divergent positions in this way, it intensifies polarization within the party while also disabling external criti cism. What Irvin Janis some years ago called 'groupthink' can be understood as drawing attention to the ways in which democratic institutions can be subject to some of the same problems. How can this be prevented? One pos sibility is to maintain a system of consid erable diversity and checks and balances, in which different deliberating groups, subject to their own internal pressures, might reach different conclusions and ultimately correct one another's errors. In a remarkable book by an insider about
A danger of
deliberative
