University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2002 

Law and Human Behavior 
Law and Human Behavior 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

What's Available - Social Influences and Behavioral Economics 
What's Available - Social Influences and Behavioral Economics 

Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of 
Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "What's Available - Social Influences and Behavioral Economics Empirical Legal 
Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human Behavior," 97 Northwestern University 
Law Review 1295 (2002). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Copyright  2003  by Northwestern  University  School of  Law 
Northwestern  University  Law  Review 

Printed  in  U.S.A.
Vol.  97,  No.  3

WHAT'S  AVAILABLE?  SOCIAL  INFLUENCES  AND

BEHAVIORAL  ECONOMICS

Cass R. Sunstein*

I. 

INTRODUCTION
Human  cognition  does  not take place  in a  social  vacuum.  When  a par-
ticular incident  becomes  cognitively  "available,"  it  is  because  of social  in-
fluences.  Individuals  are  especially  averse  to  losses;  but  how  do  we  know
whether we  are  facing  a  loss  or instead  a  foregone  gain?  What  is  the status
quo  from  which  losses  are  measured?  Social  understandings  provide  the
answer.  Individuals  often  think  and  work  in  groups;  do  group  interactions
aggravate  or  reduce  some  of the  harmful  effects  of heuristics  and  biases?'
If heuristics  and  biases  sometimes  lead  people  to  make  bad  decisions,  in  a
way  that  seems  to justify  paternalism,  the  flow  of information  is  a  crucial
reason.  Can  anything be  done-by  individuals,  government,  or the  law-to
improve  information  flow  and perhaps  to  ensure "debiasing"  in the process?
Or consider the  fact that  people  care  about  fairness  and  are  willing  to  pun-
ish,  at  their own expense,  those  who  behave unfairly. 2  How might  social  in-
fluences  reduce  or  increase  people's  willingness  to  sacrifice  their  material
self-interest for  the sake  of fairness?

My goal  in this  Essay  is  to suggest  that we  will  have  a  far better under-
standing  of the  relationship  between  behavioral  economics  and  law  if we
investigate  the  connection  between  behavioral  findings  and  social  influ-
ences.  The  real-world  effects  of heuristics  and biases  are very  much  a  func-
tion  of  social  pressures,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the  law.  Well-
organized  private groups,  showing  a working  knowledge  of behavioral  eco-
nomics  and  a  willingness  to  exploit  it  for  their  benefit,  play  a  central  role
here.  But to  say this  is  to get ahead  of the  story.  Begin with an  example.

In  fall  2002,  a pair of snipers  killed  ten people  in  the  Washington,  D.C.
area.  The  victims were  randomly  chosen.  They  included  men  and  women,

A.  Snipers

Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor,  University  of Chicago,  Law  School  and  De-

partment  of Political  Science.  I am  grateful  to Caryn  Campbell  for superb  research  assistance.

I  For evidence,  see  Norbert  Kerr  et al.,  Bias  in Judgment:  Comparing Individuals and Groups, 103

PSYCHOL.  REV.  687  (1996).

2  See  RICHARD THALER,  THE WINNER'S  CURSE  21  (1992).

1295

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1295 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

young  and old,  whites  and  African Americans.  Each  of these  murders  was
a  tragedy,  of course,  but the  actions  of the  snipers  affected  millions  of oth-
ers as  well.  Many  citizens  were  afraid  that they  would be next.  Fear, some-
times  dull  and  sometimes  very  sharp,  seemed  to  grip  much  of the  area,  and
it  significantly  affected  the  behavior  of  D.C.-area  residents.  "What  has
seized  the  capital  of the  world's  only  superpower  in  fear,  the  real  palpable
fear  that  causes  people  to  wear bullet-proof vests  to  pump  gas  and  football
teams to practice  indoors,  is  a  sniper with  an  assault rifle." 3

Consider the following  manifestations  of this  fear:

*  Many  school  districts  placed  their  classes  under  a  "code  blue,"  which
means  that students  must stay  inside  school  buildings  and cannot  leave
campus  for  lunches  or outdoor  activities;  nearly  one  million  children
were  affected.

4

*  October  SAT testing  at  several  area  schools  was  canceled.'
"  Recreation  league  soccer  for  six-year  olds,  high  school  girls'  tennis

and field  hockey,  and  baseball,  were  all  canceled  or postponed. 6

"  In  Winchester,  Virginia,  all  school field  trips were  canceled.7
"  The  Glory  Days  Grill  Invitational  Bull  Run  in  Manassas,  Virginia,  a

track meet that  attracts  over 2,000  runners,  was  canceled. 8
"  About fifty area  Starbucks stores  removed  their outside seating. 9
"  The  Prince  George's  County  school  system  canceled  all  athletic  events

indefinitely.' 0

"  The  D.C. Stoddert  Soccer  League,  with  more  than  5,000 players,  ages
four  to nineteen,  called  off games;  youth leagues  in Maryland and  Vir-
ginia  were  told to  follow the lead  of the school  systems,  most of which
canceled  outdoor  events.II

"  Many  people  stopped  going  to health  clubs with  large front windows,
and some  took to wearing  body  armor  while pumping  gas or shielding
themselves  with  a  car door  to keep  safe. 12

3 "Focused  on  Iraq  While  Sniper  Instills  Terror,"  Letter  to  Editor,  INTELLIGENCER  J.  (Lancaster,

4 Erik  Brady,  Weekend Falls  Victim  to  Sniper Fears, USA TODAY,  Oct.  13,  2002,  at  Al,  available

at http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2002-  10-13-sniper-usat-  I acoverx.htm.

Pa.),  Oct.  22,  2002.

5 Id.
6  Id.

7 Id.
8Id.
9 Parents Wary  amid Manhunt for Killer Sniper, ASSOCIATED  PRESS,  Oct.  18,  2002,  available at

http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2002-  10-08-sniper-shootingsx.htm.

10 Manny  Fernandez  &  Debbi  Wilgoren,  Few  Will  Play in  Snipers Shadow, WASH.  POST,  Oct.  18,

IIId.
12 Ellen  Sorokin  et  al.,  Everyone Is a  Victim  of the Sniper, WASH.  TIMES,  Oct.  15,  2002,  at  B I.

2002,  at  Al.

1296

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1296 2002-2003

97:1295  (2003)

Social Influences and Behavioral Economics

But there  is  something  very  odd  about  the  extraordinary  effects  of the
snipers'  actions.  For people  in  the  relevant  area,  the  snipers  caused  a  min-
iscule  increase  in  risk.  If there  were  five  million  people  in  the  D.C.  area,
and  if the  snipers  were  going  to  kill  one  person  every  three  days,  the  daily
statistical  risk  of  being  shot  was  less  than  one  in  one  million,  and  the
weekly  statistical  risk  was  less  than  three  in  one  million.  These  are  trivial
risks,  far  lower  than  the  risks  associated  with  many  daily  activities  about
which  people  do  not  express  even  the  slightest concern.  The  daily  risk,  for
example,  was  smaller  than  the risk  of death  from  drinking  thirty  diet  sodas
with  saccharin,  from  driving  one  hundred  miles,  from  smoking  two  ciga-
rettes,  from  ten  airline  trips,  from  living  in  a  home  with  a  smoker  for  two
weeks,  from  living  in  Denver  rather  than  Philadelphia  for  forty  days,  and
from  eating  thirty-five  slices  of fresh  bread.' 3  It would  be possible  to  quib-
ble  with  my  assessment  of  the  statistical  risk,  and  perhaps  people,  at  the
time, rationally  thought  that  the risk  was  somewhat  higher than  I have  sug-
gested.  But  even  if so,  the real  risk  could not possibly  have  been  sufficient
to justify the  high  levels  of anxiety  and  fear,  which  bordered,  for  many,  on
the  edge  of hysteria.  Perhaps  some  of the  defensive  behavior  was  rational,
given  the fact that that behavior  itself was  not terribly  costly.  But the  extent
of alarm  could not possibly be justified by the extent  of the risk.

Why,  then,  did  so  many  people  in  Washington  feel  fear  and  alter  their
behavior  in the midst of the snipers'  attacks?  Behavioral  economics  suggests
two principal  accounts.  First, people  rely on  the availability heuristic. Under
the  availability  heuristic,  people  assess  probabilities  by  asking  whether  ex-
amples  readily  come  to  mind.' 4  Lacking  statistical  information,  people  sub-
stitute  an  easy  question  (Can  I  think  of  illustrations?)  for  a  hard  question
(What  realities  do  the  data actually  show?).  It  is  hardly  irrational  to  use  the
availability  heuristic  when reliable  information  is  absent.  But the availability
heuristic  can  lead  to  significant  mistakes.  If an  incident  is  readily  available
but statistically rare,  the heuristic  will lead  to  overestimation  of risk;  if exam-
ples do not come  to mind,  but the statistical  risk  is high, the heuristic can  give
people  an  unjustified  sense  of security.  Perhaps  the  fear  of sniper  attack, in
the Washington  area, arose  from  a  misperception  of probability,  generated  by
the high  salience  of the few  attacks and  thus by the availability heuristic. ' 5

This  explanation  seems  to  have  considerable  power.  But  there  is  an-
other  explanation.  When  strong  emotions  are  triggered,  people  tend  to  fo-
cus  on  the  worst  case  and  not  to  think  much  about  issues  of probability  at

13  RICHARD  WILSON &  EDMUND  CROUCH,  RISK-BENEFIT  ANALYSIS  208-09,  225  (2001).  The  risk
of living in  Denver comes  from slightly elevated  radiation  levels;  the  risk from eating  fresh  bread  comes
from formaldehyde.

14 See Amos  Tversky  & Daniel  Kahneman,  Judgment  Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, in
JUDGMENT  AND  DECISION  MAKING:  AN INTERDISCIPLINARY  READER  38,  46-49 (Hal  R. Arkes  & Ken-
neth  R.  Hammond  eds.,  1986).

15 In  this light,  we can  see  that terrorists  show  a good  working  knowledge  of that  heuristic.

1297

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1297 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

all. 16  The phenomenon  of probability neglect occurs  when people  are  highly
responsive  to the  outcome  and when  significant  variations  in  its  likelihood  do
not  much  affect  thought  and behavior.' 7  Affect-rich  outcomes,  involving  in-
tense  emotions,  are  likely  to  produce probability  neglect.' 8  To  say  the  least,
the  idea  of being  killed  by  a  sniper,  at a  gas  station or on  a  playground,  is  af-
fect-rich,  especially  in  a  period  in  which  newspapers  and  television  stations
focus  their  attention  on  the  actual  murders.  Many  of those  who  altered  their
behavior  in  response  to  the  killings  appeared  not to  use the availability  heuris-
tic to  conclude  that  the  probability  of an  attack was  significant, but  instead  to
focus  on the  bad outcome  and to neglect probability  altogether.

B.  The  Social Element

It  is  therefore  reasonable  to  explain  the  effects  of the  sniper  attacks  by
reference  to  some  combination  of  the  availability  heuristic  and  probability
neglect.' 9  But an  account  of this  kind,  focusing  solely  on  individual  cogni-
tion,  seems  to  be  missing  something  important.  Countless  risks  are,  in  prin-
ciple,  "available,"  and  countless  risks  might,  in  principle,  have  the  kind  of
salience  that  would  lead  to  probability  neglect. 
In  many  communities,  the
risks  associated  with  unsafe  sex,  which  kills  tens  of thousands  of Americans
each  year,20  lack much  salience.  But  in other  communities,  those risks  are sa-
lient  indeed. 
In  many  communities,  the  risks  associated  with  tobacco  smok-
ing (a  killer  of hundreds  of thousands of Americans  annually) 2'  are not  salient
at  all;  in  many  other  communities,  those  risks  are  entirely  available.  The
dangers  associated  with  nuclear  power  are  available  to  Americans,  but  much
less  so to  citizens of France,  who are  largely  unconcerned  about those  risks. 22
Americans  do  not much  fear  the  risks  associated  with  genetic  modification  of
food,  even  though  in  principle,  such  risks  might  be  "available. '23  Obviously
the  availability  of risks,  and  the  risks  to  which  probability  neglect  attaches,  are
variable  from  place  to place.  Abandoned  hazardous  waste  sites were  not  a sali-
ent source  of risk until  about  1980, when  the Love Canal  controversy  converted

16 Yuval  Rottenstreich  &  Christopher  K.  Hsee, Money, Kisses, and Electric Shocks:  On  the Affec-

tive Psychology  of Risk,  12  PSYCHOL.  SCI. 185,  188  (2001)  (finding  that  when  emotions  are  triggered,
variations  in  probability matter relatively little).

17 See Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Probabilit,  Neglect:  Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law,  112  YALE  L.J. 61,

61-76  (2002).

18 See Rottenstreich  &  Hsee,  supra  note  16, at  187-89.
19 Other  factors  might  be at work,  involving the  new,  unfamiliar, and  apparently  uncontrollable  na-

ture of the  risk.  See PAUL  SLOVtC,  THE  PERCEPTION  OF  RISK  (Ragnar E.  L6fstedt  ed.,  2000).

20  See CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  RISK  AND  REASON  8 (2002).

22  See  Timur  Kuran  &  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Availability Cascades and Risk  Regulation, 51  STAN.  L.

23  See  ALAN  MCHUGHEN,  PANDORA'S  PICNIC  BASKET  114-21  (2000)  (discussing  incidents  that

might be  publicized widely  and  to an extent  have been).

21  Id.

REv.  683,  712  (1999).

1298

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1298 2002-2003

97:1295  (2003)

Social Influences and Behavioral Economics

such sites  into  a  strong  basis  of concern.24  Availability  thus  varies  over  time.
Some statistically  large risks do not cause a great  deal  of fear.  Why  is this?

The  question  suggests what  is  missing  from  the behavioral  account:  an
assessment  of the  social  and  cultural  dimensions  of judgment  under  uncer-
tainty.25 
In  behavioral  work,  researchers  usually  investigate  individuals'
thinking through  laboratory  experiments  in which  subjects  answer questions
in isolation.  To  say  the least, these  experiments  are  highly  illuminating,  and
they  tell  us  a  great  deal  about how  people think  and  act  in the  real  world. 26
What  I mean  to  emphasize  here  is  that  for  every  finding  in behavioral  eco-
nomics,  there  is  an  accompanying  set  of social  interactions,  which  greatly
influence  people's  beliefs and judgments.

This  is  most  obviously  true  for  availability. 

In  many  cases  of high-
visibility,  low-probability  risks,  including  sniper  attacks,  shark  attacks,  and
the  kidnapping  of young  girls,  the  sources  of availability  are  not  obscure.
The  mass  media  focus  on  those  risks;  people  communicate  their  fear  and
concern  to  one  another;  the  widespread  fear and  concern  increase  media  at-
tention;  and  the  spiral  continues  until  people  move  on.  This  account  ex-
plains  how  the  "risk  of  the  month"  syndrome  stems  from  the  interaction
between  availability  and  social  influences.  Much  of  the  time,  however,
what  is  available  and  salient to  some  is  not available  and  salient  to  all.  For
example,  many  people focus  on  cases  in which  the government  neglected to
regulate  some  environmental  risk,  with  the  consequence  being  widespread
illness  and  death. 27  To  such  people,  the  available  incidents  require  strong
precautions  in  the  face  of  uncertainty.  But  many  other  people  focus  on
cases  in  which  the  government  overreacted  to  weak  science,  engaging  in
large  expenditures  for  little  gain  in  terms of health,  safety,  or environmental
protection. 28  To  such  people,  the  available  incidents justify  a  measure  of
circumspection  and  restraint  in  the  face  of  uncertainty.  Which  of  these
cases  will be available  and to whom?

In  any  case  people  have  different  predispositions.  These  predisposi-
tions  play  a  large  role  in determining  which  of the numerous  possibilities  is
salient.  Availability  helps  to  determine  beliefs,  to  be  sure,  but  beliefs  help
to  determine  availability  as  well.  Both  beliefs  and  availability  are  endoge-
nous  to  one  another.  When  social  and  cultural  forces  interact with  salience
to  produce  concern  about  one  set  of problems,  but  not  another,  predisposi-
tions  are  crucial.  On this  count,  too,  those  interested  in behavioral  econom-
ics have  said relatively  little.

24  See  Kuran  & Sunstein, supra note 22,  at  691-98.
25  On the  cultural  issues,  see  MARY  DOUGLAS  &  AARON  WILDAVSKY,  RISK AND  CULTURE  (1982).
26  See  Colin  F.  Camerer,  Prospect Theory  in  the  Wild:  Evidence from  the  Field, in  CHOICES,

VALUES,  AND  FRAMES  288  (Daniel  Kahneman  &  Amos Tversky  eds.,  2000).

27  See  THE  PRECAUTIONARY  PRINCIPLE  IN  THE  20TH  CENTURY:  LATE  LESSONS  FROM  EARLY

WARNINGS  (Poul  Harremoes  et al.  eds.,  2001).

28 See AARON  WILDAVSKY,  BUT IS IT TRUE?  (1995).

1299

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1299 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

In  order  to  predict  behavior,  to  see  how  law  can  accomplish  shared
goals,  and  to  analyze  the  legitimate  role  of paternalism  in  law,  it  is  neces-
sary  to  know  something  about  how  social  forces  interact  with  individual
cognition.  Indeed,  law  can  sometimes  amplify  the relevant  effects-as,  for
example,  through  a  rapid,  aggressive  response  to  a  salient  risk,  a  response
that  makes the risk  more salient  still.  If public  officials focus  on  a risk, they
can  use the  underlying  cognitive  processes  to increase  social  concern.

While  I focus  throughout  this  Essay  on  the availability  heuristic  and  on
probability  neglect,  it  should  be  easy  to  see  that  social  influences  amplify
many  other  features  of  individual  cognition.  Alert  politicians  and  well-
organized  private  groups  can  manipulate  loss  aversion.  Anchoring  greatly
affects  people's judgments;  in  the face  of uncertainty,  people  often  seize  on
any  number,  or  "anchor,"  that  is  available. 29  But  on  which  number  will
they  anchor?  Social  influences,  including  those  imposed  by lawyers,  play  a
large  role  in answering  that question. 0  Fairness matters,  but the  beliefs and
actions  of others greatly  affect  people's judgments  about  fairness.3 
In  em-
phasizing  these  points,  I mean  to  suggest  the  importance  of seeing  various
cognitive  findings 
including  self-
conscious  manipulations  of the flow  of information.

in  the  context  of  social  dynamics, 

II.  AVAILABILITY  AND  PROBABILITY  NEGLECT

In this Part,  I briefly  describe  the  availability  heuristic  and  probability  ne-
glect and  their relationship  to risk-related  law.  I do  so  partly because  they  are
important  in  their  own  right,  and  not  much  discussed  in  this  Symposium,  but
mostly by way of preface  for the  discussion of social  influences.

A.  Availability

Begin  with the  availability  heuristic.  When  presented  with  hard  ques-
tions,  people  often ask  themselves  easier questions,  which  serve  to  simplify
their  inquiry. 32  The  answer  to the  easier questions  operates  as  a  heuristic  or
a  rule  of thumb.  Of these  rules  of thumb,  the availability  heuristic  is  proba-
bly the  most important  for  purposes  of understanding  law,  and  in particular,
those  aspects  of  law  that  involve  both  discrimination  and  social  risks. 33

29  See  Gretchen  B.  Chapman  &  Eric  J.  Johnson,  Incorporating the  Irrelevant:  Anchors  in  Judg-
ments of Belief and  Value, in  HEURISTICS  AND BIASES:  THE  PSYCHOLOGY OF  INTUITIVE  JUDGMENT  120
(Thomas Gilovich  et al.  eds., 2002).

3  I Id. at  137.
31 Timothy N.  Cason  &  Vai-Lam  Mui,  A  Laboratory Study of Group Polarisation in the  Team Dic-

tator Game, 107  ECON.  J.  1465,  1468-70  (1997).

32  See Daniel  Kahneman  &  Shane  Frederick,  Representativeness Revisited-  Attribute Substitution in Intui-

tive Judgment, in HEURISTICS AND  BIASES:  THE  PSYCHOLOGY OF  INTUITIVE  JUDGMENT,  supra note 29,  at 49;
Christine Jolls et  al., A  Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics, 50  STAN. L. REV.  1471,  1518-19  (1998).
33  On  the availability heuristic  in general,  see  Tversky  & Kahneman,  supra note  14,  at  38, 46-49.  On the
availability  heuristic and  law,  see  Roger  Noll  & James  Krier,  Some  Implications of Cognitive Psychology for
Risk Regulation, 19 J. LEGAL  STUD. 747,767-71  (1991);  Kuran & Sunstein, supra note 22,  at 703-05.

1300

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1300 2002-2003

97:1295  (2003)

Social Influences and Behavioral Economics

Thus,  for  example,  "a  class  whose  instances  are  easily  retrieved  will  appear
more  numerous  than  a  class  of equal  frequency  whose  instances  are  less  re-
trievable. '34  The  point  very  much  bears  on  private  and  public  responses  to
risks,  suggesting,  for  example,  that  people  will  be  especially  responsive  to
the  dangers  of AIDS,  crime,  earthquakes,  and nuclear  power plant  accidents
if examples  are  easy  to recall.35  The point  also explains  some  of the  sources
of discrimination  on the  basis  of race,  sex,  age,  and  disability.  If it  is  easy
to  bring to mind  cases  in which  a  female  employee  quit work to  care  for  her
family,  sex  discrimination  is  more  likely;  so  too  if  it  is  easy  to  think  of
cases  in which  African-American  employees  performed  poorly. 36

In  this  way,  familiarity  can  affect  the availability  of examples,  but sali-
ence  is  important  as  well.  "The  impact  of  seeing  a  house  burning  on  the
subjective  probability  of such  accidents  is  probably  greater  than  the  impact
of reading  about  a  fire  in  the  local  paper. '37  Similarly,  earlier  events  will
have  a  smaller  impact  than  later  ones.  This  point  helps  explain  much  of
human  behavior.  For example,  whether people will  buy insurance  for natu-
ral  disasters  is  greatly  affected  by  recent  experiences. 38  If floods  have  not
occurred  in  the immediate  past, people  who  live  on  flood  plains  are  far  less
likely  to  purchase  insurance. 39 
In  the  aftermath  of  an  earthquake,  many
more  people  buy  insurance  for  earthquakes,  but the  number  declines  stead-
ily  from  that  point,  as  vivid  memories  recede. 40  For  purposes  of law  and
regulation,  the  problem  is  that  the  availability  heuristic  can  lead  to  serious
errors  of  fact,  in  terms  of  both  excessive  controls  on  small  risks  that  are
cognitively  available  and  insufficient  controls  on  large  risks  that  are  not. 41
Notice  that  the  use  of the  availability  heuristic  in  these  contexts  strongly
suggests that  the heuristics  operate  even when  the stakes  are large.  And  it  is
even  possible  that  the  use  of the  availability  heuristic,  in  such  contexts,  is
fully rational  for people who  lack statistical  knowledge.  Perhaps  use of that
heuristic  is the best  way of minimizing  the  sum  of decision  and  error costs.
But  it  seems  less  useful  to  debate  the rationality  of the  availability  heuristic
than  simply  to observe  that  it has  a significant  effect  on actual  behavior.

34  Tversky  &  Kahneman,  supra note  14,  at  46.
35  See  SLOVIC, supra note  19,  at  37-38.
36  1 speculate  that  the  availability  heuristic  helps  explain  the  striking  results  in  Marianne  Bertrand  &

Sendhil  Mullainathan,  Are  Emily and  Brendan  More  Employable  Than  Lakisha  and  Jamal?  A  Field  Ex-
periment  on  Labor Market  Discrimination  11-23  (Nov.  18,  2002)  (unpublished  manuscript,  on  file  with
author)  (finding  that  otherwise  identical  job  applicants  are  less  likely to  spur  employer  interest  if their
first  name  seems  likely  to be  that of an  African-American).  The  representativeness  heuristic  might also
be  playing a  role.  See  Kahneman  & Frederick,  supra note  32,  at  60-63  (discussing  the  representative-
ness  heuristic).

37  SLOVIC,  supra note  19,  at  37-48.
38  Id. at 39-40.
39  Id.
40 Id.
41  Kuran  & Sunstein, supra note 22,  at  703-05;  SUNSTEIN,  supra note  20,  at  33-35,  78-98.

1301

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1301 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

What,  in  particular,  produces  availability?  An  interesting  study  at-
tempts  to  test  the  effects  of  ease  of  imagery  on  perceived  judgments  of
risk.42  The  study  asked  subjects  to  read  about  an  illness  (Hyposcenia-B)
that  "was  becoming  increasingly  prevalent"  on  the  local  campus. 
In  one
condition,  the symptoms  were  concrete  and  easy to  imagine:  muscle  aches,
low  energy,  and  frequent severe  headaches.  In another  condition,  the symp-
toms  were  vague  and  hard  to  imagine:  an  inflamed  liver,  a  malfunctioning
nervous  system,  and  a  vague  sense  of disorientation.  Subjects  under  both
conditions  were  asked  both  to  imagine  a  three-week  period  in  which  they
had  the  disease  and  to  write  a  detailed  description  of what  they  imagined.
After  doing  so,  subjects  were  asked  to  assess,  on  a  ten-point  scale,  their
likelihood  of contracting  the  disease.  The  basic  finding was  that  likelihood
judgments  were  very  different  in  the  two  conditions,  with  easily  imagined
symptoms  making  people  far more  inclined  to  believe  that  they  were  likely
to get the disease. 43

There  are  several  implications  for  policy  and  law.  The  public  demand
for  law  should  be  much  higher  if people  can  easily  imagine  the  harm  in
question-in  such  cases,  the  law  might  well  reflect  a  kind  of hysteria.  But
if the harm  is  difficult  to  imagine,  we  might  well  see  a  pattern  of neglect. 44
We would therefore  predict that easily  imaginable  harms  would  lead  to rela-
tively  greater  private  precautions  and  relatively  greater  governmental  con-
cern. 45  Well-organized  private  groups  should,  and  do,  take  advantage  of
this  fact,  attempting  to  publicize  visible  examples  of harms  to  which  they
seek  to draw  attention.46  This point  also offers  implications  about public  in-
formational  campaigns.  If the  government  wants  people  to  take  protective
steps,  it  should  provide  information  about  symptoms  in  a  vivid  rather  than
statistical  way,  relying  on examples  that  can  later be brought  to mind.

An  understanding  of the  availability  heuristic  bears  directly  on the  debate
over  paternalistic  interventions. 
If people  believe  that  some  risks  are  much
higher  than  they  actually  are  and  that  other risks  are  much  lower  than  they  ac-
tually  are,  their behavior  will  not  promote  their  welfare.  People  will  take  ex-
cessive  precautions  to  avoid trivial  risks  and  they will  fail to protect  themselves
against  genuine  hazards.  Government  has  a  legitimate  role  to  play  here;  at  a
minimum,  it  should  correct  false  beliefs. 
In  some  cases,  government  legiti-

42  Steven  J.  Sherman  et  al.,  Imagining Can Heighten or Lower the  Perceived Likelihood of Con-
tracting  a  Disease:  The  Mediating Effect  of Ease  of Imagery,  in  HEURISTICS  AND  BIASES:  THE
PSYCHOLOGY  OF INTUITIVE  JUDGMENT,  supra  note  29,  at 82.

43  Id. at  88.
44  Compare  the  finding that  teens'  rates  of risk  behaviors-smoking,  driving after drinking,  unsafe
sex-can  be  reduced  by  addressing  heuristics  and biases,  in  part  by explaining  that the  availability  heu-
ristic  leads  teens  to overestimate  the  risk  behavior of their  peers.  See  Baruch  Fischhoff, Heuristics and
Biases  in Application, in  HEURISTICS  AND  BIASES:  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  INTUITIVE  JUDGMENT,  supra
note 29,  at  730,  747.

45  See  Noll & Krier, supra note  33,  at  767-71.
46  See  Kuran & Sunstein,  supra note  22,  at  733-35 (discussing  availability  campaigns).

1302

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1302 2002-2003

97:1295  (2003)

Social Influences and Behavioral Economics

mately  responds  to  people's  inability  to  process  risk-related  information  by
constraining  their choices,  at  least when  the  constraint ensures that  they will do
what  they would  do  if they were  adequately  informed.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  an
understanding  of bounded  rationality  undermines  the  dogmatic,  nearly  theo-
logical,  antipaternalism  of those  who  indulge  strong  assumptions  about ration-
ality, at least if social  influences do not correct  individual  errors. 47

B.  Probability Neglect

The  availability  heuristic  can  produce  an  inaccurate  assessment  of
probability.  But sometimes  people will attempt to  make  little  assessment of
probability  at  all,  especially  when  strong  emotions  are  involved.4 8  In  such
cases,  large-scale  variations  in  probabilities  matter  little,  even  when  those
variations  unquestionably  should matter.  The  case  of the  sniper  attacks  is
an example.  The  point applies to  hope as  well  as  fear;  vivid images  of good
outcomes  will  crowd  out  consideration  of probability  too.49  Lotteries  are
successful  partly  for this  reason.

Probability  neglect  has  received  its  most  direct  empirical  confirmation
in  a  striking  study  of people's  willingness  to  pay  to  avoid  electric  shocks. 50
The  central  purpose  of the  study  was  to  test the  relevance  of probability  in
"affect  rich"  decisions.  One  experiment  investigated  whether  varying  the
probability  of  harm  would  matter  more,  or  less,  in  settings  that  trigger
In  the
strong  emotions  than  in  settings  that  seem  relatively  emotion-free. 
relatively  emotion-free  setting,  participants  were  told  that  the  experiment
entailed  some  chance  of a  $20  penalty.  In  the "strong  emotion"  setting, par-
ticipants  were  asked to  imagine  that they  would participate  in an  experiment
involving  some  chance  of  a  "short,  painful,  but  not  dangerous  electric
shock." 5'  Participants  were  asked  to  say  how  much they  would  be  willing
to  pay  to  avoid participating  in the  relevant  experiment.  Some  participants
were  told  that  there  was  a  1% chance  of receiving  the bad  outcome  (either
the  $20  loss  or  the  electric  shock),  others  were  told  that  the  chance  was
99%, and  still others  were  told that the chance  was  100%.

The  key  result  was  that  variations  in  probability  affected  those  facing
the  relatively  emotion-free  injury,  the  $20  penalty,  far  more  than  they  af-
fected people  facing  the more  emotionally  evocative  outcome  of an  electric
shock.52  For  the  cash  penalty,  the  difference  between  the  median  payment
for  a  1% chance  and  the  median  payment  for  a 99%  chance  was  predictably
large  and  indeed  broadly  consistent  with  economic  rationality:  $1 to  avoid

47 For discussion,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein  & Richard  H.  Thaler, Libertarian  Paternalism  and  the  Law

6-8 (Feb.  20,  2003)  (unpublished  manuscript,  on  file  with authors).

48  Rottenstreich  & Hsee, supra  note  16,  at 176-88.
49 See id.
50 Id.
51 Id. at  181.
52 Id.

1303

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1303 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

a  1% chance,  and  $18  to  avoid  a  99%  chance.5 3  For the  electric  shock,  by
contrast,  the difference  in  probability  made  little  difference  to  median  will-
ingness  to pay:  $7 to avoid  a  1% chance,  and  $10  to  avoid  a 99%  chance.5 4
Apparently,  people will  pay  a  significant  amount  to avoid  a  small  probability
of a  hazard  that  is  affect  laden-and  the  amount  that  they  will  pay  will  not
vary  greatly  with  changes  in  probability.  My  own  study,  involving  arsenic,
comes to a  similar  conclusion,  suggesting that people  are  less  sensitive to dif-
ferences  in  probability  when  the  risks  are  described  in  a  way  that  triggers
strong  emotions. 5  The  point  explains  "why  societal  concerns  about  hazards
such  as  nuclear  power  and  exposure  to  extremely  small  amounts  of toxic
chemicals  fail  to recede  in response  to information  about the very  small  prob-
abilities of the feared consequences  from such hazards. 5 6

An  understanding  of probability  neglect  casts  new light  on  the  finding
that  visualization  or  imagery  matters  a  great  deal  to  people's  reactions  to
risks.5 7  When  an  image  of a  bad  outcome  is  easily  accessible:  people  will
become  greatly  concerned  about  a  risk,  holding  probability  constant.58
Consider  the  fact that  when  people  are  asked  how  much  they  will  pay  for
flight  insurance  for  losses  resulting  from  "terrorism,"  they  will  pay  more
than  if they  are  asked  how  much they  will  pay  for  flight  insurance  to  com-
pensate  for  injury  or  monetary  losses  from  all  causes.5 9  The  evident  expla-
nation  for  this  peculiar  result  is  that  the  word  "terrorism"  evokes  vivid
images  of disaster, thus crowding  out probability judgments.  Note  also that
when  people  discuss  a  low-probability  risk,  their  concern  rises  even  if the
discussion  consists  mostly  of  apparently  trustworthy  assurances  that  the
likelihood  of harm  really  is  infinitesimal.60  The  reason  is  that  the  discus-
sion  makes  it  easier to visualize  the risk and hence  to fear  it.

Probability  neglect  does  not involve  the availability  heuristic.  That heuris-
tic  leads  people  not to  neglect  probability,  but  to answer the  question  of prob-
ability  by  replacing  a  hard  question  (What  is  the  statistical  risk?)  with  an  easy
question  (Do salient  examples readily  come  to mind?). 6'  My  suggestion here is

53 Id.
54 Id.
55 See  Sunstein, supro  note  17,  at  77-81.
56  Paul  Slovic  et  al.,  The  Affect  Heuristic, in  HEURISTICS  AND  BIASES:  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF

INTUITIVE  JUDGMENT,  supra note 29,  at  397.

57 See  Paul  Slovic  et  al.,  Violence Risk Assessment  and Risk  Communication:  The  Effects  of Using
Actual Cases, Providing Instruction, and Employing Probability Versus Frequency Formats, 24  LAW  &
HUM.  BEHAV.  271  (2000).

58 See George  Loewenstein  et  al.,  Risk as Feelings, 127  PSYCHOL.  BULL.  267,  275-76  (2001).
59 See  E.J.  Johnson  et  al.,  Framing, Probability Distortions, and Insurance Decisions, 7  J.  RISK  &

UNCERTAINTY  35  (1993).

60  See  Ali Siddiq  Alhakami  &  Paul  Slovic,  A  Psychological Study  of the Inverse Relationship Be-

tween Perceived Risk and Perceived Benefit, 14  RISK  ANALYSIS  1085,  1094-95  (1994).

61  See  Amos  Tversky  &  Daniel  Kahneman,  Availability:  A  Heuristic for Judging Frequency and

Probability, 5  COGNITIVE  PSYCHOL.  207  (1973).

1304

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1304 2002-2003

97:1295  (2003)

Social Influences and Behavioral Economics

not  that  visualization  makes  an  event  seem  more  probable  (though  this  is  also
true), but  that  visualization makes  the  issue  of probability  less  relevant  or even
irrelevant.  The  most  sensible  conclusion  is  that  with  respect  to risks  of injury
or harm,  vivid  images  and concrete  pictures  of disaster  can  "crowd  out"  other
kinds  of thoughts,  including  the  crucial  thought that  the  probability  of disaster
is  really  small.  "If someone  is  predisposed  to be worried,  degrees  of unlikeli-
ness  seem to provide  no  comfort,  unless one  can prove  that  harm  is  absolutely
impossible,  which  itself  is  not  possible. '62  When  people  focus  on  highly
speculative  risks,  it  is  often  because  of intense  emotional  reactions  that  make
those  risks,  and not relevant others,  stand out  from the  background.

III.  SOCIAL DIMENSIONS

All  these  points  involve  individual  thinking about  risks.  But as  I  have
stressed,  there  is  an unresolved  puzzle  for those  interested  in the  real-world
effects  of the  availability  heuristic  and  probability  neglect: 
in  many  con-
texts,  multiple  images  are  literally  available  and  potentially  salient.  "[N]ot
all  analogies  within  a  person's  repertoire  are  equal: 
for  whatever  reasons,
some  are  more  easily recalled  than  others. '63  Consider  the  problem  of gun
violence.  We  can  find  cases  in  which  the  presence  of  guns  led  to  many
deaths  and  also  cases  in  which  the  presence  of guns  allowed  law-abiding
citizens  to  protect  themselves  against  criminals. 64  Or consider  the  question
of whether  women,  when  facing  a  risk  of sexual  violence,  increase  or  de-
crease  their chances  of escaping  unscathed  if they  engage  in aggressive  self-
defense.  In some  cases,  resistance  prevented  the  assault.  In  other  cases,  re-
sistance  led  to  murder.65  In  the  face  of conflicting  instances,  which  cases
are  especially  available?  Even expert  judgments appear  to  be driven  by one
or another  set of available  instances. 66  But  why  should one  or  another kind
of case  be available?

A.  Cascades and Polarization

Social  influences  are  quite  important  here.  Sometimes  availability  and
salience  spread through  social  bandwagons  or cascades,  in which  apparently
representative  anecdotes  and  gripping  examples  move rapidly  from  one per-
son  to  another.67 
In  fact,  a  process  of  this  sort  played  a  large  role  in  the

62 JOHN  WEINGART,  WASTE  IS  A TERRIBLE  THING  TO  MIND  362  (2001).
63  YUEN  FOONG  KHONG,  ANALOGIES  AT WAR  213  (1992).
64  See  Donald  Braman  &  Dan  M.  Kahan,  More  Statistics, Less  Persuasion:  A Cultural  Theory  of

Gun-Risk Perceptions,  U.  PA. L. REV.  (forthcoming  2003).
65  See  Fischhoff, supra note  44, at  730,  733-34.
66  Id.
67 Chip  Heath  et al.,  Emotional  Selection in  Memes:  The  Case of Urban  Legends, 81  J.  PERSONALITY

& SOC.  PSYCHOL.  1028  (2001)  [hereinafter  Heath  et  al.,  Emotional  Selection  in  Memes];  Chip  Heath,  Do
People Prefer  To  Pass  Along  Good or  Bad News?  Valence  and Relevance as  Predictors  of Transmission
Propensity, 68  ORG.  BEHAV.  &  HUM.  DECISION  PROCESSES  79  (1996).  For  a popular  account  of the related

1305

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1305 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

Washington  area  sniper  attacks,  in  the  Love  Canal  scare, 68  and  in  many
other sets  of social  processes  producing law.

Consider a  stylized  illustration.  Andrew  hears  of a  social  event,  which
he  finds  to  be revealing  or  illustrative.  The  event  might  involve  crime,  dis-
crimination,  environmental  hazards,  or threats  to national  security.  Andrew
tells Barry,  who  would  be inclined  to view  the  event as  not terribly  informa-
tive,  but who  comes  to believe  that the  event does  indeed reveal  a great  deal
after  seeing  Andrew's  reaction.  Once  Carol  hears  about the  event from  An-
drew  and Barry,  she  is  likely  to  find it  revealing  as well.  Deborah  will  then
have to  possess  a  great deal  of private  information  to  reject the  shared opin-
ion  of  Andrew,  Barry,  and  Carol. 69   Stylized,  though  it  is,  the  example
shows  that  once  several  people  start  to  consider  an  example  as  probative,
many  people  may  come  to  be  influenced  by  their  opinion,  giving  rise  to
cascade  effects.10  Nor  is  the  example  entirely  unrealistic.  Why  do  people
purchase  insurance  against  natural  disasters?  Much  of  the  explanation
comes  from  social  interactions  that follow vivid examples. 71

In  the  domain  of social  risks,  availability  cascades  are  responsible  for
many  social  beliefs.  The  point  is  amplified  by  the  fact  that  fear-inducing
accounts,  with  high  emotional  valence,  are  especially  likely  to  spread.7 2
There  is  a  general  implication  here.  Because  different  social  influences  can
be  found  in different  communities,  local  variations  are  inevitable,  with  dif-
ferent  examples  becoming  salient  in  each.  One  community  might  greatly
fear abduction  of young  girls,  and another  might  not, even  though  the statis-
tical risk  is  the same  in each.  One  community  might  fear shark  attacks,  and
another  might  not,  even  though  the  likelihood  of  such  an  attack,  in  both
places,  is  miniscule.  Such  variations  might  involve  coincidence  or  small  or
random  factors,  rather than  large-scale  cultural  differences.

Different  judgments  within  different  social  groups,  with  different
available  examples,  owe  their  origin to  social  processes  of this  sort.  Indeed
the  different  reactions  to  nuclear  power  in France  and  the  United  States  can
be  explained  in  large  part  in  this  way.  Or  suppose  that  some  groups  con-
centrate  on  cases  in  which  guns  increased  violence,  while  others  focus  on
cases  in which  guns  decreased  violence. 73  When  this  is  so,  availability  cas-
cades  are  a  large  part  of the  reason.  "Many  Germans  believe  that  drinking

phenomenon  of tipping  points,  see  MALCOLM  GLADWELL,  THE TIPPING  POINT  (2000);  for  a somewhat
more technical  treatment,  see  DUNCAN  WATTS,  SIx  DEGREES OF SEPARATION  (2003).

68 See  Kuran &  Sunstein, supra note  22,  at 691-98.
69  See  David  Hirshleifer,  The  Blind  Leading  the  Blind,  in  THE NEW  ECONOMICS  OF  HUMAN

BEHAVIOR  188,  193-95  (Mariano  Tommasi  &  Kathryn  lerulli eds.,  1995).

70 See  Kuran  &  Sunstein,  supra  note  22,  at  715-33;  Sushil  Bikhchandani  et  al.,  Learning from  the

Behavior of Others, 12  J. ECON.  PERSP.  151  (1998).

71 See  Jacob  Gersen,  Strategy  and  Cognition:  Regulating  Catastrophic  Risk  (2001) 

(unpublished

manuscript,  on  file with author).

72 See  Heath et  al.,  Emotional Selection in Memes, supra  note  67,  at  1037.
73 See  Braman &  Kahan, supra  note 64.

1306

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1306 2002-2003

97:1295  (2003)

Social Influences and Behavioral Economics

water  after eating cherries  is  deadly;  they  also believe  that  putting  ice  in  soft
drinks  is  unhealthy.  The  English,  however,  rather enjoy  a  cold drink  of wa-
ter  after  some  cherries;  and  Americans  love  icy  refreshments. '74  Availabil-
ity cascades  help account  for many  diverse  social judgments.

There  is  a  closely related  phenomenon.  Processes  of social  deliberation
typically  lead  like-minded  people  to  accept  a  more  extreme  version  of the
views  with  which they  began.75  This  is  the process  known  as group  polariza-
tion. 76  If several  people  fear  global  warming,  and  speak to one  another,  their
fear  is  likely  to  increase  as  a result  of internal discussions.  If group  members
believe  that  the  United  States  cannot  be trusted  in  its  dealings  with  other  na-
tions,  that  very  belief is  likely  to  be heightened  after  members  have  started to
talk.  Group  polarization  has  not  been  studied  in  connection  with  the  avail-
ability  heuristic.  But  the  clear  implication  is  that  the  effect  of certain  avail-
able  examples  will  become  greatly  amplified  through  group  discussion.
Suppose,  for  example,  that  several  people  are  discussing  a  recent  wave  of
sniper attacks,  or cases  involving  the kidnapping  of young  girls,  or situations
in  which  the  government  has  wrongly  ignored  a  serious  foreign  threat. 77  If
these  particular  examples  are  mentioned,  they  are  likely  to  stick.  And  if the
group  has  a  predisposition  to  think  that  one  or  another  risk  is  serious,  social
dynamics  will  lead the  group  to believe  that the  example  is  highly  revealing.
The  same  is  true  if the group  is  fearful.  An  initial predisposition  toward  fear
is  likely to be aggravated  as  a result of collective  deliberations.78

In general,  then, groups  tend to  polarize  toward a  more extreme position  in
line with their predeliberation  tendencies.  This finding suggests  that groups  are
not  likely to  be  able  to  avoid the judgment  errors made  by  individuals.  A great
deal  of evidence  suggests  complex  and  mixed results  on  that question.79  With
respect  to  certain  statistical  problems,  groups  have  been  found  to  make  better
decisions  than  individuals. 80  And  in  a  finding  of  particular  relevance  here,
there  is  suggestive  evidence  that  groups  of randomly  selected  people,  without
any particular predeliberation  tendency,  are  slightly  better at avoiding  the prob-
lems  created  by use  of the availability  heuristic. 81  On the  other hand, groups of

74  Joseph  Henrich,  Group  Report:  What  Is  the  Role  of Culture  in  Bounded  Rationality?,  in
BOUNDED  RATIONALITY:  THE ADAPTIVE  TOOLBOx  343,  353-54  (2001)  (presenting  an  entertaining  out-
line  in  connection  with  food choice  decisions).

75  See  CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  WHY  SOCIETIES  NEED  DISSENT  (forthcoming  2004)  (manuscript  at  74-
95,  on  file  with  author);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Deliberative Trouble?  Why  Groups Go  to  Extremes,  110
YALE  L.J.  71  (2000).

76  ld
77  See KHONG,  supra note  63.
78  Compare  the  discussion of social  influences  and extremism  in  Russell  Hardin,  The Crippled Epis-

temology of Extremism,  in POLITICAL  EXTREMISM  AND  RATIONALITY  3  (Albert  Breton  et  al.  eds.,  2002).

79  See Kerr et  al.,  supra note  1, at  688-96.
80  ALAN  BLINDER  &  JOHN  MORGAN,  ARE  Two  HEADS  BETTER  THAN  ONE?  AN  EXPERIMENTAL
ANALYSIS  OF GROUP  VS.  INDIVIDUAL  DECISIONMAKING  (Nat'l  Bureau  of Econ.  Research,  Working  Pa-
per No.  7909,  2000), available at http://papers.nber.org/papers/w7909.pdf.

81  Kerr et  al.,  supra note  1, at  692.

1307

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1307 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

like-minded  people,  predisposed  to  show  concern  about  some  problem,  are
likely  to show amplified  use  of that heuristic.  And some  evidence  suggests that
the  use  of the  representativeness  heuristic  is  aggravated  in  groups.82  Groups
seem  to  be  more  confident  than  individuals,  but  the  evidence  conflicts  on
whether  the greater  confidence  reflects  overconfidence  bias.83  The  most com-
prehensive  study  suggests that  "there  can  be  no  simple  answer  to the  question,
'Which  is  more  biased,  individuals  or  groups?"' 84 
It  seems  clear  that  group
processes  do not  eliminate  the  use  of heuristics.  It remains  to be  seen whether
and when  they reduce  or increase  the resulting errors.85

B.  Media, Interest Groups, and Politicians

Thus  far  the  discussion  has  involved  interactions  among  individuals,
who  are  all  treated  as  equals.  But  it  should  be  clear  that  in  the  real  world,
some voices  are  more  important  than others,  especially  when availability  and
In  particular,  the  behavior  and  preoccupations  of the
salience  are  involved. 
media play  a  large  role.  Many  perceived  "epidemics"  are  in  reality  no  such
thing, but instead  a product  of overwhelming  media coverage  of gripping, un-
representative  incidents.8 6  Attention  to  these unusual  incidents  is  likely  to en-
sure  availability  and  salience,  promoting  an  inaccurately  high  estimate  of
probability  and  at  the  same  time  some  degree  of probability  neglect.  And  in
the  face  of close  media attention,  the  demand  for  legal  responses will  be  sig-
nificantly  affected.  In  the context  of the sniper  attacks,  intense  media  cover-
age  was the central  source  of social  fear, helping  to ensure  that large  amounts
of private  and public  resources  were devoted  to risk  reduction.

A  natural  question,  then,  is  why the  media  covers  certain  risks  and  not

others.  A  good clue  comes from  the following  suggestion:

Whatever  the criticisms,  the  reign  of terror  is boosting  ratings  for  cable  news net-
works.  In fact,  they  are now  at their highest levels  since  the Sept.  11,  2001,  terror-
ist attacks.  At  the end  of last  week,  Fox News  Channel's  average  daily  audience
was up 27%  from  a month before;  CNN's was  up 29%; MSNBC's, up 24%.87

Hence  the  media's  coverage  reflects  its  economic  self-interest,  at  least  in
part.  Gripping  instances,  whether  or  not  representative,  are  likely  to  attract
attention  and  to  increase  ratings.  Often  the  result  is  to  distort  probability
judgments.  There  can  be  a  kind  of vicious  circle  involving  the  availability
heuristic  and  media  incentives,  with  each  aggravating  the  other, often  to the

4 Id. at 715.
85 For  evidence  of group  polarization  on juries,  see CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN  ET AL.,  PUNITIVE  DAMAGES:

How  JURIES  DECIDE  43-61  (2002).

86 See JOEL  BEST,  RANDOM  VIOLENCE  28  (1999).
97 Johanna  Neuman,  In a  Sniper s  Grip:  Media's  Role  in Drama  Debated (pt.  1), L.A. TIMES,  Oct.

82 Id.

83 Id.

24,  2002,  at  16.

1308

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1308 2002-2003

97:1295  (2003)

Social Influences and Behavioral Economics

detriment of public  understanding.

Knowing  the  importance  of  media  coverage,  well-organized  private
groups-some  entirely  self-interested  and  others  altruistic  and  pursuing  a
social  cause-often  work  extremely hard to  promote public  attention  to par-
ticular risks.  A  common  tactic  is  to  publicize  an incident  that  might trigger
both  availability  and  salience.  Of course  terrorists  themselves  are  the most
extreme  and  vicious  example,  using  high-visibility  attacks  to  convince  peo-
ple  that  "they  cannot  be  safe  anywhere." 88  But  many  illustrations  are  less
objectionable  and  sometimes  even  benign.  Consider  the  abandoned  haz-
ardous  waste  problem  at  Love  Canal,  used  by  environmental  groups  to
promote  hazardous  waste  cleanup,8 9 or  the  Exxon  Valdez  disaster,  used  by
the  Sierra  Club  and  other  environmental  organizations  to  promote  more
stringent  safeguards  against  oil  spills.  Showing  at  least  a  working  knowl-
edge  of  the  availability  heuristic  and  other  behavioral  findings,  private
groups  seize  on  selected  incidents  and  publicize  them  to  make  them  gener-
ally  salient  to  the  public.  With  respect  to  tort  reform,  corporate  advocates
use  extreme  and  unrepresentative  cases  of jury  misconduct  to  suggest  that
significant  protections  are  needed  against  jury  overreaching.9" 
In  all  of
these  examples,  the  use  of particular  instances  might be  necessary  to  move
the public,  and  legislators,  in  the right  directions.  Certainly  the social  proc-
esses  that  interact  with  salience  and  availability  can  promote  legal  reform
where  it  is  needed.  But  there  are  no  assurances  here.  Social  influences
might  well  lead  people  to  exaggerate  a  problem  or  a  probability,  or  to  ig-
nore the question  of probability  altogether.

Politicians  engage  in the  same basic project.  President  Ronald  Reagan
was  a  master.  Consider  his  influential  discussion  of the  Chicago  Welfare
Queen,  "a  heavy  woman  driving  a  big white  Cadillac  and  paying  for  thick
steaks  with  wads  of food  stamps." 91  By  its very  nature,  the  voice  of an  in-
fluential  politician  comes  with amplifiers.  When public  officials  are  able  to
bring  an  incident  before  the  public,  a  seemingly  illustrative  example  is
likely  to  spread  far  and  wide.  A  legal  enactment  can  itself promote  avail-
ability;  if the law responds  to the problems  associated  with  hazardous  waste
dumps  or "hate  crimes,"  people  might  well  come  to  see  those  problems  as
readily  available.  The  terrorist  attacks  of September  11,  2001  would  inevi-

88  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Terrorism and Probability Neglect, J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY  (forthcoming

2003).

89  See Kuran  & Sunstein, supra note  22, at 691-98.
90  Neil  Vidmar,  Pap and Circumstance:  What Jury  Verdict Statistics Can  Tell  Us "About Jury Be-
havior and the  Tort System,  28  SUFF.  U. L. REV.  1205,  1209  (1994)  (referring  to "the  fabricated  or mis-
leading  anecdote").  There are  a number  of such  anecdotes,  but probably  the  one most  cited  is about  the
jury that rendered  a million-dollar verdict  in the  case of a woman  who  allegedly lost her psychic powers
after  undergoing  a  CAT  scan.  This  story  apparently  originated  in  1985  in  a  speech  by  an  insurance
company  executive.

91  Steven  Roberts,  Food Stamps  Program: How It  Grew and How  Reagan  Wants  To  Cut It  Back,

N.Y. TIMES,  Apr. 4,  1981,   1, at  11.

1309

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1309 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

tably  loom  large  no  matter  what  President  George  W.  Bush  chose  to  em-
phasize.  But  notice  that  the  President,  and  his  White  House  generally,  re-
ferred  to the  attacks  on  countless  occasions,  frequently  in  order  to stress  the
reality  of seemingly  distant  threats  and  the  need  to  incur  significant  costs
and burdens  to  counteract  them.  We  know  too  little  to  know  if the  govern-
ment's  emphasis  on  those  attacks  reflected,  or bred,  a  form  of probability
neglect.  But there  is  no  doubt  that  their  salience  played  a  large  role  in  af-
fecting  political  behavior  and  that  that  role  cannot  be  understood  without
reference  to social  influences.

C.  Predispositions

But  all  this  does  not  provide  the  full  picture.  Beliefs  and  orientations
are  a  product of availability,  to be  sure,  and  social  influences  help  to  ensure
both  availability  and  salience.  But  what is  available  is  also  a  product of an-
tecedent  beliefs  and  orientations,  both  individual  and  social. 
In  other
words,  availability  is  endogenous  to,  or a  product  of, individual  predisposi-
tions.  Almost no  discussion  has been devoted  to this  point  in  the behavioral
analysis  of law. 92

Consider  some  examples.  Why  do  some  people  recall  and  emphasize
incidents  in  which  a  failure  to take  precautions  led  to  serious  environmental
harm?  A  likely  reason  is  that  they  are  predisposed  to  favor  environmental
protection.  And  why  do  some  people  recall  and  emphasize  incidents  in
which  environmental  protection  led  to  excessive  costs  for  little  gain?  A
likely  reason  is  that they  are  predisposed  to oppose  environmental  controls.
Here  is  an  interaction  between  the  availability  heuristic  and  confirmation
bias,  which  is  "the  tendency  to seek  information  to  confirm  our original  hy-
potheses  and  beliefs. '93  President  Reagan's  tale  of the  Welfare  Queen  was
especially  salient  to  those  who  were  predisposed  to  believe  that  the welfare
system  was  rewarding  people  who  should  be required  to  work,  but  tried  to
cheat  the  system.  To  many  others,  the tale  would  fall  on  deaf ears  and  not
prove  memorable  at  all  (except  perhaps  as  an  illustration  of unfortunate  po-
litical  rhetoric,  or of an  attempt  to  use  the availability  heuristic).  The  same
basic  processes  are  at work  in  debates  over gun  control.  When  those  suspi-
cious  of such  controls  recall,  and  use,  instances  in  which  legal  controls  ac-
tually  cost  lives,  predispositions  are  crucial. 94

The  point  should  not  be  exaggerated.  Predispositions  are  not  a  black
box,  and  they  do  not  come  from  the  sky.  They  have  sources.  Among  their
sources  are  availability  and  salience.  Hence  there  is a  complex  set  of inter-
actions  here,  with  heuristics  helping to  constitute  predispositions,  which  are
in turn  responsible  for  the real-world  operation  of heuristics.  What  I mean
to  emphasize  is  that  all  this  happens  socially,  not  merely  individually.

92 The exception  is Braman  &  Kahan, supra note  64.
93 ELLIOT ARONSON,  THE SOCIAL ANIMAL  147  (6th  ed.  1992).
94 See Braman  & Kahan, supra  note 64.

1310

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1310 2002-2003

97:1295  (2003)

Social Influences and Behavioral Economics

When  people  are in  a  group that  is  predisposed  in  a particular  direction,  the
salient examples  will be quite different  from  those that are  salient  in a  group
with  an opposite  predisposition.  Here  group  polarization  is  especially  im-
portant.

More  generally,  different  cultural  orientations  play  a  large  role  in  de-
termining  what  turns  out to  be  available. 95  The  United  States  is  highly  di-
verse,  and for  some  purposes,  it  is plausible  to think  of different regions  and
groups  as  having  somewhat  different  cultures.  Within  the  African-
American  community,  for  example,  the  available  instances  are  sometimes
quite  different  from those  that  can be  found  within  the  White  community.96
Across  nations,  the  differences  are  even  more  striking,  in part  because  dif-
ferent world-views play  such  a dominant role.97

IV.  BEYOND AVAILABILITY

I have  emphasized  the  role  of the  availability  heuristic  and  probability
neglect,  but  social  influences  are  connected  with  the  real-world  effects  of
many heuristics  and  biases  and  with the  full  range  of findings  in  behavioral
economics.  Consider,  for example,  one  of the sources  of unpredictability  in
jury  awards  involving  punitive  damages  or  hard-to-monetize  injuries: 
the
absence  of a  "modulus"  that  would  enable  people to  make  sense  of various
"points"  along  the  scale of dollars.98  When  a  company  has engaged  in  seri-
ous misconduct,  is  the  appropriate  punishment  $100,000,  or  $1,000,000,  or
$10,000,000?  A jury's judgment  is likely  to depend  on  the  modulus  that  is
suggested  by the  most  influential  jurors.  But  where  does  that  modulus,  or
any modulus,  come from?  The  answer  lies  in social  understandings.  Some-
times  a particular juror  will  have  heard  of a  case  in  which  a  certain  amount
has  been  awarded,  and that  amount  might turn  out to  serve  as  a modulus  for
the  group.

Social  influences  are  not limited  to this  phenomenon.  In  a process  akin
to  group  polarization,  the  dollar  awards  of juries  turn  out  to  be  systemati-
cally higher  than  the  predeliberation  dollar  awards  of those juries'  median
juror. 99  Dollar  awards  undergo  a  systematic  "severity  shift,"  ensuring  that
in  many cases,  awards  are  as  high  as,  or  even higher  than,  that  of the  high-
est  individual  before  deliberation  began.  Thus  social  interactions  have  a
predictable  amplifying  tendency  on  individual  awards.  An  understanding
of individual  psychology would  be insufficient  to predict this  outcome.  It is
necessary  to  examine  social  interactions  as  well.  There  is  much  to  be
learned  about the relationship between  such  interactions  and  anchoring.

95  See  id.
96  See  RONALD N. JACOBS,  RACE,  MEDIA,  AND THE CRISIS  OF CIVIL  SOCIETY  (2000).
97  See  MARY DOUGLAS,  RISK ACCEPTABILITY  IN THE  SOCIAL  SCIENCES  53-72  (1985).
98  See  SUNSTEIN  ET  AL., supra note  85, at 29-30.
99  Id.

1311

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1311 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

Or  consider  loss  aversion.  People  are  averse  to  losses;100  but  how do
we  know  whether  something  will  count  as  a  loss?  When  will  people  see
changes  as  losses?  Often  the answer  depends  not on simple  facts,  but on a
range  of contextual  factors,  including  how  the  event  is  framed.  The  status
quo is  usually  the reference  point, so  that  losses  are  so  defined  when people
are  asked,  or forced,  to  relinquish  what they now  have.  But  simply through
inventive  terminology,  it  is  possible  to manipulate  the frame  so as  to make  a
change  appear  to be  a  loss  rather  than a  gain,  or vice versa.  These  manipu-
lations  occur socially-through  the acts  and  deeds  of other people and  insti-
tutions.  Consider  a  company  that  says  "cash  discount"  rather  than "credit
card  surcharge."  Or  consider a  parent  who  says  that  for  behavior X, rather
than  behavior  Y, a  child  will  be  rewarded,  as  opposed  to  saying  that for  be-
havior  Y, rather  than  behavior X, a  child  will be  punished.  Or  consider  fa-
miliar  advertisements  to  the  effect  that  "you  cannot  afford  not  to"  use  a
certain product.

In the  context  of environmental  regulation,  it  is easy  to  manipulate  the
reference  point  that  people  use  to  measures 
losses  or  gains.  Thus
policymakers  might  claim  that  they  are  trying  to  "restore"  water  or  air
quality  as  it was  thirty years  ago.  If they make  this  claim,  people  are  likely
to  be  receptive;  they  do  not  want  air  and  water  to  be  dirtier  than  they
recently  were.  By  contrast,  a  proposal  to  "improve"  air  or  water  quality
will  not  be  nearly  so  attractive.  People's judgments  are  much  affected  by
whether  we are  speaking  of restoration or  improvement.0 1  But how  can  we
tell  which  is  involved?  The  answer  might be  manipulated  socially,  simply
by  picking  a  "clean"  year  to  which  policymakers  seek  to  return.  There  is a
more  general  point.  Because  people  are  averse  to  losses  from  the  status
quo,  policymakers  have  a  great  deal  to  gain  by  manipulating  people's
conception  of what  the status  quo  is,  so  that  any  changes  do  not  seem to  be
a  "loss"  at  all.  If an apparent  increase  in tax rates  can really  be described  as
a  return  to  tax  rates  in  1996,  taxpayers  are  less  likely  to  object.  Such
manipulations,  inevitably  social  in  character,  will  inevitably  have  large
effects  on assessments  of legal  alternatives.10 2

Or  consider  the  finding  of  bounded  self-interest,  which  behavioral
economists  and  those  interested  in  behavioral  law  and  economics  have
stressed. 0 3  Bounded  self-interest  refers  to  the  fact  that  people  are  some-
times willing to  sacrifice  material  self-interest  in order  to  be fair and  also  to
sacrifice  material  self-interest  in order  to  punish unfairness.  But what  is the
difference  between  individual  behavior  and  behavior  in  groups?  The  issue
has  been  studied  in  connection  with  the  Dictator  Game,  used  to  explore

100  See Russell  Korobkin,  The Endowment Effect and LegalAnalysis, 97 Nw.  U.  L. REV.  1227 (2003).
101 See  Robin  Gregory  et  al.,  The  Role of Past States  in  Determining  Reference Points for Policy

Decisions,  55  ORG.  BEHAV.  &  HUM.  DECISIONS  PROCESSES  195  (1993).

102 Id
103  See THALER,  supra  note  2,  at 50-62;  Jolls  et  al., supra note 32,  at  1489-93.

1312

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1312 2002-2003

97:1295  (2003)

Social Influences and Behavioral Economics

selfishness  and  altruism. 10 4  In this  game,  a  subject  is  told that  she  can  allo-
cate  a  sum  of  money,  say  $10,  between  herself  and  some  stranger.  The
standard  economic  prediction  is  that  most  subjects  will  keep  all  or  almost
all  of the  money  for themselves.  But the  standard prediction  turns  out to be
wrong.  Most  people  choose  to  keep  somewhere  between  $6  and  $8 and  to
share  the rest. 10 5  The  question  here,  however,  is  how  behavior  in the Dicta-
tor  Game  is  affected  if  people  are  placed  in  teams-if  people  decide  in
groups rather  than  individuals.  Are  groups  more altruistic  than  individuals?
6
The  answer  is  that  team  members  choose  still  more  equal  divisions.1
1
Once  placed  in  groups,  people  show  a  significant  shift  toward  greater  gen-
erosity.

This result seems  best explained  by reference  to a  social  norm,  one  that
disfavors  selfishness,  even  within  a  group  that  stands to  benefit  from  it.  If
people are  deliberating  with others  about how  much  money  to give  to  char-
ity,  chances  are  good  that  the  group  will  end  up being  less  selfish  than  the
median  individual,  simply  because  people  do  not  want  to  appear  to  be
greedy.  People's  concern  for  their reputation,  along  with  their  concern  for
their  own  self-conception,  plays  a  large  role.  Of course  the  outcomes  here,
and the  effects  of group  influence,  would  change  if the team  in the  Dictator
Game  had  some  reason  to  be hostile  to  those  who  would  benefit  from  their
generosity.  We  can  easily  imagine  a  variation  of  the  Dictator  Game  in
which, for  example,  people of a  relatively  poor religious  group  are deciding
how  much  to  allocate  to  another  religious  group  that  is  thought  to  be  both
hostile  and  far wealthier.  In  this variation,  the social  norm  would  likely  fa-
vor greater  selfishness.

My  point,  in  short,  is  that  fairness-related  behavior  is  often  a  function
of prevailing social  influences. 0 7  Consider a  study  of cooperative behavior,
which  tested  the  subjects'  willingness  to  cooperate,  varying  only  the  name
of the game. 0 8  In one  version,  the  game  was  called  a  Wall  Street game;  in
another,  it  was  called a  Community  Game.  The  level  of cooperative  behav-
ior  was  far  higher  in  the  latter  version  that  in  the  former.  Whether  people
will  behave  fairly,  and  act  to  their mutual  advantage,  is  likely  to  depend  on
whether  they  think  that  they  are  playing  Wall  Street  or  Community;  and
here  social  signals are  crucial.

104 Cason  & Mui,  supra note  31,  at  1468-70.
105 See id
106 Id. at  1468-72.
107 This  point  is  supported  by  the  existence  of some  cross-cultural  differences  in  fairness-related

behavior.  See  the  overview in  Alvin  Roth, Bargaining Experiments,  in  HANDBOOK OF  EXPERIMENTAL
ECONOMICS  253,  282-88  (John  Kagel  & Alan  Roth eds.,  1995).

108  M.  Samuels  & Lee  Ross,  Reputations  Versus  Labels:  The  Power of Situational  Effects  in  the

Prisoner's  Dilemma  Game  (1993)  (unpublished  manuscript,  on  file  with  author);  see  also  Lee  Ross  &
Andrew  Ward,  Naive Realism  in Everyday Life:  Implications for Social Conflicts and Misunderstand-
ings, in VALUES  AND  KNOWLEDGE  103 (Edward  S. Reed  et al. eds.,  1996).

1313

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1313 2002-2003

NORTHWESTERN  UNIVERSITY  LAW  REVIEW

V.  CONCLUSION

The  cognitive  findings  emphasized  by behavioral  economists  cannot be
understood  in  a  social  vacuum.  What  is  available  and  what  is  salient  are
products  of social  interactions.  Cascade  effects are  often responsible  for the
spread  of instances  that  eventually  become  "available"  to  many  or even  all.
Frequently  group  polarization  is  at  work,  ensuring  that  like-minded  people
come  to focus,  and to  take  as  illustrative,  a  few of countless potential  cases.
Many  private groups,  whether  self-interested  or public-spirited,  are  entirely
aware  of  that  fact.  They  make  efforts  to  spread  examples  that  will,  they
hope,  serve  to  drive people's judgments  in a  particular  direction.  Many  in-
fluential  political  leaders are  masters  of this process.  Showing  intuitive  un-
derstandings  of the  underlying  mechanisms,  they  attempt  to  make  certain
examples  vivid  and  accessible,  as  a  way  of moving judgments  in  one or  an-
other direction.

I have  also  argued  that predispositions  have a  large  effect  in producing
availability.  Of course  most predispositions  have  social  foundations.  Peo-
ple  are  predisposed  to  recall,  and  to  repeat,  instances  that  fortify  their  ante-
cedent  convictions.  Those  who  are  predisposed  to  favor  a  certain  course  of
action  will  naturally  recall  and  stress  incidents  that  support  their  preferred
plan.  Just  as  predispositions  are,  in  part,  a  function  of availability,  so  too
availability  is,  in  part, a  function  of predispositions.  Social  influences  oper-
ate  at  both  levels,  affecting  what  is  available  and  also  moving  predisposi-
tions  in  one  or  another  direction. 
is  to  understand  the
relationship  between  law  and  human behavior,  it  will be  important  to know
a  great  deal  more about  individual  cognition.  But it  will be  equally  impor-
tant to  see how  individual  cognition  is  affected  by social  interactions.

If  our  goal 

1314

HeinOnline  -- 97 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1314 2002-2003

