Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein & Robert W. Hahn, "A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 150, 2002). 
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
A. Processes and Problems 
For over twenty years, the executive branch of the federal government has required regulatory agencies to assess the costs and benefits of regulation, and to attempt to ensure that the benefits outweigh, or justify, the costs.1 At least in a formal sense, cost-benefit balancing is now the official creed of the executive branch, as demonstrated by a series of executive orders.2 The point cuts across partisan divisions: President Clinton’s approach differed somewhat from President Reagan’s, but it shared the fundamental commitment to cost-benefit balancing.3 
Notwithstanding this public commitment, national regulation has hardly come into compliance with the principles of cost-benefit balancing.4 This overall pattern of imperfect compliance should raise many alarm bells, even for those who have real doubts about costbenefit analysis and merely want more coherence and better priority-setting. The general record does show numerous successes, in the form of regulations that promise to deliver significant benefits at a relatively low price.5 But in many cases, regulations seem to do more harm than good.6 Indeed, a close look at federal regulatory policy shows a wide range of problems. Perhaps foremost among them is exceptionally poor priority-setting, with substantial resources 1 President Reagan first issued an executive order requiring agencies to use cost-benefit analysis. See Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127(1982). 2 See id. (requiring regulations to pass a cost-benefit test); see also Exec. Order No. 12,498, 3 C.F.R. 323 (1986) (requiring agencies to submit an annual regulatory plan and to adhere to cost-benefit principles); Exec. Ord. No. 12,866, 3 C.F.R. 638(1994) (requiring agencies to assess all costs and benefits of regulatory alternatives). 3 President Clinton’s cost-benefit approach expressly required agencies to include qualitative measures of costs and benefits, see Exec. Order No. 12,866, 3 C.F.R. 638, 639 (1994), while President Reagan’s approach did not specify which costs and benefits were to be measured, see Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127, 128 (1982). 4 See Eric Posner, “Controlling Agencies With Cost-Benefit Analysis”, University of Chicago Law Review, Vol. 68, no.4, Fall 2001; Robert W. Hahn et al., “Assessing Regulatory Impact Analysis: The Failure of Agencies To Comply With Executive Order 12866”, 23 Harvard. J. L & PP 859 (2000) (suggesting that the absence of information on net benefits in Regulatory Impact Analyses leads to the conclusion that agencies have failed to carry out cost-benefit analyses). 5 See Robert W. Hahn et al., Do Federal Regulations Reduce Mortality? 15-19 (2000) (evaluating twenty-four regulations whose mortality benefits constitute 90% of total benefits and concluding that nine pass a cost-benefit test because their net cost per statistical life saved is less than $5 million); Cass R. Sunstein, “Cost-Benefit Default Principles”, 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1651, 1661 (2001) (providing examples where “cost-benefit analysis has ... led to regulations that accomplish statutory goals at lower cost”). sometimes going to small problems, and with little attention being paid to some serious problems.7 There are also unnecessarily high costs, with $146 to $229 billion being attributable to compliance costs each year.8 
We do not contend that an assessment of quantified costs and quantified benefits tells us everything that we need to know or that precise numbers are always possible9 But when the costs are high and the benefits low or nonexistent, something seems seriously amiss, especially because an absence of significant benefits signals a likely absence of significant savings in terms of health, safety, or the environment. Especially in a period in which economic growth and improved safety and health are among government’s highest priorities, this is a major problem. And indeed, the recent reports of the Office of Management and Budget (“OMB”), designed to capture the costs and benefits of a wide range of regulations, reveal some disturbing numbers: the EPA’s regulation for financial assurance for municipal solid waste landfills has monetized benefits of $0, but costs of $100 million, and this is expected for the next thirteen years;10 for the next thirteen years, OSHA’s methylene chloride regulation will have annual costs of $100 million and annual benefits of $40 million;11 the cost-benefit ratio for airbag depowering regulation seems bad, though there is uncertainty in the data.12 
Consider Table 1, which lists some estimates of costs and benefits of recent regulations. 6 See Hahn et al., supra note 5, at 23 (finding that over half of the twenty-four regulations studied were likely to cause an increase in mortality risk). 7 This is the theme of Stephen Breyer’ recent book. See Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle: Toward Effective Risk Regulation (1993). 8 Unless otherwise noted, year dollars are taken from the source that is cited. In this case, OMB estimates that the cost of social regulation as of 1999 is between $146 and $229 billion in 1996 dollars. Office of Management and Budget, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations tbl.4 (2000) [hereinafter OMB 2000 Report Charts] http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/2000fedreg-charts.pdf. In an earlier report to Congress, OMB notes that the EPA’s Cost of Clean report in 1990 estimated the cost of environmental regulations as of 1988 to be $101 billion (1996 dollars). OMB used this figure as a baseline and added the cost of all major environmental regulations issued by the agencies between 1987 and 1996 to estimate the annual cost of environmental regulation in 1997 at $144 billion (1996 dollars). Office of Management and Budget, Report to Congress on the Cost and Benefits of Federal Regulation tbl.1 (1997) at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/chap2.html. 9 See Kenneth Arrow et al., Benefit-Cost Analysis in Environmental, Health and Safety Regulation 8 (1996) (recommending that analysts “give due consideration to factors that defy quantification but are thought to be important”), available at http://www.aei.brookings.org.publications/books/benefit_cost_analysis.pdf. Lisa Heinzerling and Frank Ackerman, “Pricing the Priceless: Cost-Benefit Analysis of Environmental Protection,” U. Penn L. Rev. 10 OMB 2000 Report Charts, supra note 8, tbl.12. 11 Id. 12 Id. kind, but apparently these orders have not had a large effect.14 Indeed, there is some evidence that the existing orders have had little impact on what agencies actually do.15 
This is no mere academic objection. Expensive regulation may well increase prices, reduce wages, and increase unemployment (and hence poverty).16 Resources now being devoted to small or imaginary problems might be diverted instead to areas where, by all accounts, they could produce far more good. Cost-benefit analysis is not an effort to reduce all human goods to 14 See Hahn & Litan, supra note 13. Another study suggests that roughly half of the government’s final regulations would not pass a cost-benefit test. See Robert W. Hahn, Regulatory Reform: Assessing the Government's Numbers (AEI-Brookings Joint Ctr. for Regulatory Studies, Working Paper No. 99-6, 1999); see also Hahn & Litan, supra note 13, at tbl.1. (showing that a significant number of recent regulations would fail a strict cost-benefit test). 15 See Posner, supra note 4. For an examination of the impact of the efficiency effects of the executive orders on regulation, see Scott Farrow, Evaluating the Regulatory Process and Government Performance: Does Executive Office Oversight Matter? (Discussion Paper, Oct. 18, 1999) http://www.epp.cmu.edu/csir/. Farrow finds that executive office oversight does not have a significant efficiency-improving impact on the difference between proposed and final regulations, or on the cost effectiveness of regulation. Id. at 2. A partial reason is that some statutes forbid cost-benefit balancing, but we believe that this is not the whole picture. 16 To offer a few more details: If regulation increases marginal costs for firms, it is certain to lead to higher prices; if regulation increases a firm’s labor costs, wages will be reduced; but it is less clear whether regulation will increase numbers, but to increase the likelihood that regulation will actually produce human good. According to one study, better allocations of health expenditures could save, each year, 60,000 additional lives at no additional cost––and such allocations could maintain the current level of lives saved with $31 billion in annual savings.17 We do not believe that cost-benefit analysis should be the exclusive basis for assessing regulation, but we do believe that it is an important tool, and that a movement toward improved balancing is likely to promote many social goals, including better health and increased longevity.18 This somewhat abstract claim has been dramatized by repeated demonstrations that some regulations create significant substitute risks19– –and that with cheaper, more effective tools, regulation could achieve its basic goals while saving billions of dollars.20 B. A Deeper and Wider Commitment to Cost-Benefit Analysis 
How can regulation be moved in more sensible directions? This is a large question, and we will not attempt to answer it thoroughly here. But it seems to us that much of the answer lies in improved institutions, and, in particular, in institutional reforms that increase the role of costbenefit analysis in regulatory policy as a way of drawing attention to the likely effects of alternative courses of action. Of course statutory changes would be necessary in many cases. We emphasize two points here. First, the commitment to cost-benefit analysis has been far too superficial, and in some ways mostly symbolic; it should be deepened through efforts to strengthen its actual role. Second, the commitment to cost-benefit analysis has been far too narrow; it should be widened through efforts to incorporate independent regulatory commissions within its reach. unemployment, at least in the long-run. If the regulation increases the cost of capital relative to labor, employment might even increase. 17 Tammy O. Tengs & John D. Graham, “The Opportunity of Costs of Haphazard Social Investments” in LifeSaving, in Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved 167-182 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996). 18 See Hahn et al., supra note 5, at 24 (positing that evaluating the mortality implications of regulatory costs is a useful complement to cost-benefit analysis). 19 See Risk versus Risk: Tradeoffs in Protecting Health and the Environment (John D. Graham & Jonathan Baert Wiener eds., 1995) (containing case studies demonstrating that risk substitution exists). 20 See, e.g., A. Denny Ellerman et al., Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain Problem 315 (2000) (stating that the emissions-trading program “can both achieve stated environmental objectives and reduce compliance costs”); Robert N. Stavins, Market-Based Environmental Policies, in Public Policies for Environmental Protection 31, 35-41 (Paul R. Portney & Robert N. Stavins eds., 2d ed. 2000) (demonstrating that tradable permit programs can achieve environmental goals and save money). 
In this Article, we propose and explore a modest but potentially significant step toward greater depth and width: a new executive order on federal regulation, building on lessons derived from the experience of the last two decades. The proposed order, designed to replace the current one offers eight basic innovations over existing practice. Most of these address the issue of depth; the last point goes to the issue of width. 
comply with the basic principles established in previous orders, in part by explicitly requiring agency compliance with OMB guidelines for regulatory analysis. This would be an extremely significant step, because OMB’s guidelines have been widely ignored,21 and because compliance with those guidelines would significantly increase rationality and coherence in the regulatory process. 
Information and Regulatory Affairs (“OIRA”) and explicitly creates a mechanism by which OIRA might “prompt” regulation as well as constrain it. This is an important way to ensure that cost-benefit analysis will be used not simply to reduce and limit regulation, but also to spur regulation in those cases where it will do more good than harm.22 By creating a mechanism for prompting regulation, our order moves cost-benefit analysis in the direction of service as a technical tool for improving regulation, rather than simply being a mechanism for reducing it. 
explicit requirements that, to the extent permitted by law, agencies (a) consider the substitute risks introduced by regulation and (b) do not attempt to regulate trivial or de minimis problems. These requirements build on some important developments within the federal courts, which have created default rules authorizing agencies to consider substitute risks and to make de minimis exceptions from regulatory requirements.23 
These default rules are mirrored in federal 21 See Hahn et al., supra note 4, at 861 (concluding that agencies have ignored OMB guidelines from the fact that RIAs “do not provide enough information to allow regulatory agencies to make decisions that will maximize the efficiency or effectiveness of a rule”). 22 Warren, Edward W., and Gary E. Merchant, “More Good Than Harm: A First Principle for Environmental Agencies and Reviewing Courts.” 20 Ecology Law Quarterly 379-440 (1993). 23 See Sunstein, supra note 5, at 1669-76. legislation, which often bars regulation of trivial risks,24 and which also calls, in many places, for attention to substitute risks.25 
that benefits should generally be expected to exceed costs, and ask agencies to provide a rationale for proceeding with any regulation that fails to pass a cost-benefit test (based on best quantifiable estimates).26 Some statutes explicitly require agencies to act even if the benefits fall short of the costs27. There may also be cases in which an agency believes that it is worthwhile to proceed even though the quantifiable benefits do not exceed the quantifiable costs. Either way, we believe that accountability and transparency would be enhanced if the head of an agency were required to explain why a regulation is being adopted. 
ask the appropriate agency to include an underlying analysis of the benefits and costs, so that interested parties inside and outside of the government can understand how the results were obtained, and perform their own analysis of the issue if they so choose. We believe that this requirement will also promote transparency and enhance accountability. 
annual regulatory retrospective and an annual regulatory plan. The retrospective should contain a general analysis of the costs and benefits of significant regulations; this analysis will facilitate OMB’s statutory task of compiling an annual account for the executive branch as a whole.28 The annual regulatory plan, following a similar requirement in the existing executive order,29 would contain an account of what the agency aspires to do in the following year. The purpose of the regulatory plan is to ensure early, rather than last-minute, OIRA involvement in planning, and also to promote the involvement of high-level agency staff at an early stage. 24 This is the prevailing interpretation of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, under both the toxic substance provisions and the more general provisions of the Act. Indus. Union Dep’t, AFL-CIO v. Am. Petroleum Inst., 448 U.S. 607, 639 (1980); Int’l Union, UAW v. OSHA, 37 F.3d 665, 669 (D.C. Cir. 1994). 25 42 USC § 7411(a)(1) (1994). 26 For a related view, see Robert W. Crandall et al., An Agenda for Federal Regulatory Reform (1997). Crandall et al. recommend that Congress require all regulatory agencies to report the quantifiable and non-quantifiable benefits of regulations. Id. at 12. In addition, the authors argue that “Congress should require that all new regulations costing more than $100 million annually pass a broadly defined benefit-cost test.” Id. (emphasis omitted). 27 This could be the case, for example, where a specific performance standard for tailpipe emissions is statutorily set and regulations require automakers to meet that standard regardless of the outcome of a cost-benefit test. See 42 U.S.C. 7409(b)(1). 28 This task is required by the FY2000 Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, Pub. L. No. 106-58, § 628(a)), 113 Stat. 472, 472-73 (1996). regulatory agencies, such as the Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), Consumer Product Safety Commission (“CPSC”), and Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”), within the ambit of the order. This is a significant departure from existing practice. We believe that the innovation is justified because these agencies are engaged in particularly important regulatory functions. The inclusion of independent agencies raises obvious legal issues, which we discuss below.30 and materials generated as a result of the order. The goal of this provision is to increase the likelihood that agencies will take the order’s requirements seriously. It also authorizes the invalidation of arbitrary and capricious agency action, to the extent that the relevant materials are pertinent, as a matter of law, in a test of the legality of agency conduct. 
We believe that a new executive order is probably the best way to move in the directions suggested by these ideas. There are, however, reasonable counterarguments. For well over a year, the Bush Administration has been operating under an executive order issued by President Clinton, and there are real virtues in a situation in which regulatory oversight under a president of one party is done under a set of principles issued by another. It is important to give such oversight both the reality and the appearance of nonpartisanship. A possible approach would be to retain the Clinton order and to issue a supplemental order that embodies some of the proposals described here. In any case many of the ideas in this Essay might be promoted without a new order. Greater depth, at least, might well be achieved simply by a stronger effort, by OIRA, to ensure compliance with existing requirements,31 and, indeed, by an insistence on many of the proposals made here.32 If a new executive order were not to be issued, considerable progress might well be made with these suggestions in mind. For those who lack enthusiasm for our recommendations, we hope that the discussion will nonetheless cast light on the actual performance of the federal government after twenty years of experience under a (nominal) 29 See infra note 73 (describing the regulatory plan requirement of Executive Order No. 12,866). 30 See infra Part III.G. 31 See John D. Graham, “Executive Regulatory Review: Surveying the Record, Making It Work,” Address Before the Weidenbaum Center Forum (Dec. 17, 2001), http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/graham_speech121701.html (“The changes we are making at OMB are not headline-grabbers: No far-reaching legislative initiatives, no rhetoric-laden executive orders, and no campaigns of regulatory relief. Yet we are making some changes that we believe will have a long-lasting impact on the regulatory state.”) commitment to cost-benefit analysis.33 Indeed, some critics will be pleased to see the modest effects of cost-benefit requirements to date.34 
This Article is organized as follows. Part I briefly outlines the development of executive orders on federal regulation. At the same time, it provides an account of what we mean by the still-controversial idea of cost-benefit balancing, and an exploration of the lessons from two decades of experience with executive orders on federal regulation. We emphasize here the extent to which the commitment to cost-benefit analysis has been, too much of the time, symbolic rather than real. Part II explains and defends our innovations. Part III explores the limits of reform via executive order, and offers an account of what else might be done. Following a brief conclusion, the attached Appendix contains the text of our proposed executive order. 
A. What is Cost-Benefit Analysis? 
Before proceeding to the details, it is important to clarify our basic understanding of costbenefit analysis. We mean to use the term in a modest, nonsectarian way, seeing cost-benefit analysis as a tool and a procedure, rather than as a rigid formula to govern outcomes.35 Thus understood, cost-benefit analysis requires a full accounting of the consequences of an action, in both quantitative and qualitative terms. Officials should have this accounting before them when they make decisions. 
We do not insist that regulators should be bound by the “bottom-line” numbers; qualitative considerations, and a sense of distributive impacts (not themselves considered “benefits” in the analysis), are permitted to influence public officials. But if regulators are to proceed, they should be prepared to explain either how the benefits exceed the costs, or if they do not, why it is nonetheless worthwhile to go forward. When the benefits do not exceed the costs, it would make sense to adopt a presumption against proceeding––a presumption that might 32 Of course, it would not be possible, without a new executive order, to incorporate the independent regulatory commissions under the process of OIRA review. 33 We do not deal here with a pervasive problem: OIRA has a small staff (about fifty) and many regulations to review (about 600 are deemed significant each year). To produce the improvements that we think desirable, it would obviously be important to ensure that OIRA’s staff is large enough to do the necessary work. 34 Supra 10. 35See Kenneth Arrow et al, supra note 9, at 3 (“Benefit-cost analysis should play an important role in informing the decision making process....”) (emphasis added); Matthew D. Adler &Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit be rebutted by showing, for example, that children would be the principal beneficiaries of the regulation, or that poor people would be disproportionately benefited. We therefore understand cost-benefit analysis to require a certain procedure: A quantitative and qualitative accounting of the effects of regulation, together with a duty to explain the grounds for action unless the benefits exceed the costs. On this view, the antonym to regulation guided by cost-benefit analysis is regulation undertaken without anything like a clear sense of the likely consequences––or regulation that amounts to a stab in the dark.36 
What are the arguments for cost-benefit analysis, so understood? We do not attempt to answer this question in detail37; but it is important to see the central points. The standard response is economic in character: Regulation should ordinarily promote social welfare, and while social welfare might be promoted by regulations that fail cost-benefit analysis,38 costbenefit analysis is an imperfect but useful and administrable proxy for the inquiry into the social welfare question. At the very least, it seems clear that regulation is unlikely to promote social welfare when its costs are very high and its benefits are very low––especially when we consider the fact that high costs are likely to be translated into some combination of higher prices, lower wages, and lower returns to capital. It is not necessary to think that government should be treated as some maximizing machine in order to conclude that officials should know the consequences of regulation before they act, and that they should be reluctant to issue regulations that promise to cost much and to deliver little. 
Of course it is possible that in practice, quantitative cost-benefit analysis will have excessive influence on government decisions, drowning out “soft variables.” Since the numbers are not all that matters, any such effect would be a point against cost-benefit analysis. But to date, the actual record does not support this concern. To take just one example, the EPA’s Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, 29 J. Legal Studies 1105, 1106 (2000) (“CBA is properly conceptualized as a welfarist decision procedure....”) (emphasis added). 36 We are assuming throughout that regulators are acting in a situation of risk (where probabilities can be assigned to various outcomes) rather than uncertainty (where no such probabilities can be assigned). In a situation of uncertainty, when existing knowledge does not permit regulators to assign probabilities to outcome other decision rules may be useful, because it is exceedingly hard to do cost-benefit analysis. In such circumstances, the maximin principle could be used (choose the policy with the best worst-case outcome). See Jon Elster, Explaining Technical Change 185-207 (1983), for a helpful discussion. 37 For a discussion of the value of cost-benefit analysis, see Arrow et al, supra note 9, at 3-6; Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason (Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2002). 38 See Matthew D. Adler & Eric A. Posner, “Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis,” 109 Yale L.J. 165, 245-46 (1999) (stating that “maximizing overall well-being is an important role of the government” and providing examples of situations where the outcome of cost-benefit analysis should be disregarded in favor of welfarist considerations). decision to go forward with new controls on arsenic in drinking water was supported partly on the ground that nonquantifiable variables tipped the balance. We will suggest that in appropriate cases, distributional considerations should also count. The risk that cost-benefit analysis will drown out relevant variables is not a reason to abandon the analysis, but to take steps to ensure against any such effect. 
It is useful to compare cost-benefit analysis with the “precautionary principle,” often invoked as a foundation for risk regulation and indeed as an alternative to cost-benefit analysis.39 The precautionary principle asks government to prevent risks, even if they are quite speculative, on the ground that it is important to guard against large problems even if they might not come to fruition. Of course it is worthwhile to take some precautions against serious risks, even if the probability of their occurrence is well under 100%. We think, however, that the precautionary principle is an inadequate guide to action, simply because dangers often lie on both sides of the equation.40 Consider the case of genetic modification of food, a process that does carry some risks: A failure to allow genetic modification might well result in many deaths, and a small probability of many more, simply because genetic modification might well deliver cheaper and healthier food.41 Doesn’t the precautionary principle require genetic modification of food at least as much as it prohibits it? 
Or consider the question whether to ban the use of DDT. The precautionary principle might well seem to require the ban, because DDT imposes health risks for birds and mammals, including human beings. But the ban itself seems to be banned by the principle, because any such ban might lead to either unsafe or more expensive substitutes, and in either case the ban creates a 39 See Risk and the Precautionary Principle (Julian Morris ed., 2000).Some suggested alternatives to cost-benefit analysis are nothing of the kind. For example, Lisa Heinzerling and Frank Ackerman, Pricing the Priceless: CostBenefit Analysis of Environmental Protection (2002), discuss technology-based regulation and pollution trading as preferable alternatives. Id. at 31. But cost-benefit analysis, far from being an alternative to technology-based regulation, is a tool for assessing what kind of regulation makes best sense. Pollution trading is a low-cost method of bringing about compliance with regulatory goals. But in any trading system, it is necessary to “cap” overall emissions, and cost-benefit analysis is a way of helping to decide on the most sensible cap. Heinzerling and Ackerman are right to say that many “regulatory programs have been a terrific success without using cost-benefit analysis to set pollution limits.” Id. at 32. As we have suggested, cost-benefit analysis helps to identify the successes. Our claim is that we could have more successes, and better successes, and fewer failures if we attempted to analyze the consequences first. 40 See Jonathan Weiner, Precaution in a Multi-Risk World, in The Risk Assessment of Environmental and Human Health Hazards (Dennis D. Paustenbach ed., 2d ed. 41 Indur Goklany, Applying the Precautionary Principle in a Broader Context, in Risk and the Precautionary Principle, supra note 33, at 189, 207-220. (speculative) risk of serious harms.42 Or consider an effort to introduce stringent regulation of arsenic in drinking water. It is possible to justify the regulation on the ground that low levels of arsenic might create substantial risks; but it is also possible to complain that the expensive regulation (costing, say, $200 million) itself creates a risk of mortality effects, a risk that would be forbidden by the precautionary principle. What should government do? 
The precautionary principle, taken for all that it is worth, is thus frequently paralyzing: It stands as an obstacle to regulation and to nonregulation, and to everything in between. Of course speculative harms often deserve attention. But we think that too much of the time, the precautionary principle is merely a combination of rhetoric and myopia, having force only when people look at an essentially arbitrary part of the picture, rather than at the whole. A competent cost-benefit analysis takes good account of what is sensible in the precautionary principle, by asking regulators to attend to low-probability risks of significant harms. Cost-benefit analysis subsumes this risk, as it does all others, into the overall assessment of welfare effects of regulation.43 Indeed the most sensible understandings of the precautionary principle emphasize the need for an overall assessment, and insist on exploring all of the risks at stake, including lowprobability, potentially catastrophic risks.44 
A less familiar argument for cost-benefit analysis, growing out of our doubts about the precautionary principle, is cognitive in character. One goal of cost-benefit analysis is to overcome cognitive limitations by ensuring that people have a full, rather than limited, sense of what is at stake.45 People often miss the systemic effects of risk regulation;46 cost-benefit analysis is a way of putting those effects squarely on-screen. At the same time, cost-benefit analysis helps overcome the problems created by cognitive heuristics that can lead people to misunderstand the magnitude of risks, by allowing an accounting of the actual consequences of 42 See id. at 190-92. 43 Obviously, it is impossible to take extra caution (or spend more) on all activities, simply because there is a finite budget constraint at any point in time. For a good overview of the precautionary principle, see Kimberly M. Thompson et al., “Decision-analytic Refinements of the Precautionary Principle,” 4 J. of Risk Res. 127 (2001). Some suggested alternatives to cost-benefit analysis are nothing of the kind. For example, Lisa Heinzerling and Frank Ackerman, Pricing the Priceless: Cost Benefit Analysis of Environmental Protection (2002), discuss technologybased regulation and pollution trading as preferable alternatives. Id. at 31. But cost-benefit analysis, far from being an alternative to technology-based regulation, is a tool for assessing what kind of regulation makes best sense. Pollution trading is a low-cost method of bringing about compliance with regulatory goals. But in any trading system, it is necessary to “cap” overall emissions, and cost-benefit analysis is a way of helping to 44 See Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle (2001). 45 See Cass R. Sunstein, supra note 36. current hazards and of the effects of reducing them.47 To the extent that people’s emotions are getting the better of them, by producing massive concern about small risks,48 cost-benefit analysis should help put things in perspective, and at the same time might help to calm popular fears. And if people are indifferent to a risk that is actually quite large, cost-benefit analysis will help to stir them out of their torpor. The result should be to help with cognitive distortions and to produce sensible priority setting. 
There are democratic advantages as well.49 Interest groups often manipulate policy in their preferred directions, sometimes by exaggerating risks, sometimes by minimizing them, and sometimes by mobilizing public sentiment in their preferred directions. An effort to produce a fair accounting of actual dangers should help to diminish the danger of interest-group manipulation. More generally, cost-benefit analysis should increase the likelihood that citizens generally, and officials in particular, will be informed of what is actually at stake. By itself, this is a large democratic gain. 
Of course, interest groups will also try to manipulate the numbers in their preferred directions. Industry will tend to exaggerate the costs and minimize the risks. Public interest groups will do the opposite. A government that attempts to produce cost-benefit analysis will face a formidable task; it is possible that government will lack the information necessary to do this task well. But if there is a degree of accuracy, and if ranges are specified where there is uncertainty, cost-benefit analysis can be seen, not as some antidemocratic effort to tyrannize people with numbers, but instead as an indispensable tool of democratic self-government. 
We can go further. Prospective estimates of both costs and benefits often turn out to be wrong.50 This is not merely because of interest group pressures. One reason is that officials lack the extensive information that would permit them to take accurate predictions; indeed, the informational demand on agencies is overwhelmingly, especially because technologies change 46 See Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure 1-10 (Rita & Robert Kimbel, trans. 1996) (introducing ways in which people discount risk and the potential negative consequences that follow). 47 See Roger Noll & James Krier, “Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation,” 19 J. Legal Stud. 747, 762 (1990) (describing how these “pathologies” can affect estimates of risk). 48 See George Loewenstein et al., Risk As Feelings, 127 Psychol. Bull. 267 (2001). 49 Cf. Bruce A. Ackerman & Richard B. Stewart, “Reforming Environmental Law: The Democratic Case for Market Incentives,” 13 Colum. J. Env. L. 171, 172-75, 178-90 (1988) (emphasizing the democratic virtues of economic incentives). 50 See OMB, 1999 Report to Congress, at 40-43. over time.51 An enduring problem for regulatory policy is the absence of precise information on the cost or benefit sides. This point should be taken, not as a criticism of cost-benefit analysis as such, but as a reason for continuous monitoring and updating.52 Our emphasis on retrospective analysis and on prompt letters is intended to take account of the frequent inadequacy of prospective estimates. 
There are numerous challenges to cost-benefit analysis as a regulatory tool.53 We cannot discuss those challenges in this space. We suspect that many of them are rooted, at bottom, in pragmatic considerations-–in a belief that in practice, cost-benefit analysis will be used as an obstacle to desirable regulation. According to some skeptics, the antonym of cost-benefit analysis is not the unguided stab in the dark, but regulatory protection itself. If this were so, the argument for cost-benefit analysis would be greatly weakened. But the evidence does not support this pessimistic prediction;54 indeed, cost-benefit analysis has helped to spur regulation, not merely to stop it.55 We believe that, in principle, cost-benefit analysis has a great deal of promise, and that when it has been used, it has often made things better rather than worse.56 Of course, the case for cost-benefit analysis will depend, in large part, on what people do with it in the future. B. History 
Since 1980, all three branches of American government have shown increased interest in cost-benefit balancing.57 Our emphasis here is on the actions of the executive branch, which has had a longstanding interest in cost-benefit balancing, an interest that cuts across partisan divisions.58 A brief historical review will set the stage. 51 See Bradley Karkkainen, “Toward a Smarter NEPA: Monitoring and Managing Government’s Environmental Performance,” Columbia Law Review (Forthcoming 2002). 52 See id. (urging a reform of NEPA that would call for careful attention to new information over time). 53 See Lisa Heinzerling, “Regulatory Costs of Mythic Proportions,” 107 Yale L.J. 1981 (1998) (noting that an assessment of the cost-effectiveness of regulating risk is dependent on subjective evaluations of discounting future benefit, risk assessment, and regulatory purpose). see Heinzerling and Ackerman, “Pricing the Priceless,” supra 10. 54 For varying perspectives, see “Economic Analysis at EPA” (Richard Morgenstern ed. 1999); Eric Posner, University of Chicago Law Review, Volume 68, no. 4,(forthcoming 2002). 55 For a discussion of the role of economic analysis in spurring regulation of lead in gasoline and regulation of CFCs, destructive of the ozone layer, see “Economic Analysis at EPA,” supra note 44. See also the discussion of prompt letters, infra Part II.B.. 56 See “Economic Analysis at EPA,” supra note 44 57 Within Congress, see e.g., 5 U.S.C. § 1532, 1535 (requiring cost-benefit analyses and explanations for agency actions); within the executive branch, see supra note 2 (noting presidential directives on cost-benefit requirements). 58 See Cass R. Sunstein, supra note 36, at ch. 1 . 
President Nixon inaugurated the process of this general sort as long ago as 1970, with a mechanism for “Quality of Life” reviews of administrative action.59 President Carter introduced a similar process with his Regulatory Analysis Review Group, designed to conduct interagency analysis of cost-effectiveness analysis, required for “significant” rules.60 But the decisive step came under President Reagan, with the formal creation of a mechanism for OMB review of major regulations. 
The most important innovations in President Reagan’s Executive Order 12,291 were: (1) a set of substantive principles for all agencies to follow, “to the extent permitted by law,” including a commitment to cost-benefit analysis; (2) a requirement that a Regulatory Impact Analysis, including cost-benefit analysis, accompany all “major” rules; and (3) a formal mechanism for OMB oversight, with a general understanding that OMB had some (undefined) substantive control over what agencies would actually do. President Reagan considered subjecting the independent agencies to the new order, but ultimately declined to do so, partly because of concerns about legal authority, but mostly because of fears of an adverse congressional reaction.61 The independent agencies were asked voluntarily to comply with Executive Order 12,291; all of them declined. 
Executive Order 12,291 proved extremely controversial.62 Nonetheless, President Reagan expanded on the basic idea four years later with Executive Order 12,498.63 That order established a requirement that agencies submit “annual regulatory plans” to OMB for review. The result was an annual publication, the Regulatory Program of the United States, which contains a discussion of all proposed actions that might be either costly or controversial. Executive Order 12,498 served to increase the authority of agency heads over their staffs, by exposing proposals to toplevel review at an early stage. But it also increased the authority of OMB, by allowing OMB supervision over basic plans, and by making it hard for agencies to proceed without OMB preclearance. 59 See Richard R. Nathan, The Plot That Failed and the Administrative Presidency 45-49 (1975). 60 See Richard H. Pildes & Cass R. Sunstein, “Reinventing the Regulatory State,” 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1, 14 (1995). 61 See Peter M. Shane & Harold H. Bruff, The Law of Presidential Power 355-359 (1988) (describing and questioning the use of the presidential supervisory power with respect to congressional legislation). 62 See, e.g., Thomas McGarity, Rationalizing Regulation (1990) . 63 3 C.F.R. 323 (1985). 
Bush, the principal innovation was the Competitiveness, chaired by the Vice President.64 The Council engaged in occasional review of agency rules, operating as a kind of supervisor of OMB itself. It also set out a number of principles and proposals for regulatory reform.65 In essence, however, the Bush Administration followed the basic approach of its predecessor, with OMB review remaining under the two Reagan executive orders. 
Cost-benefit balancing had been highly controversial when conducted by Republican administrations. For this reason, it was uncertain whether President Clinton would allow it to continue to play a role within the executive branch. But in a significant and dramatic step, President Clinton endorsed the essential features of the Reagan-Bush orders in his Executive Order 12,866.66 The crucial point about Clinton’s order is that it accepted the basic commitments of the two Reagan-Bush orders, by requiring agencies to assess both costs and benefits and to proceed only when the latter justified the former. At the same time, President Clinton offered several changes to the Reagan-Bush processes, mainly attempting to create assurances against the fear of industry capture of the system of review. First, he attempted to diminish public concerns about interest-group power over regulation, by providing a process to resolve conflicts and procedures for greater openness.67 Second, he included references to “equity,” to “distributive impacts,” and to qualitative as well as quantitative factors, evidently so as to ensure that agencies could make adjustments in the process of decision, and abandon the cost-benefit assessment where this seems sensible.68 Third, President Clinton moved, in a modest but important way, toward including independent agencies within the executive orders. He did so by requiring the participation of the independent agencies within the unified regulatory agenda69 and also by requiring independent agencies to submit their proposals for inclusion within the annual 64 See Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Program of the United States Government, April 1, 1990March 31, 1991 5 (1990). Another very different innovation that occurred under the first President Bush was the active promotion of market-based approaches for protecting the environment--the most notable example being the acid rain allowance-trading program, which was the crown jewel of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. For an evaluation of this program, see A. Denny Ellerman et al., Markets for Clean Air (2000). 65 See id. 66 Id. at (1994). 67 See id. ] 68 Id. at 69 Id., at §(4)(b). regulatory plan, allowing the Vice President an opportunity to advise and consult.70 We will build on these initiatives here. 
Congress has been slower to support efforts to require the balancing of benefits and costs of major regulations. In 1982 the Senate unanimously passed such a law, but it was defeated in the House of Representatives.71 Two primary environmental statutes that allowed the balancing of benefits and costs prior to the mid-1990s are the Toxic Substances Control Act72 and the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.73 Recently, Congress has shown greater interest in emphasizing the balancing of benefits and costs. Table 2 reviews recent regulatory reform initiatives, which could help improve regulation and legislation. The table suggests that Congress now shares the concern of the executive branch that the regulatory system is in need of repair and could benefit from more in the way of economic analysis.74 All reforms highlighted in the table emphasize a trend towards considering the benefits and costs of regulation, although the effectiveness of the provisions remains unclear. Perhaps because of the politicized nature of the debate over regulatory reform, these reform efforts have come about in a piecemeal fashion, and there is some overlap in the requirements for analysis.75 70 Id. at § 4(c). 71 Id. 72 See 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a) (1994) (describing an allowed balancing of “risk of injury to health or the environment”). 73 See 7 U.S.C. § 136a (1994) (allowing regulation to prevent unreasonable adverse effects on the environment). 74 Robert W. Crandall et al., An Agenda for Federal Regulatory Reform 3 (1997) (noting that “recent legislative debates masked a broad consensus among knowledgeable observers on the need for regulatory reform”). 75 There has been some recent interest in Congress in reducing this overlap by establishing a single congressional agency that would have the responsibility for assessing the government regulation. This agency would be similar to the Congressional Budget Office, but it would have responsibility for regulation. In principle, such an agency could help stimulate better analysis and review of agency rules by providing an additional source of information. See Robert W. Hahn & Robert E. Litan, “Joint Testimony before the Committee on Governmental Affairs,” U.S. Senate, “The Regulatory Right-to-Know Act and the Congressional Office of Regulatory Analysis Act,” (April 1999) at http://www.aei-brookings.org/publications/testimony/testimony_99_01.pdf. Unfunded Mandates Reform CBO is required to estimate the costs of laws with Act of 1995 new mandates in excess of $50 million in any one year on state, local, and tribal governments, and in excess of $100 million in any one year on the private sector. Likewise, an executive branch agency must prepare a cost-benefit analysis of regulations with new mandates in excess of $100 million in any one year on state, local, and tribal governments or the private sector. The agency is required to choose the “least costly, most costeffective, or least burdensome alternative,” unless the provisions are inconsistent with law or the head of an agency can explain why such an alternative was not adopted. 
Small Business Regulatory Enforcement An agency must submit each final regulation and Fairness Act of 1996 the supporting analyses to Congress and the General Accounting Office. Congress has at least sixty calendar days to review major regulations before they can become effective. During that time, Congress can enact a joint resolution of disapproval that, if passed and then signed by the president, would void the regulation. In addition, strengthened judicial review provisions hold agencies more accountable for the impacts of regulations on small entities. 
Regulatory Accountability Provision of In separate appropriations legislation in 1996, 1996, 1997, and 1998 1997, and 1998, Congress required the Office of Management and Budget to submit an assessment of the annual benefits and costs of all existing federal regulatory programs to Congress for 1997, 1998, and 2000, respectively. The Office of Management and Budget already must review and approve analyses submitted by agencies estimating the costs and benefits of major 76 See Robert W. Crandall et al. An Agenda for Federal Regulatory Reform, 10-11 (1997); Robert W. Hahn, The Impact of Economics on Environmental Policy, 39 J. Envtl. Econ. & Mgmt 375-399 (2000). Pipeline Safety and Partnership Act of 1995 Food Quality Protection Act of 1996 Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996 Truth in Regulating Act of 1999 Biennial Review Provision Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
of the proposed rules. The annual report provisions build on this review process. 
The Secretary of Transportation must issue a pipeline standard “only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits of the intended standard justify its costs.” This Act eliminates the Delaney Clause for pesticides that set a zero-tolerance standard for carcinogens from residues in processed foods. In setting standards for raw or processed foods, the EPA will now establish a tolerance level to ensure “a reasonable certainty of no harm” from pesticide residues. For pesticide products that exceed that negligible risk, the EPA may consider the benefits of the pesticide to justify granting a tolerance. 
Under the original act, the maximum contaminant level (MCL) was to be set as close to the maximum contaminant level goal as “feasible.” Feasible was defined as using the best technology available “taking costs into consideration.” Under the new act, the EPA administrator “shall publish a determination as to whether the benefits of the MCL justify, or do not justify, the costs.” Establishes a three-year pilot program under which individual agency Regulatory Impact Analyses are subject to independent evaluation by GAO, upon request by Congress. 
Requires Federal Communications Commission: (1) to review biennially its regulations pertaining to telecommunications service providers and broadcast ownership; and (2) to determine whether economic competition has made those regulations no longer necessary in the public interest. 
Courts, too, have shown interest in cost-benefit principles, developing a set of default rules that authorize agencies to minimize costs and maximize benefits, in the face of statutory ambiguity. Consider the following principles,77 all with support in the cases. Unless Congress has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be permitted to make de minimis exceptions to statutory 77 For a more detailed discussion of these principles, see Cass R. Sunstein, “Cost-Benefit Default Principles,” 99 Mich L Rev 1651 (2001). 
It is not difficult to understand why the executive branch would be skeptical of the idea of judicial intervention. As a general rule, it is not in the interest of the executive branch to increase the authority of the judiciary over executive officers. To be sure, judicial review might solve an agency problem faced by the President if courts could be enlisted to enforce presidential prerogatives against agencies. But the apparent judgment of the executive branch has been that the risks of that course, prominently including losses on appeal, outweigh the advantages. 
We have suggested a modest but significant change, slightly compromising the interests of the executive in favor of the interests of the public as a whole. Under our order, judicial review would be available of the materials generated pursuant to the order, but only to the extent that those materials are relevant to the agency’s decision under the relevant statute. This proposal would not violate current law; it would merely add to the set of materials that courts examine when testing the question whether the agency has followed the statute or acted arbitrarily. To be sure, this innovation would add materials to the file for judicial review, and in that sense would complicate the judicial task. But it would add little beyond what courts are now considering in the regulatory context.165 
We believe that a new executive order on federal regulation could do a great deal of good. One reason is the very signal that such an order would send: By virtue of its high visibility, and because of its source (the White House), a new order would suggest a serious commitment, on the part of high-level officials, to improving regulatory outcomes. Another reason is that such an order could embody institutional and substantive reforms that would reduce the problems of shallowness and narrowness. Our central goal has been to ensure that the commitments in previous executive orders are real rather than symbolic, and we believe that the steps suggested here would be helpful in promoting that goal. 
An executive order is not, however, a panacea; it is not sufficient for real change, and for some purposes it is not even necessary. With respect to the question of necessity, we have noted that OIRA could move in many of the directions we propose under 165 See, e.g., Chlorine Chemistry Council v. EPA 206 F.3d 1286 (DC Cir 2000) (ruling that chloroform must be treated as a threshold pollutant under the Safe Drinking Water Act). 
44 existing law, including the existing executive order. Indeed, one of our major goals has been to outline the lessons of over two decades of experience with presidential requirements of cost-benefit balancing and to suggest what can be done in response to that experience. If a new executive order does not seem desirable or feasible, we hope that our discussion and our proposed order will have heuristic value, suggesting what should be done even without formal changes.166 With respect to the insufficiency of a new order, some statutes ban cost-benefit balancing, and the executive must obey the law. A thoroughgoing reform effort would require legislative reforms, not merely executive action. At the executive level itself, everything depends on implementation. It is possible that an executive order, like a Constitution, will be a mere “parchment barrier,”167 with little or no effect on the real world. In fact, successful implementation probably requires high-level political support, in the form, for example, of a clear understanding that the President or the Vice President is committed to the process inaugurated by the executive order. But an executive order would itself be a step toward establishing that understanding. 
To make the process truly effective, however, greater congressional support will probably be required. This support will only come if the public sees a need for greater transparency and accountability in the regulatory process. The reality is that most of the public is (usually rationally) uninformed on many regulatory issues, including the issue of regulatory oversight.168 And legislators do not typically have a strong incentive to support regulatory reforms that promote accountability. Indeed, many members of Congress seem to prefer to pass laws and regulations that give the appearance of fixing the problem––leaving it to the executive and the judiciary to sort out implementation.169 Without stronger congressional efforts, any steps from the President will have a limited effect. 166 Note in this regard that prompt letters and return letters are being issued in significant numbers without any formal changes. See Prompt Letters, supra note 108; Return Letters, at http://www.whitehouse.gove/omb/inforeg/return_letter.html (archiving recent return letters). 167 Jack N. Rakove, Parchment Barriers and the Politics of Rights, in A Culture of Rights: The Bill of Rights in Philosophy, Politics, and Law--1791 and 1991 98, 129-36 (Michael J. Lacey & Knud Haakonssen eds., 1991). 168 For the classic discussion of rational ignorance on the part of voters, see, e.g., Anthony Downs, An Economic Theory of Democracy (1957),. 169 On the political economy of regulation, see e.g., Roger G. Noll, Reforming Regulation (1971); Bruce M. Owen & Ronald Braeutigam, The Regulation Game (1978); Roger Noll, The Economics and Politics of the Slowdown in Regulatory Reform (1999), available at http://www.aei.brookings.org/publications/books/economics_and_politics.pdf. 
Government regulation continues to display a pattern of “paranoia and neglect.”170 Understood as a pragmatic tool for drawing attention to the likely effects of regulation, cost-benefit analysis holds out considerable promise for overcoming the underlying problems. For over twenty years, executive orders have attempted to discipline the administrative process by requiring agencies to pay close attention to both costs and benefits. But the overall record is mixed. In many cases, cost-benefit analysis does appear to have improved agency decisions in quite significant ways.171 At the same time, the system for OIRA review has not succeeded in fundamentally redirecting regulation toward areas where it would do the most good. 
Of course there are many reasons for this mixed record.172 But part of the reason, we suggest, is that the executive’s commitment to cost-benefit analysis remains both too shallow and too narrow. It is too shallow because too much of the time agencies fail to take the commitment seriously, and the process of OIRA review has not ensured that they will do so. It is too narrow because a large number of agencies are not subject to OIRA review at all. We have suggested a range of possible responses. To overcome shallowness, we have called for mandatory compliance with OMB guidelines on regulatory analysis; formalized the ideas of “return letters” and “prompt letters;” offered new principles governing substitute risks and trivial risks; clarified the issue of equity and distributional effects; and authorized limited judicial review of the materials generated through this process. To overcome narrowness, we have included the independent agencies, which issue many of the nation’s most important regulations, within the scope of the order. 
As we have discussed, an executive order, standing by itself, will not do all, or even nearly all, of what should be done. A great deal depends on personnel and on a serious commitment, on the part of high-level officials, to regulatory reform. Congressional support is also important. As we have emphasized, such a commitment could accomplish a great deal, building on what we have suggested here, under the 170 John D. Graham, Making Sense of Risk: An Agenda for Congress, in Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved 183, 183 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996). 171 See Economic Analysis at EPA, supra note 44. 172 One reason, mentioned above, is that Congress sometimes bans cost-benefit balancing. See Whitman v. American Trucking Ass’n, 531 U.S. 457, 471 (2001) (holding that the Clean Air Act “unambiguously bars cost considerations” when the EPA sets ambient air quality standards under the Act). existing executive order; and to reduce the reality and appearance of partisanship, there are clear advantages to a situation in which an administration of one party is operating under principles laid down under an administration of another party. But the experience of the last two decades suggests that a revised and improved executive order could attract the support of people with a wide range of political commitments, and inaugurate significant improvements in the system of government regulation. 
The American people deserve a regulatory system that protects and improves their health, safety, environment, and well-being without imposing unacceptable or unreasonable costs on society. Regulatory policies should be based on a careful assessment of the likely consequences of regulation, including an effort to assess and balance both costs and benefits. Regulatory policies should use the lowest-cost means of achieving social goals. Public and private resources should be devoted to large problems, not trivial ones. The general objective of this Executive Order is to ensure that cost-benefit analysis, understood as a tool to produce better decisions, will have a far larger role in the federal government than it now does. The particular objectives are: to ensure that regulations are adopted on the basis of an evaluation of their likely consequences; to promote sensible priority-setting; to increase attention to neglected problems while reducing expenditures on minor or nonexistent problems; to ensure that agencies consider alternatives to costly regulation; to enhance planning and coordination with respect to both new and existing regulations; and to make the process accessible and open to the public. In pursuing these objectives, the regulatory process shall be conducted so as to meet applicable statutory requirements and with due regard to the discretion that has been entrusted to the Federal agencies. 
Accordingly, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows: SECTION 1. STATEMENT OF REGULATORY APPROACH AND REQUIREMENTS (A) Approach. Federal agencies should promulgate only those regulations that are required by law, are necessary to interpret the law, or are made necessary by compelling public need, such as material failures of private markets to protect or improve the health and safety of the public, the environment, or the well-being of the American people. In deciding whether and how to regulate, agencies shall assess the costs and benefits of reasonable regulatory alternatives, including the alternative of not regulating. Costs and benefits shall be understood to include both quantifiable measures (to the fullest extent that these can be usefully estimated) and qualitative measures of costs and benefits that are difficult to quantify, but nevertheless essential to consider. Agencies should ordinarily act only if the incremental benefits exceed the incremental costs. Further, in choosing among alternative regulatory approaches, agencies should ordinarily select the approach that maximizes net benefits, unless a statute requires another regulatory approach. (B) Agency Requirements. To ensure that agency regulations are consistent with the approach set forth above, agencies shall adhere to the following requirements, to the extent permitted by law: 
(1) Each agency shall identify the problem that it intends to address as well as assess the significance of that problem. 
(2) Each agency shall explain why the problem that it intends to address is not adequately handled by private markets or by state or local authorities. 
(3) Each agency shall examine whether existing regulations (or other law) have created, or contributed to, the problem that a new regulation is intended to correct and whether those regulations (or other law) should be modified to achieve the intended goal of regulation more effectively. 
(4) Each agency shall identify and assess available alternatives to direct regulation, including providing economic incentives to encourage the desired behavior, such as user fees or marketable permits, or providing information upon which choices can be made by the public. 
(5) In setting regulatory priorities, each agency shall attempt to ensure that it addresses serious problems rather than trivial ones and shall consider, to the extent reasonable, the degree and nature of the risks posed by various substances or activities within its jurisdiction. 
(6) Each agency shall explore and explain whether any regulation will create significant new risks of any kind, and if so, shall identify the extent of any new risks in qualitative and quantitative terms. 
(7) When an agency determines that a regulation is the best available method of achieving the regulatory objective, it shall design its regulation in the most cost-effective manner to achieve that objective. 
(8) Each agency shall assess both the incremental costs and benefits of the intended regulation and, recognizing that some costs and benefits are uncertain and difficult to quantify, should generally propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the incremental benefits of the intended regulation exceed its incremental costs. If an agency determines to proceed even though the quantifiable incremental benefits do not exceed the quantifiable incremental costs, then the agency should explain why it intends to proceed in those circumstances, by, for example, referring to distributional effects as authorized by subsection (15) below. 
(9) Each agency shall base its decisions on the best reasonably obtainable scientific, economic, and other information concerning the need for, and consequences of, the intended regulation. 
(10) Each agency shall identify and assess reasonable alternative forms of regulation, including at least two reasonable alternatives to the option under consideration, one more stringent and one less stringent. 
(11) Each agency shall, to the extent feasible, use performance objectives, rather than specifying the behavior or manner of compliance that regulated entities must adopt. 
(12) Wherever feasible, agencies shall seek the views of those most likely to be affected, including appropriate state, local, and tribal officials before imposing regulatory requirements that might significantly or uniquely affect those governmental entities. As appropriate, agencies shall seek to reduce unnecessary conflicts between federal regulatory actions and other law and regulation, including that issued by state and local governments. 
(13) Each agency shall avoid regulations that are inconsistent, incompatible, or duplicative with/of other regulations or policies. 
(14) Each agency shall draft its regulations in language that is simple and easy to understand. 
(15) Each agency shall consider, as appropriate, distributional effects, and after undertaking the analysis of costs and benefits, agencies shall be permitted to take account of those distributional effects in deciding whether to proceed. If the costs exceed the benefits by a substantial margin, agencies shall proceed only if the distributional effects are very clear and highly desirable. 
SECTION 2. ORGANIZATION An efficient regulatory planning and review process is vital to ensure that the Federal Government’s regulatory system best serves the American people. (A) The Office of Management and Budget. Coordinated review of agency rulemaking is necessary to ensure that regulations are consistent with applicable law, the President’s priorities, and the principles set forth in this Executive Order, and that decisions made by one agency do not conflict with the policies or actions taken or planned by another agency. The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) shall carry out that review function. Within OMB, the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) is the repository of expertise concerning regulatory issues and should thus take the lead in implementing this Executive order. Where appropriate, OIRA should draw heavily on the expertise of the Council of Economic Advisers and the Office of Science and Technology Policy in developing sound regulatory policy. To the extent permitted by law, OMB shall provide guidance to agencies and assist the President, the Vice President, and other regulatory policy advisors to the President in regulatory planning, and shall be the entity that reviews individual regulations, as provided by this Executive order. (B) OIRA shall be authorized to review proposed regulations. To carry out this task, OIRA shall issue guidelines governing regulatory impact analyses. These guidelines shall be issued after an appropriate period for comments from affected agencies, the private sector, and any interested persons. When a proposed regulation does not, in OIRA’s view, conform to the principles set out in this Executive Order or to OIRA guidelines for engaging in regulatory analysis, OIRA shall return the regulation to the agency for reconsideration. (C) OIRA shall be authorized to prompt agencies to undertake actions where the incremental benefits exceed the incremental costs. When OIRA has asked an agency to undertake such action, the agency shall, within 60 days, offer a public account of its intended course of action. (D) The Vice President. The Vice President is the principal advisor to the President on, and shall coordinate the development and presentation of recommendations concerning, regulatory policy, planning, and review, as set forth in this Executive Order. In fulfilling their responsibilities under this Executive Order, the President and the Vice President may be assisted by the regulatory policy advisors within the Executive Office of the President and by such agency officials and personnel as the President and the Vice President may, from time to time, consult. 
SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS For purposes of this Executive order: (A) “Advisors” refers to regulatory policy advisors consulted by the President and Vice President, including, among others: the Director of OMB; the Chair (or another member) of the Council of Economic Advisers; the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy; the Assistant to the President for Domestic Policy; the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs; the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology; the Assistant to the President for Intergovernmental Affairs; the Assistant to the President and Staff Secretary; the Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff to the Vice President; the Assistant to the President and Counsel to the President; the Deputy Assistant to the President and Director of the White House Office on Environmental Policy; and the Administrator of OIRA, who also shall coordinate communications relating to this Executive order among the agencies, OMB, the other Advisors, and the Office of the Vice President. (B) “Agency,” unless otherwise indicated, means any authority of the United States that is an “agency” under 44 U.S.C. § 3502(1), including those considered to be independent regulatory agencies, as defined in 44 U.S.C. § 3502(10). (C) “Director” means the Director of OMB. (D) “Regulation” or “rule” means an agency statement of general applicability and future effect, which the agency intends to have the force and effect of law, that is designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy or to describe the procedure or practice requirements of an agency. It does not, however, include: 
(1) Regulations or rules that pertain to a military or foreign affairs function of the United States, other than procurement regulations and regulations involving the import or export of non-defense articles and services; 
(2) Regulations or rules that are limited to agency organization, management, or personnel matters; or (3) Any other category of regulations exempted by public notice of the Administrator of OIRA. (E) “Regulatory action” means any substantive action by an agency (normally published in the Federal Register) that promulgates or is expected to lead to the promulgation of a final rule or regulation, including notices of inquiry, advance notices of proposed rulemaking, and notices of proposed rulemaking. (F) “Significant regulatory action” means any regulatory action that is likely to result in a rule that may: 
(1) Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, the environment, public health or safety; (2) Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency; or 
(3) Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof. 
SECTION 4. CENTRALIZED REVIEW OF REGULATIONS The guidelines set forth below shall apply to all regulatory actions, for both new and existing regulations, by agencies other than those agencies specifically exempted by public notice of the Administrator of OIRA: (A) Agency Responsibilities. In addition to adhering to its own rules and procedures and to the requirements of applicable law, each agency shall develop its regulatory actions in a timely fashion and adhere to the following procedures with respect to a regulatory action: 
(a) Each agency shall provide OIRA, at such times and in the manner specified by the Administrator of OIRA, with a list of its planned regulatory actions, indicating those which the agency believes are subject to review under this Executive order. Absent a material change in the development of the planned regulatory action, those not designated as significant will not be subject to review under this section unless, within 10 working days of receipt of the list, the Administrator of OIRA notifies the agency that OIRA has determined that a planned regulation is a significant regulatory 53 action within the meaning of this Executive Order. The Administrator of OIRA may by public notice waive review of any planned regulatory action designated by the agency as significant, in which case the agency need not further comply with subsection (A)(2)(b) or subsection (A)(2)(c) of this section. 
(b) For each matter identified as, or determined by the Administrator of OIRA to be, a significant regulatory action, the issuing agency shall provide to OIRA: (i) The text of the draft regulatory action, together with a reasonably detailed description of the need for the regulatory action and an explanation of how the regulatory action will meet that need. The description of need should clearly identify whether the regulation is designed to address a specific failure in the functioning of markets and how it addresses that need. 
(ii) An assessment of the potential costs and benefits of the regulatory action, including an explanation of the manner in which the regulatory action is consistent with a statutory mandate and, to the extent permitted by law, maximizes net economic benefits. 
(c) For those matters identified as, or determined by the Administrator of OIRA to be, a significant regulatory action within the scope of section 3(F)(1), the agency shall also provide to OIRA the following additional information developed as part of the agency’s decision-making process (unless prohibited by law): 
(i) An assessment, including the underlying analysis, of benefits anticipated from the regulatory action together with, to the extent feasible, a quantification of those benefits. 
(ii) An assessment, including the underlying analysis, of costs anticipated from the regulatory action, together with, to the extent feasible, a quantification of those costs; and 
(iii) An assessment, including the underlying analysis, of costs and benefits of potentially effective and reasonably feasible alternatives to the planned regulation––including improvements to the current regulation and viable nonregulatory actions such as information provision––and an explanation why the planned regulatory action is preferable to the identified potential alternatives. (d) In emergency situations, or when an agency is obligated by law to act more quickly than normal review procedures allow, the agency shall notify OIRA as soon as possible and, to the extent practicable, comply with subsections (A)(2)(b) and (c) of this section. For those regulatory actions that are governed by a statutory or courtimposed deadline, the agency shall, to the extent practicable, schedule rulemaking proceedings so as to permit sufficient time for OIRA to conduct its review, as set forth below in subsection (B)(2) through (4) of this section. 
(e) After the regulatory action has been published in the Federal Register or otherwise issued to the public, the agency shall: 
(i) Make available to the public, via the Internet and through other appropriate means, the information set forth in subsections (A)(2)(B) and (A)(2)(C); (ii) Identify for the public, in a complete, clear, and simple manner, the substantive changes between the draft submitted to OIRA for review and the action subsequently announced; and 
(iii) Identify for the public those changes in the regulatory action that were made at the suggestion or recommendation of OIRA. (B) OIRA Responsibilities. The Administrator of OIRA shall provide meaningful guidance and oversight so that each agency’s regulatory actions are consistent with applicable law, the President’s priorities, and the principles set forth in this Executive Order and do not conflict with the policies or actions of another agency. OIRA shall, to the extent permitted by law, adhere to the following guidelines: 
(1) OIRA shall review all actions identified by the agency or by OIRA as significant regulatory actions. 
(2) OIRA shall waive review or notify the agency in writing of the results of its review within the following time periods: 
(a) For any notices of inquiry, advance notices of proposed rulemaking, or other preliminary regulatory actions prior to a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, within 10 working days after the date of submission of the draft action to OIRA; (b) For all other regulatory actions, within 90 calendar days after the date of submission of the information required by this Order, unless OIRA has previously reviewed this information and, since that review, there has been no material change in the facts and circumstances upon which the regulatory action is based, in which case, OIRA shall complete its review within 60 days; and 
(c) The review process may be extended either (1) once by no more than 30 calendar days upon the written approval of the Director or (2) at the request of the agency head. 
(3) For each regulatory action that the Administrator of OIRA returns to an agency for further consideration of some or all of its provisions, the Administrator of OIRA shall provide the issuing agency a written explanation for such return, setting forth the pertinent provision of this Executive Order on which OIRA is relying. 
(4) For each regulatory action for which the Administrator of OIRA issues a prompt letter, the Administrator of OIRA shall provide the issuing agency a written explanation for such prompt, setting forth the pertinent provision of this Executive Order on which OIRA is relying. 
(5) Except as otherwise provided by law or required by a Court, in order to ensure greater openness, accessibility, and accountability in the regulatory review process, OIRA shall be governed by the following disclosure requirements: (a) All substantive communications between OIRA personnel and persons not employed by the executive branch of the Federal Government regarding a regulatory action under review shall be governed by the following guidelines: 
(i) A representative from the issuing agency shall be invited to any meeting between OIRA personnel and such person(s); 
(ii) OIRA shall forward to the issuing agency, within 10 working days of receipt of the communication(s), all written communications, regardless of format, between OIRA personnel and any person who is not employed by the executive branch of the Federal Government, and the dates and names of individuals involved in all substantive oral communications (including meetings to which an agency representative was invited, but did not attend, and telephone conversations between OIRA personnel and any such persons); and (iii) OIRA shall publicly disclose relevant information about such communication(s), as set forth below. 
(b) OIRA shall maintain a publicly available log that shall contain, at a minimum, the following information pertinent to regulatory actions under review: 
(i) The status of all regulatory actions, (ii) A notation of all written communications forwarded to an issuing agency; and 
(iii) The dates and names of individuals involved in all substantive oral communications, including meetings and telephone conversations, between OIRA personnel and any person not employed by the executive branch of the Federal Government, and the subject matter discussed during such communications. (c) After the regulatory action has been published in the Federal Register or otherwise issued to the public, or after the agency has announced its decision not to publish or issue the regulatory action, OIRA shall make available to the public all documents exchanged between OIRA and the agency during the review by OIRA under this section. Provided, that OIRA shall make exceptions to ensure protection of material that is proprietary or otherwise privileged. 
SECTION 5: REGULATORY RETROSPECTIVE AND REGULATORY PLANNING (A) Each agency shall produce an annual report on the benefits and costs of its significant regulations during the past year. A draft of the annual report shall be submitted to OIRA to ensure an adequate period (in no case less than ninety days) for OIRA review and comment. (B) Each agency shall produce, by December 31 of each year, a report on its planned activities for the following year (“annual regulatory plan”). OIRA shall be given an opportunity to comment on the annual regulatory plan and to work with the relevant agency to ensure compliance with the requirements and principles in this order. SECTION 6. RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS To the extent permitted by law, disagreements or conflicts between or among agency heads, or between OIRA and any agency, that cannot be resolved by the Administrator of OIRA shall be resolved by the President, or by the Vice President acting at the request of the President, with the relevant agency head (and, as appropriate, other interested government officials). Vice Presidential and Presidential consideration of such disagreements may be initiated only by the Director, by the head of the issuing agency, or by the head of an agency that has a significant interest in the regulatory action at issue. Such review will not be undertaken at the request of other persons, entities, or their agents. 
Resolution of such conflicts shall be informed by recommendations developed by the Vice President, after consultation with the Advisors (and other executive branch officials or personnel whose responsibilities to the President include the subject matter at issue). The development of these recommendations shall be concluded within 60 days after review has been requested. 
At the end of this review process, the President, or the Vice President acting at the request of the President, shall notify the affected agency and the Administrator of OIRA of the President’s decision with respect to the matter. 
SECTION 7. PUBLICATION Except to the extent required by law, an agency shall not publish in the Federal Register or otherwise issue to the public any regulatory action that is subject to review under section 4 of this Executive Order until whichever of the following occurs first: (1) the Administrator of OIRA notifies the agency that OIRA has waived its review of the action or has completed its review without any requests for further consideration; or (2) the applicable time period expires without OIRA having notified the agency that it is returning the regulatory action for further consideration. If the terms of the preceding sentence have not been satisfied and an agency wants to publish or otherwise issue a regulatory action, the head of that agency may request Presidential consideration through the Vice President, as provided under section 6 of this Order. Upon receipt of this request, the Vice President shall notify OIRA and the Advisors. The guidelines and time period set forth in this Order shall apply to the publication of regulatory actions for which Presidential consideration has been sought. 
SECTION 8. JUDICIAL REVIEW This Executive order is intended to improve the internal management of the Federal Government. Agency analyses generated by this Executive order shall be placed on file for judicial review and, to the extent that those analyses are relevant to the legality of the agency’s conduct, the reviewing court may consider them in assessing the legal issues. This Executive order does not otherwise create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person. 
Readers with comments should address them to: Cass R. Sunstein University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991) Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991) Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study (August 1992) Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993) Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) (April 1993) Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication (September 1993) Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of Software (August 1994) Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption (January 1995) Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 1995) Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handguns (August 1996) Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997) William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998) Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000) Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
Position (August 2000) 
Internet (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) (May 2001) 2001) 
Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001) 2001) 
Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution: The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 2001) Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft: The Declining Need for Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry: Creating Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the Commons (August 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha ASolution@ (February 2002) Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, forthcoming Journal of Legal Studies 2002) Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy: Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, forthcoming Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
