The Wilson Quarterly (1976-), Vol. 26, No. 1 (Winter, 2002), p. 3

 

 

Taking Issue 
Author(s): Bruce Ackerman and Cass R. Sunstein 
Source: 
Published by: 
Stable URL: 
Accessed: 15-03-2016 21:01 UTC

 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/40260559

Wilson Quarterly

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Wilson Quarterly and Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, 
preserve and extend access to The Wilson Quarterly (1976-).

 

 

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 128.240.233.146 on Tue, 15 Mar 2016 21:01:19 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

 Correspondence

 Letters may be mailed to One Woodrow Wilson Plaza, 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C.
 20004-3027, or sent via facsimile, to (202) 691-4036, ore-mail, to wq@wwic.si.edu.
 The writer's telephone number and postal address should be included. For reasons of space, letters are usually
 edited for publication. Some letters are received in response to the editors' requests for comment.

 Taking Issue

 events in the first half of the 21st century.) By

 contrast, my comments on National Public Radio

 According to Peter Berkowitz and Benjamin

 did reflect my own views, indeed, the same view

 Wittes ["The Professors and Bush v. Gore" WQ,

 Autumn '01 ], my "work dripped with disdain for the

 that I have elaborated in my academic writing: On
 the one hand, the Court, with its decision on

 conservative majority" of the Supreme Court long

 Bush v. Gore, might well have done the nation a

 before Bush v. Gore. This is simply not true.

 big favor, and no one should accuse the justices

 In fact, a forthcoming book of mine goes out of

 of partisan motives. (In his strident book on Bush

 its way to defend the Supreme Court's decisions

 v. Gore, Alan Dershowitz sharply criticizes me

 in the area of campaign finance. In contrast to the

 for saying this.) On the other hand, the Court s rea-

 harsh judgments of Buckley v. Valeo (1976) and its

 soning was embarrassingly weak as a matter of

 progeny that generally prevail in the academy, I
 defend the basic principles of the Court's
 jurisprudence. In contrast, I challenge the

 law, and for this reason it has serious problems from

 the standpoint of legitimacy.

 Berkowitz and Wittes take the hilarious step of

 authors to point to a single essay or book of mine

 juxtaposing my comments on NPR with my

 that engages in disdainful criticism of a major

 science-fictional piece in the Chronicle, thus man-

 area of the Rehnquist Court's work.

 ufacturing a conflict between "two seemingly

 I leave it to your readers to compare my essay

 irreconcilable views" and lumping me together

 in the London Review of Books with the

 with scholars making "flamboyant assertions sup-

 Berkowitz/Wittes characterization of my argu-

 ported only by their authority." Berkowitz and

 ments concerning the 2000 election. This can be

 Wittes are certainly entitled to defend Bush v.

 done by searching www.lrb.co.uk. But it is harder
 to check on their broad-brush mischaracteriza-

 Gore against its critics. But they should be more

 careful about converting disagreements on the

 tions, and so it seems appropriate to set this part of

 merits into attacks on the good faith of their fellow

 the record straight.

 Bruce Ackerman

 Yale University Law School

 New Haven, Conn.

 citizens. They should exercise a heightened

 degree of care in their public pronouncements.
 Cass R. Sunstein

 University of Chicago Law School

 Chicago, III.

 Peter Berkowitz and Benjamin Wittes are cer-

 tainly right to say that "scholars who assume the

 office of public intellectual must exercise a

 Teaching History

 heightened degree of care and restraint in their pub-

 Wilfred M McClay has written a perceptive and

 lic pronouncements." But they do not live up to
 their own standards.

 poignant essay ["History for a Democracy," WQ,

 Autumn '01] advocating a long-needed great

 As Berkowitz and Wittes well know, my little

 awakening for the place of history in American life.

 piece in the Chronicle of Higher Education was a

 Endorsing his plea, I add a few words.

 response to the editors' somewhat whimsical

 When Lincoln said we must "disenthrall our-

 request for a very brief essay on how historians in

 selves," it was from the "dogmas" of the past and

 the far distant future would regard Bush v. Gore.

 not from the past itself, for in the same speech he

 I chose to accept the invitation with an obvious-

 declared, "We cannot escape history." Similarly,

 ly whimsical piece from an imaginary historian.

 John Adams stated that we must "disabuse" ourselves

 The piece was not intended to reflect my own con-

 of the past. "The dogma of Aristotle is the most

 sidered views on the subject. (Anyone who doubts

 unphilosophical of the world, the most inhuman

 the element of whimsy should consult the piece

 and cruel. Until this wicked position, which is

 itself, with its multiple references to made-up

 worse than the slavery of the ancient republics, or

 Winter 2002 3

This content downloaded from 128.240.233.146 on Tue, 15 Mar 2016 21:01:19 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

