University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Is Incoherence Outrageous? 
Is Incoherence Outrageous? 

Journal Articles 

2002 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Daniel Kahneman 

Ilana Ritov 

David Schkade 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Ilana Ritov & David Schkade, "Is Incoherence Outrageous?," 54 
Stanford Law Review 1293 (2002). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Is Incoherence  Outrageous?

Cass R. Sunstein,*  Daniel Kahneman,**
David Schkade***  & Ilana Ritov****

For  their valuable  comments,  we  are  most  grateful  to  Cary  Coglianese,'
Mark  Kelman, 2  and  the  team  of Theodore  Eisenberg,  Jeffrey  Rachlinski,  and
Martin  Wells  (hereafter  ER&W).3  ER&W  offer  a  great  deal  of information
about  the  real  world  of punitive  damages,  presenting  a  mixed  verdict  on  our
basic  claims.  Coglianese  provides  an  impressively  detailed  account  of the
problem  of  achieving  coherence  in  the  world  of administrative  penalties.
Kelman  questions  the  importance  of coherence  and  also  urges  that  in  many
cases,  people's judgments  may  be better if they  lack a  global perspective.  We
are  pleased  to  say  that we  have  few  significant  disagreements  with  the  three
commentaries.  In  brief,  we  think  that  ER&W's  evidence  is  fully  consistent
with  our  basic  claims,  despite  a  conservative  test;  that  Coglianese  has
elaborated  helpfully  on  the problem  of achieving  coherence  in  civil  penalties;
and that  Kelman's  basic  arguments  should  not be  taken  to  dispute  our claims,
which  are  less  different  from  his  own  than  a reader  of his  commentary  might
infer.  Apart  from  these  points,  which  we  elaborate  below,  we  offer  a  more
general  suggestion,  one  that is  perhaps  insufficiently  emphasized  in  our  main
paper:  Even  if  it  is  demonstrated,  incoherence  usually  is  not  taken  to  be
outrageous.  The  persistence  of incoherence,  in  many  domains  of the  law,  is
closely  connected with this psychological  fact.

Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished  Service  Professor, University of Chicago.
Eugene  Higgins  Professor of Psychology  and Professor of Public  Affairs,  Princeton

University

(2002).

Herbert D. Kelleher Professor of Business, University  of Texas,  Austin.
Associate Professor, Hebrew  University of Jerusalem.

I.  Cary  Coglianese,  Bounded Evaluation: Cognition, Incoherence, and Regulatory

Policy, 54 STAN.  L. Rnv.  1217 (2002).

2.  Mark  Kelman,  Problematic Perhaps, but Not Irrational, 54 STAN.  L. REv.  1273

3.  Theodore  Eisenberg,  Jeffrey  J. Rachlinski  &  Martin  T.  Wells,  Reconciling
Experimental Incoherence with Real-World Coherence in Punitive Damages, 54  STAN.  L.
REv. 1239 (2002).

1293

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1293 2001-2002

1294

STANFORD LAWREVIEW

[Vol. 54:1293

I.  EXPERIMENTS  AND THE REAL WORLD

ER&W  provide  an  instructive  look  at the  real-world  of punitive  damage
awards.  The most novel part of their essay offers some intriguing data analysis,
suggesting that the incoherence  that we  describe actually  exists,  and hence that
there is  a "degree  of support"4  for our  claims in real-world  data.  But thinking
that  few  "complaints  about  a  legal  system  resonate  louder  than  charges  of
incoherence," 5  ER&W  object  that  if our  argument  is  right,  we  should  "be
observing  a  legal  system  on  the  verge  of  collapse," 6  because  any  "society
would  find  a  torrent  of  incoherent  legal  judgments  to  be  unfair,  unjust,
unpredictable,  and unmanageable." 7  And  in a  discussion of prior findings  that
appears  to be in some tension  with their new analysis,  ER&W contend  that the
system  of punitive  damages  is  actually  quite  coherent,  showing  a high  degree
of predictability.  Of the  three  comments,  ER&W's  raises  the  most  complex
issues, and we shall discuss those issues in some detail.

A.  A New Analysis

ER&W's  innovative  empirical  analysis  is based  on their (welcome)  claim
that  our  essay  can  be  used  to  generate  testable  hypotheses.  They  offer  three
such hypotheses.  The first involves juries.  In their view, we would predict that
juries,  which  make  decisions  in  isolation,  would  produce,  across  diverse
categories  of cases,  the  same  statistical  relationship  between  punitive  awards
and  compensatory  awards.  The  second  hypothesis  involves  judges,  who
observe  cases  from  many categories.  ER&W  think that we would predict that
judges  will  be  engaging  in  cross-category  comparisons  and  hence  that  the
effects  of case  categories  "should  be  greater in judge-tried  cases  than in jury-
tried  cases."'  Perhaps  most  interestingly,  ER&W  urge  that  if we  are  right,
judges  will  offer  higher  awards  than  juries  in  cases  involving  the  more
prominent  category of harm.  The reason  is that in  cross-category  comparisons,
the  awards  in  the more  prominent  category  typically  increase;  and judges,  in
ER&W's view, are engaged in cross-category  comparisons.  ER&W rightly say
that  the  third  hypothesis  seems  counterintuitive,  even  a  bit odd.  Could  it  be
right  to  suggest  that  when  the harm  is  prominent, judges  will  produce higher
damage awards  than juries?

Comparing  actual  awards  in cases  involving bodily injury to  actual awards
in  cases  not  involving  bodily  injury,  ER&W  find  support  for  all  three
hypotheses.  For juries,  the ratio  of compensatory  to  punitive  awards  is about

4.  Id. at 1243.
5.  Id. at 1239.
6.  Id. at 1240.
7.  Id.
8. Id. at 1249.

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1294 2001-2002

June  2002]

OUTRAGEOUS INCOHERENCE?

1295

the same between  cases involving bodily injury  and cases  not involving bodily
injury.  For judges,  punitive  awards  have  a far  higher  ratio  to  compensatory
awards  in  cases  involving  bodily  injury.  Most  strikingly,  the counterintuitive
prediction  is  vindicated.  The  punitive  award  is  likely  to  be  much  higher,
compared  to  the  compensatory  award,  when  judges  are  making  the  decision
than when juries are doing so.

ER&W have  done  a very creative job of adapting  our account  of punitive
damage  assessment to produce  testable  hypotheses for their  extensive  data  set.
We  are of course  delighted  that  our model  passed the  tests  that they  set for it.
Still,  we should point out that these tests  are overly severe  and that  our model
might  have  failed  them  even  if  it  is  basically  correct.  Three  points  deserve
mention.  First,  ER&W's  analyses  use  compensatory  damages  as  a proxy  for
the  "outrage  x  harm"9  component  of our  model.  But in  our model,  as  in  the
law, compensatory  damages  are linked only to the harm, not the outrageousness
of the  defendant's  behavior.  The  outrageousness  (often  called  egregiousness)
of the defendant's behavior  is not represented in the ER&W analyses,  though it
is  central  to  our  model  of how  punitive  damages  are  set.  Second,  ER&W's
analysis  takes  for  granted  that judges  consider each  case  in  a broader  context,
one that includes  cases  from  other categories.  What is certainly  true, and  what
we emphasized,  is that judges  could consider cases  through a wider viewscreen
because,  unlike juries, they have  encountered  a varied set  of cases.  However,
we are  not aware of any direct  evidence that judges  do spontaneously  consider
particular  cases in  a broad context.  Indeed,  our original paper drew on work by
Guthrie, Rachlinski,  and Wistrich in raising  doubts about precisely that point. 1°
The  Supreme  Court  apparently  has  similar  doubts  about  the  width  of the
screen judges use.  In Leatherman the Court found it necessary to require even
appellate judges  to engage  in an explicit comparison  (i.e.,  to use  a wide screen)
in  evaluating  the constitutionality  of damage  awards,  rather than  trusting their
experience."  Finally,  ER&W's  analyses  use  the  contrast  between  cases  with

9.  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  David  Schkade  &  Ilana  Ritov,  Predictably

Incoherent Judgments,  54 STAN.  L. REV.  1153,  1166(2002).

10.  See  Chris  Guthrie,  Jeffrey  Rachlinski,  & Andrew  Wistrich,  Inside  the  Judicial

Mind, 86 CORNELL  L. REv.  778  (2001).

11.  See Cooper Indus.,  Inc. v. Leatherman Tool Group, 532 U.S. 424,440 (2001).
Differences  in the institutional competence  of trial judges  and appellate judges are consistent
with our conclusion.  In [BMW of North Am. v.] Gore [517  U.S. 559 (1996)],  we instructed
courts evaluating a punitive damages award's  consistency  with due process  to consider three
criteria:  (1) the  degree  or reprehensibility  of  the  defendant's  misconduct,  (2) the  disparity
between  the  harm  (or  potential  harm) suffered  by  the  plaintiff  and  the punitive  damages
award,  and (3) the difference between the punitive damages awarded by the jury and the civil
penalties authorized or imposed in comparable cases.  Only  with respect to  the  first  Gore
inquiry do the  district courts  have  a somewhat  superior vantage  over courts  of appeals,  and
even then the advantage  exists  primarily with respect to issues turning on witness  credibility
and  demeanor.  Trial  courts  and  appellate  courts  seem  equally  capable  of analyzing  the
second factor.  And the third Gore criterion,  which calls for a broad legal comparison, seems
more suited to the expertise of appellate courts.  Considerations  of institutional  competence
therefore fail to tip the balance in favor of deferential  appellate review.

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1295 2001-2002

1296

STANFORD LA WREVIEW

[-Vol.  54:1293

and  without physical  injury as a proxy for the prominence of the case  category.
While  certainly  a reasonable  operationalization,  this  classification  is  imperfect
since the  "non-physical"  class  includes  many highly  prominent  categories  (as
possible  examples,  consider  sexual  harassment  and  racial  discrimination' 2),
again  limiting  our  hypotheses'  chances  to  succeed. 
In  sum,  because  our
account  of  punitive  damage  assessment  succeeded  on  this  somewhat
unfavorable  terrain,  what  ER&W  call  "modest"  support  should  probably  be
interpreted  as much stronger.'3

One further point.  ER&W contend that we predict that case  categories will
play no role  in jury cases;  but  the claim  strikes us as  too  strong,  and  it is  their
Indeed,  compensatory  awards  typically  differ  among
speculation,  not  ours. 
categories,  and  hence  categories  will  matter  insofar  as  compensatory  awards
operate  as  anchors.  In  our  study  compensatory  damages  were  held  constant.
But in  an  earlier  study, mentioned  briefly  in  our  article,  compensatories  were
not constant in the isolation  condition, and we  found a large difference between
categories  in the isolation  condition.' 4

B.  Predictability and Coherence

Notwithstanding the evidence just discussed, ER&W urge that "research  on
quantitative  judgments  demonstrates  substantial  consistency  in  judgments."' 5
Drawing  largely  on an  impressive  and  influential  study  by  Eisenberg,  Wells,
and  three  co-authors,16  ER&W  claim  that  the  legal  system  has  proved  its
"ability  to  reduce  and  manage  the  limitations  of human judgment.' 7  In  our
view,  the real-world  data  do  not support  this  optimistic  conclusion,  at least  if
the  optimism  is  applied  to  jury  determinations.' 8  We  have  noted  that  in
Leatherman, the  Supreme  Court  found  the  risks  of  arbitrary jury  outcomes
sufficiently troubling  to require  de novo  review  of the  constitutionality  of jury
awards  by  appellate  courts.  Further, over  half of punitive  damage awards  are

Id. (emphasis  added, citations and footnote  omitted).

12.  We  describe  these  as  possible  examples  because  we  lack  evidence  on  what

categories  of"nonphysical"  injury count as prominent.

13.  See  Deborah  Prentice  & Dale  Miller,  When  Small  Effects  Are Impressive,  118
PSYCHOL.  BULL.  112,  160-164  (1992)  (giving  an  instance  in  which  small  effects  are
impressive).

14.  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  David  Schkade,  & Ilana  Ritov,  Legal

Coherence and Incoherence (2001)  (unpublished manuscript, on file with author).

15.  Eisenberg, et al., supra note 3, at 1241.
16.  See Theodore  Eisenberg,  John  Goerdt, Brian  Ostrom,  David  Rottman  & Martin  T.

Wells, The Predictability of Punitive Damages, 26 J. LEGAL STUD.  623, 633-37 (1997).

17.  Eisenberg, et al., supra note 3,  at  1242.
18.  See W.  Kip Viscusi,  Why There Is No Defense of Punitive Damages, 87  GEO.  L.J.

381,  384-87 (1998).

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1296 2001-2002

June 2002]

OUTRAGEOUS INCOHERENCE?

1297

reduced  or overturned.' 9  The  process  of appellate  review  can  impose  on  all
parties  involved  substantial  transaction  costs  and  lead to  situations  in which
justice delayed becomes justice denied.

Before explaining the problem, we emphasize  our  agreement with many of
ER&W's  conclusions.  Punitive  awards  are  indeed  relatively  rare.  They  are
especially  uncommon  in  cases  lacking  intentional  misconduct.  Significantly,
the  compensatory  award  plays  a  substantial  role  in  determining  the  punitive
award.  For this reason punitive awards  are far from entirely unpredictable.  But
ER&W  downplay  the  existence  of  a  great  deal  of noise  in  the  system.  The
studies  that  purport  to  show  predictability  find  that  the  compensatory  award
explains  46-47%  of the  variation  in  punitive  damage  awards,  an  impressive
figure to be sure, but one that leaves  the majority of the variation unexplained.
The  claim  of predictability is  further  weakened  by the  fact that in  the relevant
work, the  focus of analysis  is not on actual punitive damage awards, but on the
logarithm of  such  awards,  which  is  the  dependent  variable  that  is  being
explained.  Any transformation  of real  awards  into  log  awards  will  naturally
shrink  much  of  the  variation  in  the  size  of  punitive  damages  awards.  But
defendants  pay their penalties in  dollars,  not in log dollars,  and  the uncertainty
they face  when  a  punitive award  could  range  from  $10,000  to  $1,000,000  is
rather more  impressive  than is  conveyed when  the  same range is  expressed  in
log  units  (7  vs  9).  With  respect  to  predictability,  judicial  oversight  and
appellate  review  can  and  do help,  but we respectfully  disagree  with  ER&W's
suggestion  that the  legal  system  has  overcome  the  cognitive  problems that  we
have  described.  Consider  the  fact  that  another  empirical  study, based  on  a
larger sample than  that used by  ER&W, finds  that punitive  awards  "are  highly
variable and unpredictable." 20

But  coherence,  not  predictability,  is  our  focus  here.  To  the  extent  that
ER&W  are able  to establish predictability,  they have not established  coherence.
To see this point, begin with the fact that because of the difficulty of translating
moral judgments  into  dollars,  anchors  will loom very large.  The compensatory
award  is  the  most  readily  available  anchor,  and  in  light  of  the  translation
problem,  it  should be  no surprise  that  that award  helps  to explain  the punitive
award.  And when  people  are  making judgments  in  isolation,  the  anchor  will
have  an  especially  big  effect,  indeed  a  bigger  effect  than  it  has  when people
look  at  two  or  more  cases  at  once.  Here,  then,  is  the  problem.  Because

19.  See,  e.g.,  Marc  Galanter,  Real  World Torts: An  Antidote to  Anecdote,  55 MD.  L.
REV.  1093,  1115-16  (1996)  (citing  studies  finding  that  jury  punitive  damage  awards  are
reduced in fifty percent or more of product liability cases).

20.  See  Jonathan  Karpoff  &  John  Lott, On  the  Determinants and  Importance of
Punitive Damage Awards,  42  J.L.  &  EcoN.  527,  571  (1999).  The  authors  do  find  that
compensatory  awards,  alongside  other  identifiable  factors  (such  as  lawsuit  type,  firm
characteristics,  and location  of suit), can  explain  as much  as 50%  of the variation in  punitive
awards.  But without prior information  that there will be a punitive award, "only  1-2  percent
of the variation  in punitive awards can  be explained."  Id.

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1297 2001-2002

1298

STANFORD LAWREVIEW

[Vol.  54:1293

compensatory  awards  in  certain  categories  of cases  (for  example,  commercial
fraud  cases)  are  typically larger  than  compensatory  awards  in  other categories
of cases  (for example, personal  injury cases),  punitive  awards will be larger in
the  former  set  of  cases  as  well,  regardless  of the  relative  outrageousness  of
cases  from the two  categories.  The  existing research  shows  that this difference
is  entirely  predictable.  But  that very  difference  is  a form  of predictable
incoherence in the sense that we  discuss.  The  reason  is  that people  are most
unlikely  to  approve  of the  pattern  of outcomes  that  emerges  from  their  own
judgments  in isolation.  And one reason  for the disapproval  is that anchors  have
a  larger effect  on judgments  in isolation  than  on  comparative judgments.  We
can  now  see  that  if, as  ER&W  urge,  compensatory  awards  are  acting  as  the
anchor,  people's judgments  will appear  to  make  sense  on  their  own,  but  will
not make sense, by people's  own lights, when taken together.

In  this  light,  it  is  possible  to  dissolve  the  tension  between  the  apparently
conflicting  empirical  claims  reported  by  ER&W.  First,  punitive  awards  do
indeed  have some  degree of predictability  (although that predictability  is more
impressive  for scholars who think in  terms of logarithms  than for plaintiffs  and
defendants,  who  think  about  actual  dollars).  Second,  punitive  awards  can be
shown to be incoherent, in  the sense that people's  decisions  in isolation  do not
match  their decisions if they are engaging  in  cross-category  comparisons.  The
two claims  are not in conflict.

C.  Public Indifference

Now  let  us  turn  to  ER&W's  broadest  claim.  They  contend  that  if
incoherence  is  pervasive,  the  legal  system  would  be  "on  the  verge  of
collapse,"2' and people would  be up in arms.  The "paradox"  lies in the fact that
"the  system  seems  to  work well,  despite  the  well-founded  concerns"2  of our
article.

We do not think that there is any paradox.  Because  people do not naturally
seek coherence,  it seems  to us wrong to suggest that incoherence, in the domain
of punitive  damages,  would  produce  any  kind  of public  outcry.  Suppose,  for
example,  that a  presidential  candidate  of either party,  armed  with  sensational
data,  wanted to  make an energetic  and  dramatic  campaign  speech,  in which  he
demonstrated,  beyond  a  shadow  of  a  doubt,  that  punitive  awards  in  some
categories  of cases  were  far too  low when  taken in  comparison  with awards  in
other  categories  of  cases. 
If you  were  the  candidate's  campaign  manager,
would  you urge him to deliver-that speech?  Would the speech be taken to have
uncovered an outrage?  Would the candidate make a public  splash? We doubt  it.
For  the  same  reason  that people  do  not  spontaneously  worry  over coherence,
incoherence,  when  brought  to  public  attention,  is  a reason  for  embarrassment

21.  Eisenberg, et al., supra note 3, at  1240.
22.  Id. at  1241.

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1298 2001-2002

June 2002]

SOUTRAGEOUS INCOHERENCE?

1299

and  possibly  reform-but  hardly  an  outrage.  Because  of  the  relative
indifference  to  incoherence,  the  system  may  appear "to  work  well"2  even
when it in fact does not.

II.  ACHIEVING  COHERENCE

Like  ER&W,  Coglianese  is  concerned  to  connect  our  arguments  to  real-
world  evidence  about  law  and  policy.24  But  while  ER&W  concentrate  on
punitive  damage  awards,  Coglianese  examines  administrative  penalties.  His
overall  goal  is  to  show  that  incoherence  cannot  be  established  simply  by
finding disparities in congressionally-specified  penalty  amounts.  It is necessary
to ask many more questions.

Coglianese  says,  rightly,  that  our discussion  of administrative  penalties  is
focused  on what he calls the problem of "comparative  coherence."2  He insists
that  seemingly  inexplicable  variations  in  dollar  amounts  are  only  partly
informative.  Suppose, for example,  that those who injure birds are subject  to a
federal penalty  of $20,000,  but that those who  subject  employees  to  dangerous
working conditions  are subject to  a federal  penalty  of $10,000.  Is this proof of
incoherence?  Not necessarily.  For example,  employers may be subject to stiff,
additional  penalties  under state  law  while those  who  injure  birds  may not be;
the  lower  federal  penalties  may  make  a  great  deal  of sense  once  federal  and
state  penalties  are  taken  together. 
It  is  also  possible  that  the  government
regularly  enforces  the  latter statute,  and infrequently  enforces  the former-and
hence  the  disparity  in penalties  is  sensibly  responsive  to  varying enforcement
levels.

Coglianese  offers an impressive account  of the many variables that must be
examined in order  to reach  firm conclusions  about coherence.  He  is  correct to
insist  that  judgments  of  incoherence  might  themselves  reflect  a  form  of
bounded  rationality-a  failure  to  take  account  of  considerations  (such  as
additional penalties  and the level of enforcement  activity) that actually matter a
great deal.  But we are sure that Coglianese would  agree  that people, including
policymakers,  rarely  attempt  to  make  anything  like the  necessary  assessment.
It would be heroic,  and in  our view implausible,  to think that the existing  array
of administrative penalties  reflects  considered judgments  about the factors  that
Coglianese  rightly  identifies.  So  too with  existing  variations  in  cost-per-life-
saved.  As  Coglianese urges,  no sensible person  could urge that  every program
for risk reduction  should have the same cost-per-life-saved.  Contextual  factors,
including  distributional 
incorporating
contextual  factors is most unlikely to rescue the current  system from  the charge
of incoherence.

issues,  matter  a  great  deal.  But 

23.  Id.
24.  Coglianese, supra note  1.
25.  Id. at 1219.

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1299 2001-2002

1300

STANFORD LA WREVIEW

[Vol. 54:1293

Coglianese  raises the possibility that after all  relevant  sanctions  have been
imposed,  there will  be less incoherence  than it would seem if we focus  on only
one  type  of  penalty.  But  we  think  that  Coglianese  would  agree  that
incoherence  is  likely to  be substantial,  all the more  in  light of the fact that the
greater  the  number of different proceedings  that must  be initiated to  achieve  a
coherent  penalty,  the  less  likely  it  is  that  a  sensible  overall  outcome  will be
achieved.  The execution  of a complex  strategy  is  harder than  a simpler  one,
and  a complex  task will  inevitably have  higher transaction  costs.  Indeed,  we
greatly  doubt  that  administrative  penalties  are  in  fact  set  through  deliberate
consideration  of all  the  variables  to  which  Coglianese  draws  attention.  The
relative  coherence  of  penalties  within  categories  itself  suggests  that  these
variables  do not play a major role, simply because  there is no reason to  assume
that the variables  in question  are kept  constant within  categories.  For example,
if  we  compare  a  violation  of the  African  Elephant  Conservation  Act 26  and  a
violation  of  the  law  protecting  Bald  and  Golden  Eagles  (carrying  the  same
penalty),27  it  is  not  obvious  why  the  existence  of  other  liability,  or  the
availability  of  other  remedies  to  ensure  compliance,  or  the  probability  of
detection, and so forth, would be the same in both cases.

One of the most striking features  of Coglianese's  discussion is  the support
that  it gives to  our claim  that full  coherence  is exceedingly  difficult  or perhaps
impossible  to achieve in practice  (assuming we could agree  on what it means in
principle).  Nonetheless,  we  think  that much  can  be done  to  reduce  the  most
serious anomalies.  This point brings  us directly to Kelman's paper.

III.  PREScRIPTIwE,  NOT NORMATIVE

Our major  concern  with  Kelman's  interesting  discussion2n  is  that  he  has
taken issue with claims that we do not make.  Contrary to Kelman's suggestion,
we  do  not  believe  that  category-bound  judgments  are  always  inferior  to  the
judgments  made  in  cross-category  comparisons.  And  in  analyzing  punitive
damage reform,  our approach is prescriptive  rather than normative.  We seek to
show  how  certain  social  goals  might  be  obtained,  without  saying  anything
about  the  appropriate  goals  of punitive  awards.  We  attempt  to  dispel  four
misunderstandings  here.

First,  we  do  not  say  (and do  not  believe)  that  those who  make  category-
bound  judgments  are  "irrational." 29 
Indeed  we  do  not  mean  to  make  any
controversial  claims  about  the  nature  of  rationality.  Our  more  cautious
suggestions  are that  category-bound  thinking  does  give  rise to  incoherence,  in
the  sense  that  we  describe  it, and  that incoherence  is  indeed  a  problem.  We

26.  16 U.S.C. §§ 4201.4246 (2002)
27.  16 U.S.C. § 668  (2000)
28.  Kelman,  supra note 2.
29.  Id. at 1275.

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1300 2001-2002

June 2002]

SOUTRAGEOUS INCOHERENCE?

1301

plead  innocent  to  Kelman's  charge  that  we  have  offered  an  "unduly  casual
invocation of the  'rationality'  norm."3'  We have no view  about Kelman's  claim
that  law  students  are  rational  to  be intensely  disappointed  when  they  do  not
receive job offers  from  their preferred  law firm;  and nothing we say speaks  to
his  suggestion  that  intense  emotional  reactions  are  generally  rational  if they
promote people's subjective ends.

Second, we do  not think, as Kelman  suggests,  that "the global perspective
is always  optimal."3'  We meant to be very tentative here, suggesting only "that
most people, in most conditions,  prefer a wide viewscreen  to a narrow one,  and
will in principle  (though not always  in actual practice)  have greater  confidence
in  the  judgments  they  make  in  a  broad  context  rather  than  in  a  narrow
context." 32   We  do  not  disagree  with  Kelman's  suggestion  that  in  some
circumstances,  people's judgments  may  be  better  when  and  because  they  are
category-bound. 
(Certainly  we  do  not  mean  to  say  anything  about  "the
appropriate response to misbehavior by one's  child"!33)
Third,  Kelman  misunderstands  our  argument 

that  we
emphasize  coherence-what  he calls  "horizontal  equity"3 4 -at  the  expense  of
other  social  goals,  and  in  insisting  that  it  might  be  sensible  to  sacrifice
coherence  for the  sake  of ensuring  that punishments  are  not too  severe  or  too
lenient.  We agree  with Kelman's  suggestion  that horizontal  "equity  is  at best
but  one  value."3s  We  said  that  "coherence  is  not  a  trumping  value,  and  a
system  displaying incoherence  may well be better than one  that is coherent  but
pervasively  unjust."36  We urged  only that  at "the  very  least,  efforts  should  be
made to  correct  the most conspicuous  anomalies-a  goal that  can be obtained
without thinking that it is easy or even possible  for people to agree  on what full
coherence actually requires. ' 37

in  objecting 

Fourth,  Kelman  is  mistaken  to  say  that  according  to  our  argument,  "we
should  assess  punitive damages  in  accord with  a  sense  of outrage  because we
typically do."3  He urges  (far more modestly than Hume) that "it is never clear
39  he adds  that perhaps  punitive
why we  should derive an  'ought'  from  an 'is';
damages  should not be understood  in terms  of outrage  at  all.  But we did  not
intend  to  accept  any  particular  normative  theory  of punitive  damages.  We
certainly  did  not  mean  to  express  any  view  on  the  retributive  view  of

30.  Id. at  1278.
31.  Id. at  1275.
32.  Sunstein et al.,  supra note  14,  at  1179.
33.  Kelman, supra note 2, at  1276.
34.  Id. at  1280.
35.  Id.
36.  Sunstein et al., supra note  14,  at 1203.
37.  Id. at 1203.
38.  Kelman, supra note 2, at  1289.
39.  Id.

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1301 2001-2002

1302

STANFORD LAWREVIEW

[Vol. 54:1293

punishment.  Our goals, here  as  in other  work,  are descriptive  and prescriptive
rather than normative:  Why are awards what they are?  Assuming that the legal
system has  as  a certain  goal,  how does  it best get there?  If optimal deterrence
is  the  goal,  it  does  not  make  much  sense  to  rely  on juries.  If the  goal  is  to
reduce  incoherence  while  retaining  a  large  role  for  retributive  thinking,  the
legal system might attempt to use  additur and remittur to  increase  anomalously
low  awards  and  to  decrease  anomalously  high  ones.  But  as  we  also  say,  a
society "should be willing to tolerate  a degree of predictable  incoherence if this
is the price  of avoiding a (coherent)  set of biased and unjust awards." 0

IV.  OUTRAGE

Much  of our work on punitive damages  has  been  concerned with the topic
of outrage.  In  our view, outrage  is associated with  an urge to punish, which  is
the foundation  for such  awards.41  Jurors'  reactions  to misconduct  are rooted  in
judgments  about  whether  the  defendant  has  done  something  that  qualifies  as
genuinely  outrageous.  We  have  also  shown  that  outrage  itself is  category-
bound.  What  appears  outrageous  in  isolation may appear barely  objectionable
when placed in the context of far more egregious  wrongdoing.

Our  investigation has  brought new clarity to  a not unrelated  point:  Within-
category  incoherence  is  easily noticed  and  arouses  a  strong sense  of injustice.
Incoherence  across  categories  is  harder  to  see  and  less  impressive  when  it  is
seen.  People  do  not spontaneously  question  the coherence  of their judgments
across  category  boundaries,  and  are not greatly  exercised  by incoherence  when
it  is  drawn  explicitly  to  their  attention.  Nonetheless,  incoherence  can  be  a
serious problem, indeed  a source of real injustice.  We are not exactly outraged.
But we think that much more can,  and should, be done to reduce the problem.

40.  Sunstein et al., supra note  14, at  1183.
41.  Indeed,  the legal  criteria  for  awarding  punitive  damages  seem  almost a recipe  for
outrage, for example,  "reckless  disregard  for the welfare  of others"  or "gross  deviation from
the normal standard  of care."  CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  REID  HASTIE,  JOHN  W.  PAYNE,  DAVID  A.
SCHKADE  &  W. Kip Viscusi,  PUNITIVE  DAMAGES:  How JuRIEs  DECIDE  259  (2002)  (quoting
punitive damage  instructions).

HeinOnline  -- 54 Stan. L. Rev. 1302 2001-2002

