Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Conformity and Dissent" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 164, 2002). 
Conformity and Dissent 
Cass R. Sunstein 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
Much of the time, human beings do what others do. This is perfectly sensible, because the actions and statements of other people convey valuable information about what should be done. In addition, most people want the good opinion of others, and this desire promotes conformity. But conformity can lead both groups and institutions in unfortunate and even catastrophic directions. The most serious problem is that by following others, people fail to disclose what they know and believe, thus depriving society of important information. Those who dissent, and who reject the pressures imposed by others, perform valuable social functions, often at their own expense, material or nonmaterial. These points are illustrated by reference to theoretical and empirical work on conformity, cascades, and group polarization. An understanding of the role of conformity and dissent casts new light on a variety of legal issues, including the expressive function of law; the institutions of the American constitution; the functions of free speech in wartime; the debate over the composition of the federal judiciary; and affirmative action in higher education. 
“If I were to choose between living in a society which enjoys freedom of expression, but not having the right myself, or enjoying the right in a society which does not have it, I would have no hesitation in judging that my own personal interest is better served by the first option.”1 * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. For valuable comments, I am grateful to Jacob Gersen, Reid Hastie, David Hirshleifer, Christine Jolls, Catharine MacKinnon, Martha Nussbaum, Susan Moller Okin, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Lior Strahilevitz, Adrian Vermeule, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1 Joseph Raz, Ethics in the Public Domain 39 (1994). 
“As soon as a person is in the midst of a group he is no longer indifferent to it. He may stand in a wholly unequivocal relation to an object when alone; but as soon as a group and its direction are present he ceases to be determined solely by his own coordinates. In some way he refers the group to himself and himself to the group. He might react to the group in many different ways; he might adopt its direction, compromise with it, or oppose it; he might even decide to disregard it. But even in the latter instance (which superficially seems to be an ‘absence of group influence’) there is a clear and determined reference to the group as fully as in the preceding cases.”2 
“Justice Marshall brought a special perspective. . . . His was the mouth of a man who knew the anguish of the silenced and gave them a voice. . . . I have been perhaps most personally affected by Justice Marshall as a raconteur . . . . Occasionally, at Conference meetings, I still catch myself looking expectantly for his raised brow and his twinkling eye, hoping to hear, just once more, another story that would, by and by, perhaps change the way I see the world.”3 “A child, however, who had no important job and could only see things as his eyes showed them to him, went up to the carriage. ‘The Emperor is naked,’ he said.”4 
“[W]hile individual ideology and panel composition both have important effects on a judge’s vote, the ideology of one’s colleagues is a better predictor of one’s vote than one’s own ideology.”5 
How do people influence each other? What are the social functions of dissenters, malcontents, and skeptics? How do the answers to these questions bear on law and policy, and on the design of private and public institutions? 
2 Solomon Asch, Social Psychology 483 (1952). 3 See Sandra Day O’Connor, Thurgood Marshall: The Influence of a Raconteur, 44 Stan. L. Rev. 1217, 1217, 1220 (1992). 4 See Hans Christian Anderson, The Emperor’s New Suit, in Hans Christian Anderson, Shorter Tales (Jean Hersholt trans. 1948; originally published 1837). 5 Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the DC Circuit, 83 Va L Rev 1717, 1764 (1997). —A large number of judicial votes and decisions were investigated to see if it matters whether a panel, on a federal court of appeals, includes two judges, or instead three, appointed by a President of the same party.6 It is tempting to suggest that this should not matter at all; two judges, after all, are able to produce a majority decision. But this suggestion turns out to be wrong. A panel with three judges appointed by Republican presidents is much more likely than a panel with two to reverse an environmental decision at the behest of an industry challenger.7 A group of three like-minded judges behaves very differently from a group with more diverse views. No less remarkably, a single Democratic judge, sitting with two Republicans, turns out to be more likely to vote in favor of an industry challenge to a regulation than a single Republican, sitting with two Democrats.8 It is not entirely wrong to conclude that when sitting with Republicans, Democratic judges vote like Republicans, and that when sitting with Democrats, Republican judges vote like Democrats. But this conclusion is itself misleading, because how Democrats vote, and how Republicans vote, is very much dependent on whether they are sitting with one or two judges appointed by presidents of the same party.9 
—Ordinary citizens were asked to say, as individuals, how much a defendant should be punished for specified misconduct.10 Their responses were measured on a scale of 0 to 8, where 0 meant no punishment at all and 8 meant “extremely severe” punishment.11 After recording their individual judgments, people were sorted into six-person juries, which were asked to deliberate and to reach unanimous verdicts. When the individual jurors favored little punishment, the group showed a "leniency shift," meaning a rating that was systematically lower than the median rating of individual members before they started to talk 6 The statements in this paragraph are based on my independent research, presented below, and on Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the DC Circuit, 83 Va L Rev 1717, 1755 (1997). To the same effect, see Frank Cross and Emerson Tiller, Judicial Partisanship and Obedience to Legal Doctrine, 107 Yale LJ 2155 (1998) (finding that a panel of three Republican judges is far more likely to reject agency action, in order to reach a conclusion that would be predicted of that panel on political grounds, than a panel of two Republicans and one Democrat). 7 See the data discussed below; see also Revesz, supra note, at 1754-55 (also finding that a panel of three judges appointed by the president of the same party behaves differently from a panel with judges appointed by presidents of different parties) . 8 See id. at 1752. 9 Id. at 1752, 1754. 10 See David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating About Dollars, 100 Colum L Rev 1139 (2001). 11 Id. at 1150. with one another.12 But when individual jurors favored strong punishment, the group as a whole produced a "severity shift," meaning a rating that was systematically higher than the median rating of individual members before they started to talk.13 The direction and the extent of the shift were determined by the median ranking of individual jurors, and because one or two dissenters from the majority view could shift the median, they could make a significant difference. 
My principal claim in this Article is that for each of us, conformity is often a rational course of action, but when all or most of us conform, society can end up making large mistakes. One reason we conform is that we often lack much information of our own, and the decisions of others provide the best available information about what should be done.14 The central problem is that widespread conformity deprives the public of information that it needs to have. Conformists are often thought to be protective of social interests, keeping quiet for the sake of the group, while dissenters tend to be seen as selfish individualists, embarking on projects of their own. But in an important sense, the opposite is closer to the truth. In many situations, dissenters benefit others, while conformists benefit themselves. 
In a well-functioning democracy, institutions reduce the risks that accompany conformity, in part because they meet conformity with dissent, and hence increase the likelihood that more information will emerge, to the benefit of all. A high-level official during World War II attributed the successes of the Allies, and the failures of Hitler and the other Axis powers, to the greater ability of citizens in democracies to scrutinize and dissent, and hence to improve past and proposed courses of action.15 Dissent and scrutiny were possible because skeptics were not punished by the law and because informal punishments, in the form of social pressures, were relatively weak. I will suggest that an understanding of group influences, and their potentially harmful effects, casts new light on a wide range of issues, including the nature of the American 12 Id. at 1152, 1154-55. 13 Id. 14 See the discussion of imitation as a fast and frugal heuristic in Joseph Henrich et al., What Is the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality, in Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox 343, 344 (Gerd Gigerenzer and Richard Selten eds. 2002) (“Cultural transmission capacities allow individuals to shortcut the costs of search, experimentation, and data processing algorithms, and instead benefit from the cumulative experience stored in the minds (and observed in the behavior) of others.”). 15 See Luther Gulick, Administrative Reflections from World War II (1948). Irving Janis, Groupthink (2d ed. 1985), can be seen as a generalization of this theme. constitutional structure; the functions of bicameralism; the sources of ethnic hostility and political radicalism; the importance of civil liberties in wartime and during social panics and witch-hunts; the performance of juries; the effects of diversity on the federal judiciary; affirmative action in higher education; and the potentially large consequences of law even when it is never enforced. 
Throughout I focus on two influences on individual belief and behavior. The first involves the information conveyed by the actions and statements of other people. If a number of people seem to believe that some proposition is true, there is reason to believe that that proposition is in fact true. Most of what we think—about facts, morality, and law—is a product not of first-hand knowledge, but of what we learn from what others do and think. This is true even though they too may be merely following the crowd. As we shall see, this phenomenon can create serious problems for the system of precedent, as when courts of appeals follow previous courts that are in turn following their predecessors, creating a danger of widespread, self-perpetuating error. And of course some people have more influence than others, simply because the decisions of those people convey more information; we are especially likely to follow those who have special expertise, those who seem most like us, those who fare best, or those whom we otherwise have reason to trust.16 
The second influence is the pervasive human desire to have and to retain the good opinion of others. If a number of people seem to believe something, there is reason not to disagree with them, at least not in public. The desire to maintain the good opinion of others breeds conformity and squelches dissent, especially but not only in groups that are connected by bonds of affection, which can therefore impair group performance. We shall see that close-knit groups, discouraging conflict and disagreement, often do badly for that very reason. In any case much of human behavior is a product of social influences. For example, employees are far more likely to file suit if members of the same workgroup have also done so17; teenage girls who see that other teenagers are having children are more likely to become pregnant themselves18; the perceived behavior of others 16 See Daniel Goldstein et al., Why and When Do Simple Heuristics Work?, in Bounded Rationality, note supra, at 174–76; Robert Boyd and Peter Richerson, Norms and Bounded Rationality, in id. at 284–87. 17 See Harold H. Gardner, Nathan L. Kleinman, and Richard J. Butler, Workers’ Compensation and Family and Medical Leave Act Claim Contagion, 20 J Risk and Uncertainty 89, 101–110 (2000) 18 See, e.g., George A. Akerlof, Janet L. Yellen & Michael L. Katz, An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing in the United States, 111 Q.J. Econ. 277 (1996). has a large effect on the level of violent crime19; broadcasters mimic one another, producing otherwise inexplicable fads in programming20; lower courts sometimes do the same, especially in highly technical areas, and hence judicial mistakes may never be corrected.21 
We should not lament social influences or wish them away. Much of the time, people do better when they take close account of what others do. Some of the time, we even do best to follow others blindly. But social influences also diminish the total level of information within any group, and they threaten, much of the time, to lead individuals and institutions in the wrong directions. Dissent can be an important corrective; many groups and institutions have too little of it.22 As we shall see, conformists are free-riders, whereas dissenters often confer benefits on others; and it is tempting to free-ride. As we shall also see, social pressures are likely to lead groups of like-minded people to extreme positions. When groups become caught up in hatred and violence, it is rarely because of economic deprivation23 or primordial suspicions24; it is far more often a product of the informational and reputational influences discussed here.25 Indeed, unjustified extremism frequently results from a “crippled epistemology,” in which extremists react to a small subset of relevant information, coming mostly from one another.26 19 See Edward Glaeser, E. Sacerdote, and Jose Scheinkman, Crime and Social Interactions, 111 Quarterly Journal of Economics 507 (1996). 20 See Robert Kennedy, Strategy Fads and Strategic Positioning: An Empirical Test for Herd Behavior in Prime-Time Television Programming, J. Industrial Economics (2002). 21 See Andrew F. Daughtety and Jennifer F. Reinganum, Stampede to Judgment, 1 Am Law and Ec. Rev. 158 (1999). 22 Hence Mill’s claim that “the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing generation; those who dissent from the opinion, stil more than those who hold it. If the opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for truth; if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with error.” John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, in John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, On Liberty, Considerations on Representative Government 85 (H.B. Acton ed. 1972) 23 See Alan B. Krueger and Jitka Maleckova, Education, Poverty, Political Violence and Terrorism: Is There a Causal Connection? (unpublished manuscript 2002). 24 See Timur Kuran, Ethnic Norms and Their Transformation Through Reputational Cascades, 27 J Legal Stud 623, 648 (1998). 25 See Cass R. Sunstein, Why They Hate Us: The Role of Social Dynamics, 25 Harv J Law and Public Policy 429 (2002). 26 See Russell Hardin, The Crippled Epistemology of Extremism, in Political Rationality and Extremism 3, 16 (Albert Breton et al. eds. 2002). 
Similar processes occur in less dramatic forms. Many large-scale shifts within legislatures, bureaucracies, and courts are best explained by reference to social influences. When a legislature suddenly shows concern with some formerly neglected problem—for example, hazardous waste dumps or corporate misconduct—the concern is often a product of conformity effects, not of real engagement with the problem. Of course the new concern might be justified. But if social influences are encouraging people to conceal information that they have, or if the blind are leading the blind, serious problems are likely. There is a further point. With relatively small "shocks," similar groups can be lead, by social pressures, to dramatically different beliefs and actions. When societies differ, or when large-scale changes occur over time, the reason often lies not where we usually look, but in small and sometimes elusive factors.27 
An appreciation of informational influences, and of people’s concern for the good opinion of others, helps to show how, and when, law can alter behavior without being enforced—and merely by virtue of the signal that it provides.28 The central point here is that law can provide reliable evidence both about what should be done and about what most people think should be done. In either case, it can convey a great deal of relevant information.29 Consider bans on public smoking and on sexual harassment. If people think that the law is speaking for the view of most or all, potential violators are less likely to engage in smoke or to engage in sexual harassment. Potential victims are also more likely to take the steps to enforce the law privately, as, for example, through reminding people of their legal responsibilities, and insisting that violators come into compliance. In this light we can better understand the much-disputed claim that the law has an “expressive function.”30 By virtue of that function, law can even stop or 27 See Joseph Henrich, What is the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality?, in Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox 353-54 (2001), for an entertaining outline in connection with food choice decisions. For example: “Many Germans believe that drinking water after eating cherries is deadly; they also believe that putting ice in soft drinks is unhealthy. The English, however, rather enjoy a cold drink of water after some cherries; and Americans love icy refreshments. ” Id. at 353. See also Paul Omerod, Butterfly Economics (1993), for a popular account. 28 See Robert Kagan and Jerome Skolnick, Banning Smoking: Compliance Without Enforcement, in Smoking Policy (Robert Rabin and Stephen Sugarman eds.) (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993). 29 See Richard McAdams, Norms Theory: An Attitudinal Theory of Expressive Law, 79 Oregon L. Rev. 339 (2000). 30 Mathew Adler, Expressivist Theories of Law: A Skeptical Overview, 148 U Pa L Rev 1363 (2000); Symposium, The Expressive Dimension of Governmental Action: Philosophical and Legal Perspectives, 60 Maryland L. Rev. 465 (2001). accelerate a social cascade.31 Here too the areas of cigarette smoking and sexual harassment are relevant examples. But if would-be violators are part of a dissident subcommunity, they might well be able to resist law’s expressive effect; fellow dissidents can band together and encourage one another to violate the law. Indeed, informational and reputational factors can even encourage widespread noncompliance, as, for example, in drug use and failure to comply with the tax laws.32 The law’s expressive power is partly a function of its moral authority, and when law lacks that authority within a subcommunity, its signal may be irrelevant or even counterproductive. 
This Article is divided into seven parts. Parts II, III, and IV investigate social science evidence involving, respectively, conformity, cascades, and group polarization. A unifying theme is that in all three contexts, individuals are suppressing their private signals—about what is true and what is right—and that this suppression can cause significant social harm. Groups of like-minded people are especially vulnerable on this count. Part V focuses on the expressive function of law and in particular on the phenomenon of “compliance without enforcement.” Part VI catalogues some implications of social influences for constitutionalism, judicial confirmations, and affirmative action in higher education. Here I urge that the principal contribution of the framers of the American Constitution lay not in their endorsement of deliberative democracy, but in their insistence that diversity is an affirmative good, likely to improve deliberation. This enthusiasm for diversity helps account for the systems of checks and balances and federalism. I also suggest that it is important to attempt to provide a mix of views on the federal bench; indeed, consideration should be given to increasing the likelihood that panels, on courts of appeals, contain judges appointed by president of different parties. I urge as well that in those cases in which racial diversity will improve discussion, it is entirely legitimate for colleges and universities to attempt to promote racial diversity. Part VII is a brief conclusion. 
II. 
Why, and when, do people do what others do? To answer this question, we need to distinguish between hard questions and easy ones. Intuition suggests 31 See Dan Kahan, Gentle Nudges vs. Hard Shoves: Solving the Sticky Norms Problem, 67 U. Chi. L. Rev 607 (2000). 32 See Robert Kagan and Jerome Skolnick, in Banning Smoking: Compliance Without Enforcement, in Smoking Policy: Law, Politics, and Culture 78 (Robert Radin ed. 1999). that when people are confident that they are right, they will be more willing to do what they think best and to reject the views of the crowd. Several sets of experiments confirm this intuition, but they also offer some significant twists. Most important, they suggest three points that I will emphasize throughout: otherwise identical groups in dramatically different directions.33 a single dissenter, or voice of sanity, is likely to have a huge impact.34 likely to influence us, even on the simplest questions.35 And if people are part of a group to which we also belong, they are far more likely to influence us, on both easy and hard questions.36 
My ultimate goal is to see how these points bear on the behavior of those involved in making, enforcing, and interpreting law. But let us begin by reviewing some classic studies. 
In the 1930s, the psychologist Muzafer Sherif conducted some simple experiments on sensory perception.37 Subjects were placed in a very dark room and a small pinpoint of light was positioned at some distance in front of them. Because of a perceptual illusion, the light, which was actually stationary, appeared to move. On each of several trials, Sherif asked people to estimate the distance that the light had moved. When polled individually, subjects did not agree with one another, and their answers varied from one trial to another. This is not surprising; because the light did not move, any judgment about distance was a stab in the dark. But Sherif found some striking results when subjects were 33 See p. below. 34 See p. below. Note a parallel finding: A minority is especially likely to have influence if it consists of more than one person and if all members of the minority group are in basic agreement. See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 81-82 (1999). 35 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What to think By Knowing Who You Are: Self-Categorization and he Nature of Norm Formation, Conformity, and Group Polarization, 29 British J. Soc. Psych. 97 (1990). Group membership and self-categorization are emphasized in John Turner et al., Rediscovering the Social Group: A Self-Categorization Theory 42-67 (1987). 36 Dominic Abrams et al., supra note, at 97-110. 37 Muzafer Sherif, An Experimental Approach to the Study of Attitudes, 1 Sociometry 90 (1937). A good outline can be found in Lee Ross and Richard Nisbet, The Person and the Situation 28-30 (1991). asked to act in small groups. Here the individual judgments converged and a group norm, establishing the right distance, quickly developed. Indeed, the norm remained stable within groups across different trials, thus leading to a situation in which different groups made, and were committed to, quite different judgments.38 There is an important clue here about how similar groups, indeed similar nations, can converge on very different beliefs and actions simply because of modest and even arbitrary variations in starting points. 
When Sherif added a confederate—his own ally, unbeknownst to subjects—something else happened.39 The judgment of the confederate, typically much higher or much lower than those made by individual subjects, helped produced correspondingly higher or lower judgments within the group. The large lesson is that at least in cases involving difficult questions of fact, judgments “could be imposed by an individual who had no coercive power and no special claim to expertise, only a willingness to be consistent and unwavering in the face of others’ uncertainty.”40 Perhaps more remarkable still, the group’s judgments became thoroughly internalized, so that subjects would adhere to them even when reporting on their own, even a year later, and even when participating in new groups whose members offered different judgments.41 The initial judgments were also found to have effects across “generations.” In an experiment in which fresh subjects were introduced and others retired, so that eventually all participants were new to the situation, the original group judgment tended to stick, even after the person who was originally responsible for it had been long gone.42 
What accounts for these results? The most obvious answer points to the informational influences produced by other people’s judgments. After all, the apparent movements are a perceptual illusion, and the system of perception does not readily assign distances to those movements. In those circumstances, people are especially likely to be swayed by a confident and consistent group member. This finding has implications outside of the laboratory and for classrooms, courtrooms, bureaucracies, and legislatures. If uninformed people are trying to decide whether global warming is a serious problem, or whether they should be 38 Id. at 29. 39 Id. 40 Id. 41 Id. 42 Id. at 29-30. concerned about existing levels of arsenic in drinking water, they are likely to be responsive to the views of confident and consistent others.43 
What is true for factual issues is true for moral, political, and legal issues as well. Suppose that a group of legislators is trying to decide how to handle a highly technical issue. If a “confederate” is planted among the group, showing considerable confidence, she is highly likely to be able to move the group in his preferred direction. So too if she is not a confederate at all, but simply an ordinary legislator with great confidence on the issue at hand. If judges are trying to resolve a complex issue on which they lack certainty, they too are vulnerable to conformity effects.44 And for judicial panels as well, Sherif-type effects can be expected on technical matters if one judge is confident and seems expert. The problem is that the so-called specialists may have biases and agendas of their own, leading to large errors. Note that there is an important qualification to these claims, to which I will return: Sherif’s conformity findings significantly decrease if the experimenter uses a confederate whose membership in a different social group is made salient to subjects.45 
But what if perception does provide reliable guidance? What if people have good reason to know the right answer? The leading experiments, conducted by Solomon Asch, explored whether people would be willing to overlook the apparently unambiguous evidence of their own senses.46 In these experiments, the subject was placed into a group of seven to nine people who seemed to be other subjects in the experiment but who were actually Asch’s confederates. The simple task was to “match” a particular line, shown on a large white card, to one of the three “comparison lines” that was identical to it in length. The two nonmatching lines were substantially different, with the differential varying from an inch and three quarters to three quarters of an inch. 43 See the discussion of authority in Robert Cialdini, Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion 20836 (1993). For evidence that minority views can be influential if they are held by consistent, confident people, see Robert Bray et al., Social Influence By Group Members With Minority Opinions, 43 J Personality and Social Psych. 78 (1982). 44 See section below. 45 Abrams, supra note, at 99-104. 46 See the overview in Solomon Asch, Opinions and Social Pressure, in Readings About the Social Animal 13 (Elliott Aronson ed. 1995). 
In the first two rounds of the Asch experiments, everyone agrees about the right answer. “The discriminations are simple; each individual monotonously calls out the same judgment.”47 But “suddenly this harmony is disturbed at the third round.”48 All other group members make what is obviously, to the subject and to any reasonable person, a clear error, matching the line at issue to one that is conspicuously longer or shorter. In these circumstances, the subject, in all cases showing initial confusion and disbelief at the apparent mistakes of others, has a choice: He can maintain his independent judgment or instead accept the view of the unanimous majority. A large number of people end up yielding at least once in a series of trials. When asked to decide on their own, subjects erred less than 1% of the time; but in rounds in which group pressure supported the incorrect answer, subjects erred 36.8% of the time.49 Indeed, in a series of twelve questions, no less than 70% of subjects went along with the group, and defied the evidence of their own senses, at least once.50 Conformity experiments of this kind have now produced 133 total sets of results from seventeen countries, including Zaire, Germany, France, Japan, Lebanon, and Kuwait.51 A meta-analysis of these studies uncovers a variety of refinements on Asch’s basic findings, but his basic conclusion has held up. For all results, the mean percentage error is 29%.52 People in some nations, with “conformist” cultures, do err more than people in other nations, with more “individualist” cultures.53 The variations are real, but the overall pattern of errors—with subjects conforming between 20% and 40% of the time—does not show huge differences across nations. 
Note that Asch’s findings contain two conflicting lessons. First, a significant number of people are independent all or much of the time. About 25% of people are consistently independent,54 and about two-thirds of total individual answers do not conform. Hence “there is evidence of extreme individual differences” in susceptibility to group influences, with some subjects remaining completely independent, and others “going with the majority without exception.”55 While independent subjects “present a striking spectacle to an 47 Solomon Asch, Social Psychology 453 (1952). 48 Asch, Opinion and Social Pressures, supra note, at 13. 49 Id. at 16. 50 Id. 51 See Rod Bond and Peter Smith, Culture and Conformity: A Meta-Analysis of Studies Using Asch’s Line Judgment Task, 119 Psych. Bulletin 111, 116 (1996). 52 Id. at 118. 53 Id. at 128. 54 Ronald Friend et al., A Puzzling Misinterpretation of the Asch “Conformity” Study, 20 European J of Social Psych 29, 37 (1990). 55 Solomon Asch, Social Psychology, supra note, at 457-58. observer,” giving “the appearance of being unshakable,”56 other people show a great deal of anxiety and confusion.57 Second, most subjects, at least some of the time, are willing to yield to the group even on an apparently easy question on which they have direct and unambiguous evidence. For present purposes, the latter finding is the most important. 
Why do people sometimes ignore the evidence of their own senses? The two principal explanations involve information and peer pressure. Some of Asch’s subjects seem to have thought that the unanimous confederates must be right; but other people, though believing that group members were unaccountably mistaken, were unwilling to make, in public, what those members would see as an error. In Asch’s own studies, several conformists said, in private interviews, that their own opinions must have been wrong58—a point that suggests that information, rather than peer pressure, is what was moving them.59 This informational account is strengthened by one study in which people recorded their answers anonymously but gave nearly as many wrong answers as they had under Asch’s own conditions.60 A similar study finds that conformity is not lower when the subject’s response is unavailable to the majority.61 On the other hand, these are unusual results, and experimenters generally find significantly reduced error, in the same basic circumstances as Asch’s experiments, when the subject is asked to give a purely private answer.62 In the same way, easily identifiable conformity or deviation has been found to produce higher conformity.63 These findings suggest that peer pressure matters as well. 
Asch’s own conclusion was that his results raised the possibility that “the social process is polluted” by the “dominance of conformity.”64 He added, “That we have found the tendency to conformity in our society so strong that reasonably intelligent and well-meaning young people are willing to call white 56 Id. at 466. 57 Id. at 470. 58 See Asch, supra. 59 It would be possible to question this explanation, however, on the ground that some of these conformists might have been embarrassed to admit that they were vulnerable to peer influence, entirely apart from a belief that the peers might have been right. 60 See Robert Shiller, Irrational Exuberance 149-50 (2000). 61 Bond and Smith, supra note, at 124. 62 See Aronson, supra note, at 23-24. 63 See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 66 (1999). 64 Asch, supra note, at 21. black is a matter of concern.”65 As I have noted, Asch’s experiments produce broadly similar findings across nations, and so in Asch’s sentence just quoted, the word “society” could well be replaced with the word “world.” But I want to stress another point here: Many people are not willing to disclose their own information to the group, even though it is in the group’s interest, most of the time, to learn what it is known or thought by individual members. To see this point, imagine a group almost all of whose members believe something to be true even though it is false. Imagine too that one member of the group, or a very few members of the group, know the truth. Are they likely to correct the dominant view? If Asch’s findings generalize, the answer is that they may not be. They are not reticent because they are irrational. They are making is a perfectly sensible response to the simple fact that the dominant view is otherwise—a fact that suggests either that the small minority is wrong or that they are likely to risk their own reputations if they insist that they are right. As we shall see, Asch’s findings help explain why groups can end up making unfortunate and even selfdestructive decisions. 
Would those findings apply to judgments about morality, policy, and law? It seems jarring to think that people would yield to a unanimous group when the question involves a moral, political, or legal issue on which they have great confidence. But if Asch is correct, such yielding should be expected, at least some of the time. We will find powerful evidence that this happens within federal courts of appeals.66 The deadening effect of public opinion was of course a central concern of John Stuart Mill, who insisted that protection “against the tyranny of the magistrate is not enough,” and that it was also important to protect “against the tyranny of the prevailing opinion and feeling; against the tendency of society to impose, by other mans than civil penalties, its own ideas and practices as rules of conduct on those who dissent from them . . .”67 Mill’s focus here is on the adverse effects of coerced conformity not only on the individuals who are thus tyrannized, but also on society itself, which is deprived of important information.68 65 Id. 66 See below. 67 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, in John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, On Liberty, Considerations on Representative Government 73 (H.B. Acton ed. 1972). 68 See id. at 72-76. 
What factors increase or decrease conformity? Consistent with Sherif’s findings, people are less likely to conform if they have high social status or are extremely confident about their own views.69 They are more likely to conform if the task is difficult or if they are frightened.70 Consider also the following: different ways.71 When people stand to make money if they are right, the rate of conformity is significantly decreased in the same basic condition as the Asch experiments, if the task is easy. People are less willing to follow group members when they stand to profit from a correct answer. But there is a striking difference when the experiments are altered to make the underlying task difficult. In that event, a financial incentive, rewarding correct answers, actually increases conformity. People are more willing to follow to crowd when they stand to profit from a correct answer if the question is hard. Perhaps most strikingly, the level of conformity is about the same, when financial incentives were absent, in lowdifficulty and high-difficulty tasks—but the introduction of financial rewards splits the results on those tasks dramatically apart, with significantly decreased conformity for low-difficulty tasks and significantly-increased conformity for high-difficulty tasks.72 
These results have simple explanations. A certain number of people, in the Asch experiments, actually know the right answer, and give conforming answers only because it is not worthwhile to reject the shared view of others in public. But when a financial incentive is offered, peer pressure is outweighed by the possibility of material gain. The simple lesson here is that an economic reward can counteract the effects of social pressures. By contrast, difficult tasks leave people with a great deal of uncertainty about whether they are right. In such circumstances, people are all the more likely to give weight to the views of others, simply because those views are the most reliable source of information. Consider in this regard the parallel finding that people’s confidence in their own judgments is directly related to the confidence shown by the experimenter’s confederates.73 When the confederates act with confidence and enthusiasm, 69 See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 66 (1999). 70 Id. 71 See Robert Baron et al., The Forgotten Variable in Conformity Research: Impact of Task Importance on Social Influence, 71 J Personality and Social Psych. 915 (1996). 72 Id. at 923. 73 Id. subjects also show heightened confidence in their judgments, even when they were simply following the crowd. Consider also the general claim that imitation of most other people can operate as a kind of fast and frugal heuristic, one that works well for many creatures, including human beings, in a wide variety of settings.74 Like most heuristics, the imitation heuristic, while generally sensible and often the best available, also produces errors in many situations.75 
There is a disturbing implication. A “majority consensus” is “often capable of misleading individuals into inaccurate, irrational, or unjustified judgments.” Such a consensus “can also produce heightened confidence in such judgments as well.” 76 It follows that “so long as the judgments are difficult or ambiguous, and the influencing agents are united and confident, increasing the importance of accuracy will heighten confidence as well as conformity—a dangerous combination.”77 The point very much bears on the sources of unjustified extremism, especially under circumstances in which countervailing information is unavailable.78 The same point helps explain group influences within the federal courts.79 
confederates, unanimously making the erroneous decision, mattered only up to a number of three; increases from that point had little effect.80 Using one confederate did not increase subjects’ errors at all; using two confederates increased errors to 13.6%; and using from three confederates increased error to 31.8%, not substantially different from the level that emerged from further increases in group size. But Asch’s own findings appear unusual on this count. Subsequent studies have found that, contrary to Asch’s own findings, increases in the size of the group of confederates usually do increase conformity.81 
More significantly, a modest variation in the experimental conditions made all the difference: the existence of at least one compatriot, or voice of sanity, dramatically reduced both conformity and error. When one confederate 74 See Daniel Goldstein et al., Why and When Do Simple Heuristics Work?, in Bounded Rationality, supra note, at 174. 75 See id. 76 Baron et al., supra note, at 925. 77 Id. at 925. 78 See Hardin, supra note. 79 See below. 80 Asch, supra note. 81 Baron, supra note, at 119-20. made a correct match, errors were reduced by three-quarters, even if there was a strong majority the other way.82 There is a clear implication here: If a group is embarking on an unfortunate course of action, a single dissenter might be able to turn it around, by energizing ambivalent group members who would otherwise follow the crowd. It follows that affective ties among members, making even a single dissent less likely, might well undermine the performance of groups and institutions. Consider here a study of the performance of investment clubs— small groups of people who pool their money to make joint decisions about stock market investments.83 The worst-performing clubs were built on affective ties and primarily social; the best-performing clubs limited social connections and were focused on increasing returns. Dissent was far more frequent in the highperforming clubs. The low performers usually had unanimous votes, with little open debate. The problem is that the votes in low performing groups were “cast to build social cohesion rather than to make the best financial choice.”84 In short, conformity resulted in significantly lower returns. 
experimenters’ confederates and in particular on whether the subject considers himself part of the same group in which those confederates fall. If the subject identified himself as a member of a different group from the majority, the conformity effect is greatly reduced.85 People are especially likely to conform when the group consists of people whom subjects like or admire, or otherwise identify with.86 The general point explains why group membership is often emphasized by those who seek to increase or decrease the influence of a certain point of view. Perhaps an advocate can be discredited, without the relevant group, by showing that he is a “conservative” or a “liberal,” prone to offer unacceptable views. 
Thus conformity—and hence error—is dramatically increased, in public statements, when the subject perceives himself as part of a reasonably discrete 82 Id. at 18. The finding here is reminiscent of the tale of The Emperor’s New Clothes, in which a single voice of sanity was necessary and sufficient to expose the truth. See Hans Christian Anderson, The Emperor’s New Suit, in Hans Christian Anderson, Shorter Tales (Jean Hersholt trans. 1948; originally published 1837). 83 Brooke Harrington, Cohesion, Conflict and Group Demography (unpublished manuscript 2000), 84 Id. 85 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What To Think By Knowing Who You Are, 29 Brit J Soc Psych 97, 104-110 (1990). 86 Baron et al., supra, at 66. The point is stressed at various places in Turner, supra note; see, e.g., pp. 151-170. group that includes the experimenter’s confederates (all, like himself, psychology majors, for example).87 By contrast, conformity is dramatically decreased, and hence error is also dramatically decreased, in public statements when the subject perceives himself as in a different group from the experimenter’s confederates (all but himself ancient history majors, for example).88 Notably, private opinions, expressed anonymously afterwards, were about the same whether or not the subject perceived himself as a member of the same group as others in the experiment. And people who thought that they were members of the same group as the experimenter’s confederates gave far more accurate answers, and far less conforming answers, when they were speaking privately.89 In the real world, would-be dissenters might silence themselves partly when and because they trust group members to be right, partly because they do not want to risk the opprobrium of like-minded others, and partly because they fear that they will, through their dissent, weaken the effectiveness and reputation of the group to which they belong. There is a large lesson here. Publicly expressed statements, showing agreement with a majority view, may be both wrong and insincere, especially when relevant speakers identify themselves as members of the same group as the majority.90 The finding of heightened conformity is linked with evidence of poor performance by groups whose members are connected by 87 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What To Think By Knowing Who You Are, 29 Brit J Soc Psych 97, 106-08 (1990). 88 Id. 89 See Abrams et al., supra note, at 108. By contrast, people who thought that they were members of a different group actually gave more accurate, nonconforming answers when speaking publicly, which creates an interesting puzzle: Why was there more accuracy in public than in private statements? The puzzle is solved if we consider the likelihood that subjects could consider it an affirmative good to disagree with people from another group (even if they secretly suspected that those people might be right). In the real world, this effect may well be heightened when people are asked whether they agree with opponents or antagonists; they might well say “no” even when the answer is “yes,” simply because agreement carries costs, either to reputation or to self-conception. 
There is a noteworthy finding about the nature of minority influences: They have a larger impact on people’s privately expressed views than on their publicly expressed views. See Baron et al., supra note, at 79-80. For example, minority members who express enthusiasm for gay rights, or opposition to gay rights, affect anonymous opinions more than publicly stated opinions. See id. at 80. This point has obvious implications for the effects of secret votes and ballots. 90 Consider the fact that the least conformity, and the greatest accuracy, was found when people who thought of themselves in a different group were speaking publicly. At the same time, the largest number of conforming, inaccurate responses came when people thought of themselves in the same group and were speaking publicly -- even though the number of inaccurate private responses in that experimental condition was not notably higher than in other conditions. See Abrams et al., supra note, at 108. arguments from both sides, and polarization followed this presentation, as it has elsewhere.355 Notice in this regard that for polarization hypothesis to hold, it is not necessary to know whether judges spend a great deal of time offering reasons to one another. Mere exposure to a conclusion is enough.356 A system of simple votes, unaccompanied by reasons, should incline judges to polarize. Of course reasons, if they are good ones, are likely to make those votes especially persuasive. 
like-minded judges go to extremes, should we be troubled? Is it good if a large effect is found from a single judge from a different party? More generally: Is there reason to attempt to ensure diversity on the federal courts? To promote a degree of diversity on panels? There is a widespread view that judges appointed by presidents of different political parties are not fundamentally different and that once on the bench, judges frequently surprise those who nominated them.357 The view is not entirely baseless, but it is misleading. Some appointees do disappoint the Presidents who nominated them, but the availability heuristic should not fool us into thinking that these examples are typical. Judges appointed by Republican presidents are quite different from judges appointed by Democratic presidents. “Partisanship clearly affects how appellate courts review agency discretion.”358 
But it seems difficult to evaluate the underlying issues without taking a stand on the merits—without knowing what we want judges to do. Suppose that three Republican judges are especially likely to uphold criminal convictions, and that three Democratic judges are especially likely to reverse those convictions. At first glance, one or the other is troubling only if we know whether we approve of one or another set of results. In the punitive damage study discussed above, the movement toward increased awards might be something to celebrate, not to deplore, if we conclude that the median of predeliberation awards is too low and that the increase, produced by group discussion, ensures more sensible awards. And if a view about what judges should do is the only possible basis for evaluation, we might conclude that those who prefer judges of a particular party should seek judges of that party, and that group influences are essentially beside the point. 355 Schkade, supra note, at 1150 and 1150 n. 44. 356 See Robert Baron et al., supra note, at 74. 357 See, e.g., Jeffrey Rosen, New York Times Magazine; others. 358 See Revesz, supra note, at 2175. 
But the conclusion is too strong. In some cases, the law, properly interpreted, really does argue strongly for one or another view. The existence of diversity on a panel is likely to bring that fact to light and perhaps to move the panel’s decision in the direction of what the law requires. The existence of politically diverse judges, and of a potential dissent, increases the probability that the law will be followed. The Chevron study, referred to above, strongly supports this point.359 The presence of a potential dissenter—in the form of a judge appointed by a president from another political party—creates a possible whistleblower who can reduce the likelihood of an incorrect or lawless decision.360 Through an appreciation of the nature of group influences, we can see the wisdom in an old idea: A decision is more likely to be right, and less likely to be political in a pejorative sense, if it is supported by judges with different predilections. 
There is a further point. Suppose that in many areas, it is not clear, in advance, whether the appointees of Democratic or Republican presidents are correct. Suppose that we are genuinely uncertain. If so, there is reason to favor a situation in which the legal system has both, simply on the ground that through that route, more (reasonable) opinions are likely to be heard. And if we are genuinely uncertain, there is reason to favor a mix of views merely by virtue of its moderating effect. In the face of uncertainty, sensible people choose between the poles.361 
by independent regulatory commissions, such as the Federal Trade Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the National Labor Relations Board, and the Federal Communications Commission. Much of the time, such agencies act through adjudication. They function in the same fashion as federal courts. And under federal statutes, Congress has attempted to ensure that these agencies are not monopolized by either Democrats or Republicans. The law requires that no more than a bare majority of agency members may be from a single party.362 An understanding of group influences helps explain this requirement. An independent agency that is all-Democratic, or all-Republican, might move toward an extreme position, indeed a position that is more extreme than that of 359 See Cross and Tiller, supra note. 360 This is the explanation in Cross and Tiller, supra note, at 2173. 361 For evidence, see Mark Kelman et al., Context-Independence in Legal Decisionmaking, in Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). 362 See, e.g., 15 U.S.C. § 78d (1994). the median Democrat or Republican, and possibly more extreme than that of any agency official standing alone. A requirement of bipartisan membership can operate as a check against movements of this kind. Congress was apparently aware of this general point. Closely attuned to the policymaking functions of the relevant institutions, it was careful to provide a safeguard against extreme movements. 
Why do we fail to create similar safeguards for courts? Part of the answer must lie in a belief that unlike heads of independent regulatory commissions, judges are not policymakers. Their duty is to follow the law, not to make policy. An attempt to ensure bipartisan composition would seem inconsistent with the commitment to this belief. But the evidence I have discussed shows judges are policymakers of an important kind, and that their political commitments very much influence their votes. In principle, there is good reason to attempt to ensure a mix of perspectives within courts of appeals. 
Of course the idea of diversity, or of a mix of perspectives, is hardly selfdefining. It would not be appropriate to say that the federal judges should include people who refuse to obey the Constitution, or who refuse to exercise the power of judicial review, or who think that the Constitution allows suppression of political dissent and racial segregation. Here as elsewhere, the domain of appropriate diversity is limited. What is necessary is reasonable diversity, or diversity of reasonable views, and not diversity as such. People can certainly disagree about what reasonable diversity entails in this context. All that I am suggesting here is that there is such a thing as reasonable diversity, and that it is important to ensure that judges, no less than anyone else, are exposed to it, and not merely through the arguments of advocates. 
issue: the legitimate role of the Senate in giving “advice and consent” to presidential appointments to the federal judiciary. Above all, an understanding of social influences suggests that the Senate has a responsibility to exercise its constitutional authority in order to ensure a reasonable diversity of view. The Constitution’s history fully contemplates an independent role for the Senate in the selection of Supreme Court Justices.363 That independent role certainly authorizes the Senate to consider the general approach, and likely pattern of votes, of potential judges. There can be no doubt that the President considers the 363 See David A. Strauss and Cass R. Sunstein, The Senate, the Constitution, and the Confirmation Process, 101 Yale L.J. 1491 (1992). general approach of his nominees; the Senate is entitled to do so as well. Under good conditions, these simultaneous powers would bring about a healthy form of checks and balances, permitting each branch to counter the other. Indeed, that system is part and parcel of social deliberation about the direction of the federal judiciary. 
Why might this view be rejected? It could be urged that there is only one legitimate approach to constitutional or statutory interpretation—that, for example, some version of originalism or textualism is the only such approach, and that anyone who rejects that view is unreasonable. For true believers, it is pointless to argue for diverse views.364 Diversity is not necessary, or even valuable, if we already know what should be done, and if competing views would simply cloud the issue. (In a scientific dispute, it is not helpful to include those who believe that the earth is flat.) Or it might be urged that a deferential role for the Senate, combined with natural political competition and cycles, will produce a sensible mix over time. I do not deny this possibility. My only suggestions are that a high degree of diversity on the federal judiciary is desirable, that the Senate is entitled to pursue diversity, and that without such diversity, judicial panels are will inevitably go in unjustified directions. 
Countless educational institutions pursue the goal of diversity. Most of America’s large private and public institutions seek a wide range of views, faculty, and students. There are some prominent exceptions; some institutions pride themselves on a high degree of homogeneity.365 And here as elsewhere, the idea of diversity needs to be clarified. Colleges and universities do not make special efforts to include students who collect Britney Spears memorabilia, hate America, smell bad, or have low SAT’s. Such institutions are committed to diversity, but only to a certain degree and of a certain kind. It remains possible to urge, as many do, that they give excessive attention to diversity of some kinds and insufficient attention to diversity of other kinds. The only point I am making here is that they tend to be committed to diversity of a recognizable sort. 364 Note, however, that even if it would be appropriate for all judges to share a certain approach, it is also desirable to have diversity with respect to the application of that approach. Textualists do not all agree with one another; there is internal diversity in the world of originalism. Diversity is appropriate here to ensure an airing of reasonable views. 365 See the discussion of Brigham Young University in Martha Nussbaum, Cultivating Humanity (1999). 
There are many reasons for this commitment. One involves simple market pressures; a school that has different sorts of students is more likely to be able to attract good faculty and good students.366 Of course people’s preferences and values vary, and some people want to go to places that are relatively homogeneous. But this seems to be the exception rather than the rule.367 And there is another justification for diversity, one that has received considerable attention within courts368 and that is closely related to my topic here. The idea is that education is simply likely to be better if the school has people with different views, perspectives, and experiences. In the context of affirmative action, this justification was approved in Justice Powell’s decisive opinion in the Bakke case,369 an opinion that has the unusual distinction of having settled, for a period of decades, the constitutionality of affirmative action in higher education without having been embraced by any other justice on the Supreme Court. My goal here is to offer a qualified defense of Justice Powell’s view. I urge that in some educational settings, racial diversity is important for ensuring a broad array of experiences and ideas, and that in those settings, narrowly tailored affirmative action programs should be constitutionally permissible. 
Justice Powell insisted that a diverse student body is a constitutionally acceptable goal for higher education.370 The central reason is that universities should be allowed to ensure a “robust exchange of ideas,” an interest connected with the first amendment itself.371 Justice Powell acknowledged that this interest seemed strongest in the context of undergraduate education, where views are formed on a large number of topics. But even in a medical school, “the contribution of diversity is substantial.”372 A medical student having a particular background, including a particular ethnic background, “may bring to a 366 Note that this justification is most unlikely to be legitimate as a constitutional matter. A public institution is not permitted to justify discrimination by claiming, or even showing, that many of its constituents call for it. Brown v. Bd. of Education itself requires that conclusion; see also Palmore v. Sadoti, 466 US 429, 441 (1984), suggesting that private “biases may be outside the reach of the law, but the law cannot, directly or indirectly, give them effect.” 367 Recall the prior qualifications about the definition of diversity. Even apparently diverse institutions are homogenous in certain ways and along certain dimensions, and this is what students and faculty seem to prefer. 368 See Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F.3d 932, 944 (5th Cir. 1996); Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th Cir. 2002). 369 See 438 US 265 (1978 (opinion of Powell, J.). 370 438 US at 311-12. 371 Id. at 313. 372 Id. professional school of medicine experiences, outlooks, and ideas that enrich the training of its student body and better equip its graduates to render with understanding their vital service to humanity.”373 Justice Powell also emphasized that doctors “serve a heterogeneous population,” and suggested that graduate admissions decisions are concerned with contributions that follow formal education.374 
Thus Justice Powell concluded that the crucial question was whether a race-conscious admission program, giving benefits to people because they are members of racial minority groups, was a necessary means of promoting the legitimate goal of diversity. Here he reached his famous conclusion that racial or ethnic background could be a “plus” in the admissions decision, though quotas would not be allowed.375 For Justice Powell, a legitimate admissions program should be “flexible enough to consider all pertinent elements of diversity in light of the particular qualifications of the applicant, and to place them on the same footing for consideration, although not necessarily according to them the same weight.”376 Thus it would be acceptable to promote “beneficial educational pluralism” by considering a range of factors, including “demonstrated compassion, a history of overcoming disadvantage, ability to communicate with the poor, or other qualifications deemed important.”377 
My central concern here is the principal378 basis for Justice Powell’s conclusion: the value of ensuring a “robust exchange of ideas” in the classroom, and the legitimacy of promoting racial diversity in order to ensure that exchange. To understand the contemporary relevance of Justice Powell’s opinion, it is necessary to outline the recent developments in the constitutional principles governing affirmative action programs. The Court has now settled on the view that affirmative action programs, like all other programs embodying racial discrimination, should be subject to “strict scrutiny” from courts, and invalidated unless they are the least restrictive means of achieving a compelling state 373 Id. at 314. 374 Id. 375 Id. at 316-320. 376 Id. at 317. 377 Id. 378 This is not the exclusive basis for Justice Powell’s opinion; he was also concerned with what will happen after graduation – with the possibility that members of minority groups will serve their communities, in a way that confers significant social benefits on populations that might otherwise be underserved. Id. For evidence that this does happen, see John Bowen and Derek Bok, The Shape of the River (1998). interest.379 It is also clear that past “societal discrimination,” meaning discrimination in the nation’s past, is not a legitimate basis for discrimination against whites.380 It is equally clear that narrow, remedial affirmative action programs are acceptable if they are specifically designed to correct for proven past discrimination by the institution that is acting affirmatively.381 
What remains unclear is when, if ever, a public institution is permitted to justify affirmative action by reference to “forward-looking” justifications, not involving a remedy for past discrimination.382 A state might, for example, try to defend affirmative action in hiring police by urging that a police force will simply be more effective if it contains African-Americans among others— especially in a community that contains people of multiple races.383 Justice Powell was really offering a similar claim about higher education: Whether or not a college or university has itself discriminated against African-Americans or others, it should permitted to discriminate in favor of them if it is doing so as a means of ensuring a “robust exchange of ideas.” But current justices have given conflicting signals about the legitimacy and strength of forward-looking justifications.384 379 See, e.g., City of Richmond v. Croson, 488 US 469 (1989); Adarand Constructors v. Pena, 515 US 200 (1995). 380 City of Richmond v. Croson, 488 US 469, 477 (1989). 381 United States v. Paradise, 480 US 149 (1987); Local No. 93, International Association of Firefighters v. Cleveland, 478 US 616 (1987). 382 For general discussion, see Kathleen M. Sullivan, Sins of Discrimination: Last Term's Affirmative Action Cases, 100 Harv. L. Rev. 78, 96 (1986): "Public and private employers might choose to implement affirmative action for many reasons other than to purge their own past sins of discrimination. The Jackson school board, for example, said it had done so in part to improve the quality of education in Jackson -- whether by improving black students' performance or by dispelling for black and white students alike any idea that white supremacy governs our social institutions. Other employers might advance different forward-looking reasons for affirmative action: improving their services to black constituencies, averting racial tension over the allocation of jobs in a community, or increasing the diversity of a work force, to name but a few examples. Or they might adopt affirmative action simply to eliminate from their operations all de facto embodiment of a system of racial caste. All of these reasons aspire to a racially integrated future, but none reduces to 'racial balancing for its own sake.'" 383 Id. 384 For one view, see Johnson v. Transportation Agency, 480 U.S. 616, 647 (1987) (Stevens, concurring): “Instead of retroactively scrutinizing his own or society's possible exclusions of minorities in the past to determine the outer limits of a valid affirmative-action program -- or indeed, any particular affirmative-action decision -- in many cases the employer will find it more appropriate to consider other legitimate reasons to give preferences to members of underrepresented groups. Statutes enacted for the benefit of minority groups should not block these forward-looking considerations.” For a contrasting view, see Justice O'Connor, in Metro 
There can be no doubt that universities are permitted to promote diversity and dissent by seeking a mix of faculty and students. Efforts of this kind are pervasive; this is what most admissions offices try to do. To be sure, some serious free speech issues might be raised if an admissions office discriminates in favor of, or against, particular points of view.385 But even if public institutions are barred from pursuing diversity of ideas by discriminating directly against some points of view, such institutions are surely permitted, without offending the first amendment, to seek a variety of backgrounds and experiences, in the hope that better discussions will result. If Justice Powell is right, affirmative action programs can be similarly justified. The simple idea here is that diverse populations are likely to increase the range of thoughts and perspectives, and to reduce the risks of conformity, cascades, and polarization associated with group influences.386 We have seen that on the judiciary, judges with diverse views can act as “whistleblowers,” correcting ill-considered views of the law. In educational institutions, a high degree of diversity, including racial diversity, often has the same effect. A racially uniform class is all too likely to polarize to an unjustified position, simply because students’ antecedent views are not subject to critical scrutiny. 
For example, we can easily imagine all-white classrooms, discussing the issue of racial profiling, in which the absence of racial diversity is a serious problem. Those who have not had bad experiences, as a result of such profiling, will lack crucial information. Return here to Justice O’Connor’s comments on Justice Marshall: “Justice Marshall brought a special perspective. . . . His was the mouth of a man who knew the anguish of the silenced and gave them a voice. . . . Broadcasting v. FCC, 497 US 547, 612 (1990), joined by Justices Rehnquist, Scalia, and Kennedy: “Modern equal protection has recognized only one [compelling state] interest: remedying the effects of racial discrimination. The interest in increasing the diversity of broadcast viewpoints is clearly not a compelling interest. It is simply too amorphous, too insubstantial, and too unrelated to any legitimate basis for employing racial classifications.” 385 I am unaware of any first amendment challenge to a university’s efforts to promote diversity by promoting a range of views, even though such efforts would necessarily involve discrimination against some views and in favor of others. But there are some hard questions lurking here. One set of questions involve the sheer difficulty of proof: In a case in which a student is or is not denied admission, the applicant’s political view will undoubtedly be one of a range of factors, and it will be hard to isolate, in a challenge, point of view as the decisive factor. In a case of discharge or suspension as a result of political view, there would indeed be a constitutional problem. See Pickering v. Bd. of Educ., 391 US 563, 568 (1968). 386 For supportive evidence, see Patricia Gurin, Reports Submitted on Behalf of the University of Michigan: the Compelling Need for Diversity in Higher Education, 5 Mich J Race & Law 363 (1999). I have been perhaps most personally affected by Justice Marshall as a raconteur . . . . Occasionally, at Conference meetings, I still catch myself looking expectantly for his raised brow and his twinkling eye, hoping to hear, just once more, another story that would, by and by, perhaps change the way I see the world.”387 What was true for Justice O’Connor is true for white students in many educational settings. In the context of racial profiling, and in many other imaginable cases, a degree of racial diversity is likely to bring to bear valuable information and perspectives. These may change how the group sees the world, whether or not it leads to a different conclusion on the merits. 
To say this is of course not to make the absurd claim that white people all agree with one another about racial profiling, or that African-Americans have the same experiences and opinions about that complex issue. And in light of the fact that members of all races contain people with a range of both favorable and unfavorable views about racial profiling, it would be possible to respond that any problem, if it exists, is not because the group is all-white, but if and because its members begin with a uniform view of racial profiling. And if this is so, what, if anything, is added by promoting diversity not of views but of racial background? The answer must be that African-Americans, by virtue of their experience, are able to add something to the discussion as such. And this seems far from implausible. If students need to know something about the magnitude and the experience of racial profiling, those who have been subject to such profiling will be able to offer novel insights. And if African-Americans do, in fact, have an unusually high degree of hostility to racial profiling, that is by itself a point worthwhile to know and to try to understand. So too if they do not show such hostility. Of course supplemental readings could be used to expose people to diverse views. The value of diversity lies not simply in learning about facts, but also in seeing a range of perspectives, including the emotions attached to them—and in being in the actual physical presence of those who have those perspectives, and perhaps cannot be easily dismissed. 
These points might be used by a purportedly nondiscriminatory institution to defend a set of policies designed to ensure a reasonable diversity of view in classroom discussions. Because of the importance of a wide range of ideas to the educational enterprise, the goal seems both legitimate and compelling. Are affirmative action programs the least restrictive means of promoting that goal? The answer depends on the nature of those programs. It is easy to imagine 387 See Sandra Day O’Connor, Thurgood Marshall: The Influence of a Reconteur, 44 Stan. L. Rev. 1217, 1217, 1220 (1992). cautious efforts, using race as a factor, in which the “least restrictive means” test is indeed satisfied.388 And that point is sufficient to suggest that Justice Powell’s approach is essentially correct. 
To be sure, the same arguments about the importance of diverse views might be enlisted very broadly, and in circumstances that might seem unattractive. Imagine, for example, an effort, by a mostly African-American university, to point to the need for diversity as a way of defending discrimination against African-Americans and in favor of whites. Such a university might claim that it wants significant representation by whites in order to reduce the risks from group influences and to improve the quality of discussion. It does indeed follow, from what I have said thus far, that this argument is legitimate. A classroom that is entirely African-American might well suffer from conformity effects and polarization; and a educational institution might want to correct the situation. If courts should be suspicious of the argument in this context, it is because they do not trust the sincerity of those who make it. Courts might believe that the reference to diversity is actually a pretext for an illicit discriminatory motive. But it is easy to imagine cases in which diversity is the real concern and no pretext is involved. 
There is a further complexity. Suppose that a university claims that it is pursuing the goal of high-quality education. Suppose that it insists that its admissions policies, which place a premium on many forms of diversity, are a legitimate means of pursuing that goal. Such a university might well be willing to discriminate in favor of members of racial minorities—and might well claim that this form of discrimination is part of the neutral pursuit of high-quality education. Is this illegitimate? Outside the context of affirmative action, the Court has come very close to holding that it is.389 In making decisions about child custody, courts are prohibited from taking account of the possible prejudice to be faced by children of racially mixed couples. The prohibition applies even if it is defended as part of a neutral mechanism for promoting the welfare of the child.390 A racially-based system of child custody cannot be justified on the ground that in light of existing social values, children do better in a family that is all-white or all-African-American. This decision suggests that an institution is not permitted to defend otherwise illegitimate discrimination by suggesting that it is 388 This was the conclusion of the court of appeals about the program used by the University of Michigan Law School. See Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th Cir. 2002). 389 See Palmore v. Sadoti, 466 US 429 (1984). 390 See id. neutrally pursuing a more abstract goal.391 But I am not claiming here that affirmative action fails to count as discrimination. I am urging instead that affirmative action can be adequately justified, in some contexts, as a way of ensuring that educational institutions do what they are supposed to do. 
It is important to emphasize the narrowness of the argument I am making. In some cases, racial diversity is important for improving the educational process within the relevant school. But in some cases, the claim seems extremely weak. Would a mathematics class, or a course in physics, be improved if it contained a degree of racial diversity? This seems unlikely. In principle, I do not believe that courts should use the Constitution to scrutinize affirmative action programs with great care.392 But the law is otherwise, and if courts are going to do so, they should not offer a blanket ruling for or against a diversity rationale in higher education. They should accept that rationale in the context of undergraduate education, but not for programs for which racial diversity is not necessary to promote a “robust exchange of ideas.” In the context of law school, the centrality of racial issues to important aspects of legal education should be enough to allow narrowly tailored affirmative action programs to survive constitutional scrutiny.393 
Human beings pay close attention to the informational and reputational signals sent by others. These signals produce conformity, even in cases in which many people have reason to believe, on the basis of their private information, that others are mistaken or worse. Informational and reputational influences also produce cascades, in which people do not rely on, and fail to disclose, the information that they themselves have. Cascades and errors occur spontaneously when people rationally take account of the decisions and statements of their predecessors. Errors are magnified when people are rewarded for conformity— and minimized when people are rewarded, not for correct individual decisions, but for correct decisions at the group level. 
Cascades, like conformity, are not a problem in themselves. Sometimes cascades produce good outcomes, at least compared to a situation in which 391 On some of the complexities here, see David A. Strauss, The Myth of Colorblindness, 1986 Supreme Court Review 99. 392 See Cass R. Sunstein, Designing Democracy: What Constitutions Do (2002). 393 See Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th Cir. 2002). people rely solely on their own information. The real problem is that when cascades are occurring, people do not disclose information from which others would benefit. The result is that both individuals and groups can blunder, sometimes catastrophically. Institutions involved in making, enforcing, and interpreting the law are subject to conformity and cascade effects. The executive branch has been shown to blunder as a result.394 We have seen that within courts, precedential cascades are highly likely, especially in complex areas; and in such areas, cascades tend to be both self-perpetuating and self-insulating. 
The general lesson is clear. It is extremely important to devise institutions that attempt to promote disclosure of private views and private information. Institutions that reward conformity are prone to failure to the extent that they do not do that; institutions are far more likely to prosper if they create a norm of openness and dissent. The point very much bears on the risks of group polarization. Groups of like-minded people are likely to go to extremes, simply because of limited argument pools and reputational considerations. The danger is that the resulting movements in opinion will be unjustified. It is extremely important to create “circuit breakers”395 and to devise institutional arrangements that will serve to counteract movements that could not be supported if people had a wider range of information. 
These points have implications for numerous issues in law and policy. I have focused on a small subset of those issues here. We have seen that an appreciation of social influences casts new light on the expressive function of law. Simply by virtue of what it says, and even if it is rarely enforced, law can affect the behavior of those who are unsure whether to engage in certain conduct—and also the behavior of those who are unsure whether to challenge those who engage in that conduct. Bans on smoking in public and on sexual harassment are cases in point. Law’s effectiveness, in this regard, lies in its power to give a signal about what it is right to do, and also to dissipate pluralistic ignorance, by providing information about what other people think that it is right to do. A legal enactment can operate in the same fashion as Asch’s confederates and Milgram’s experimenter. Because people care about the reactions of others, law’s expressive function will be heightened if the relevant conduct is visible; bans on smoking in public places are an obvious example. For the same reason, that function will be weakened if prospective law-breakers live in a supportive subcommunity; consider bans on the use of narcotics. With an 394 See Janis, Groupthink, supra note, for a collection of examples. 395 See Eric Posner, supra note. understanding of social influences, we can therefore make some predictions about when law is likely to be effective merely by virtue of what it says—and about when law will be ineffective unless it is accompanied by vigorous enforcement activity. 
I have suggested that many of the Constitution’s institutions serve to reduce the likelihood of bad consequences from conformity, cascades, and group polarization. Such institutions increase the likelihood that important information, and alternative points of view, will receive a public airing. The system of bicameralism is the most obvious example, producing a system in which lawmaking is done by two institutions with different cultures, thus creating a potential check on unjustified movements. I have also urged that the framers’ most distinctive contribution consisted not in their endorsement of deliberative democracy, which was uncontroversial, but in their commitment to heterogeneity in government, seeing (in Hamilton’s words) the “jarring of parties” as a method for “promoting deliberation.” 
More controversially, I have suggested that an understanding of social influences suggests the importance of ensuring a high degree of diversity on the federal bench. It is foolish to pretend that Republican appointees do not, as a class, differ from Democratic appointees; and we have reason to appreciate the value, on any panel, of having a potential “whistleblower,” in the form of one judge of a different party from the other two. Of course judges are rarely lawless, but a group of like-minded judges is prone to go to extremes. An appreciation of social influences on belief and behavior also supports the legitimacy of efforts to promote racial diversity in higher education, at least where such diversity is likely to improve learning. 
Even if occasionally alarming, much of the behavior discussed here attests to the reasonableness and good sense of ordinary people. In the face of doubt, we do well to pay attention to the views of others.396 After all, they might know better than we do. It is prudent to be cautious about challenging other people, not only because they might be right, but also because people do not always like to be challenged. Even in the most freedom-loving societies, people dissent at their peril. A reluctance to disagree is not merely prudent; it is often courteous too. But conformity creates serious dangers. Behavior that is sensible, prudent, 396 Note the suggestion, in Goldstein et al., supra note, at 174, that conformity operates as a sensible heuristic, one that often works well but that sometimes misfires, see Henrich et al., supra note, at 356–57. and courteous is likely to lead individuals and societies to blunder, simply because people fail to learn about facts or opinions from which they would benefit. 
It is usual to think that those who conform are serving the general interest and that dissenters are antisocial, even selfish. In a way this is true. In some settings, conformists strengthen social bonds, whereas dissenters imperil them, or at least introduce tension. But in an important respect, the usual thought has things backwards. Much of the time, it is in the individual’s interest to follow the crowd, but in the social interest for the individual to say and do what he thinks best. Well-functioning systems of law and politics take steps to discourage conformity and to promote dissent, partly to protect the rights of dissenters, but mostly to protect interests of their own. 
University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A AThird Way@ (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of Technological Change (June 1999) David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics (November 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 1999) David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts (January 2000) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost (February 2000) David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift (February 2000) Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 2000) 2000) 2000, revised May 2002) 
Position (August 2000) 
Internet (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 161 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, forthcoming Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002) Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002) Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as Insurer? (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 
