University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2002

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory
law (with notes on interpretive theory)
Cass R. Sunstein

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory law (with notes on interpretive theory)" ( John M. Olin Program
in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 158, 2002).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO.  158 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
Avoiding Absurdity? 
A New Canon in Regulatory Law 
(with Notes on Interpretive Theory) 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
THE LA W S CHOOL 
THE U NIV ERSITY OF CHICA GO 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: 
http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
 
The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=323662

Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law 

 

 
 

Cass R. Sunstein* 

A New Principle 

 
In the last two decades, federal courts have been developing a new and thus far unacknowledged 
canon  of  regulatory  law:  As  a  general  rule,  administrative  agencies  will  be  taken  to  have  the 
authority to interpret statutes so as to avoid absurd or patently unreasonable results, even if the 
interpretation is hard to square with the literal  language of the statute.  This canon authorizes 
agencies,  and  in  particular  agencies  that  regulate  the  environment,  far  more  flexibility  in  the 
interpretation of literal language  than courts are now permitted to have. My narrow goal in this 
Essay is to describe and to defend this canon. My broader goal is to use the canon as a basis for 
urging  that  contemporary  theories  about  interpretation  go  wrong  by  emphasizing  large  claims 
about democracy and legitimacy at the expense of an inquiry into the real-world capacities of our 
various institutions, including the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the federal 
courts. 
The  new  canon  has  old  roots  in  the  time-honored  idea  that  courts  will  not  construe 
 
statutes  to  produce  absurdity.1  But  that  notion  remains  highly  controversial,  at  least  in  some 
applications,2  in  part  because  of  a  belief  that  much  mischief  might  follow  if  courts  attempt  to 
avoid  what  they  consider  to  be  absurdity.  For  reasons  to  be  elaborated,  the  canon  that  I  am 
defending should be endorsed even by those who believe that courts have no business departing 
from  statutory  language.3  Compared  to  courts,  regulatory  agencies  have  a  high  degree  of 
specialized  competence    and  a  large  measure  of  political  accountability.  They  are  in  a  good 
position  to  know  if  a  departure  from  literal  language  will  unsettle  the  regulatory  scheme. 
Because of these characteristics, courts should allow agencies to avoid absurdity, in the face of 
literal text, even in cases in which courts should not themselves exercise this power–and to allow 
agencies more freedom to assume this canon than courts. 
I  will  also  connect  the  new  canon  to  some  of  the  largest  and  most  intense  of  current 
 
debates about legal interpretation, especially in the context of regulatory law and environmental 
protection. In particular, I will urge that it is important to understand interpretive disputes not by 
reference to abstractions, but in the light of institutional considerations–by asking who is good at 
what, and  by asking about the effects, over time, of one or another approach to interpretation.4 
Consider,  for  example,  the  debate  over  formalism:  the  view,  defended  most  prominently  by 
Justice Antonin Scalia, that legitimate interpretation requires fidelity to the ordinary meaning of 

                                                           

*Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  Law  School  and  Department  Political 

Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Adrian Vermeule for extremely helpful discussion. 

1 Church of the Holy Trinity v United States, 143 U.S. 457 (1892). 
2 See Frederick Schauer, The Practice and Problems of Plain Meaning: A Response to Aleinikoff and Shaw, 45 

Vand. L. Rev. 715  (1992) 

3 See id. at 734-36; Edward Rubin, Modern Statutes, Loose Canons, and the Limits of Practical Reason, 45 Vand. 
L. Rev. 579 (1992). Some of these issues, and the jurisprudential questions, are discussed in some detail in Cass R. 
Sunstein  and  Adrian  Vermeule,  Interpretation  and  Institutions  (University  of  Chicago  Working  Paper,  July  2002); 
related issues of regulatory law are discussed, from a different angle, in Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason: Law, 
Safety, and the Environment (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 

4 See id; Adrian Vermeule, Interpretive Choice, 75 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 74, 103 (2000). 

the relevant text when originally enacted.5  Some people, including Justice Stephen Breyer, reject 
this view, arguing legitimate interpretation includes a variety of devices designed to ensure that 
sense,  rather  than  nonsense,  is  made  of  the  law.6  Often  this  debate  seems  highly  abstract  and 
conceptual,    involving  contests  over  big  ideas  like  democracy,  legitimacy,  authority,  and 
constitutionalism.  
The  last  decade,  however,  has  witnessed  a  kind  of  “institutional  turn,”7  in  which  it  is 
 
starting  to  be  seen  that  debates  over  the  best  approach  to  interpretation  are  debates  about 
consequences  and, in particular, about institutional capacities.8 The controversy over formalism 
might itself be seen in these terms. If courts adopt formalism, will the system of regulatory law 
be better or worse? If courts, abandoning the ordinary meaning of the text, are likely to blunder, 
the argument for formalism is greatly strengthened.  That argument would also be strengthened if 
our legislatures,  faced  with  a  formalist  judiciary, would  be likely  to anticipate problems before 
they arise and to correct them after the fact. In that event, the problems introduced by formalism, 
for regulatory law or environmental protection, would be reduced by legislative corrections. But 
if courts, abandoning formalism, are likely to make the law far more sensible, and if legislatures 
cannot be expect to anticipate or correct errors, the argument for formalism is greatly weakened. 
If  we  emphasize  institutional  capacities,  we  will  see  that  in  deciding  about  the  appropriate 
approach to interpretation, two issues are central. The first involves the capacity of the relevant 
interpreters.  The  second  involves  the  systemic  effects  of  one  or  another  approach  to 
interpretation.  
 
These  general  points  very  much  bears  on  the  canon  that  I  am  identifying  here.  In  the 
context of apparent absurdity, reasonable people can disagree about whether and to what extent 
judges should depart from literal language. But as we shall see, the issue is quite different when 
agencies are seeking to make that departure.  This point has large implications for interpretation 
in  the  context  of  regulation  and  environmental  protection.  It  suggests  that  regulators,  simply 
because of their comparative advantages, should be allowed to repudiate or to endorse formalism 
as they see fit. 
 
The new canon of interpretation is best understood in light of certain pathologies of the 
largest development in the last century of American law: the rise of the modern regulatory state. 
In  controlling  risks  to  safety,  health,  and  the  environment,  and  in  regulating  banking  and 
communications,  modern  legislatures  issue  countless  rules.  Some  of  them  are  vague;  some  of 
them  are  precise  and  detailed.  In  either  case,  legislatively-enacted  rules  sometimes  amount  to 
“thin  simplifications”  that  often  extend  over  decades  and  that  must  be  engrafted  onto complex 
systems of natural and human interactions.9 Simply because of human limitations, these systems 
cannot  be  well-understood  by  legislators  at  the  time  of  enactment.  As  a  result,  thin 
simplifications  threaten,  on  occasion,  to  produce  harm  or  even  disaster,  not  least  from  the 
standpoint of their proponents. The harms can involve safety, health, and the environment itself, 
as when a statutory enactment, designed to protect air or water quality, has the unintended effect 
of doing the opposite in one or another application. I will not be able to discuss the point in detail 
in  this  space;  but  there  are  many  ways  of  reducing  the  relevant    risks.  One  of  the  simplest,  I 
suggest,  is  to  authorize  agency  officials  not  to  reject  enacted  law,  but  to  abandon  a  literal 
                                                           

5 See Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation (1990). 
6 See Ronald Dworkin, Law’s Empire 242-44 (1985). 
7 See Vermeule, supra note 4; Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism be Defended Empirically?, 66 U. Chi. L. Rev. 

636 (1999). 

8 See Schauer, supra note 2; Vermeule, supra note 4. 
9 See James Scott, Seeing Like A State (2000). 

approach  to  interpretation  by  adapting  statutory  terms  to  unanticipated  circumstances.  By 
abandoning  literalism  where  it  would  produce  absurdity  or  patent  unreasonableness,  agencies, 
like the courts that do the same, engage in a legitimate form of interpretation -- one that occurs in 
households and workplaces as well as in government agencies and courtrooms.  
Some  pertinent  clarifications  before  we  begin:  The  canon  authorizes  agencies  to  avoid 
 
absurdity;  it  does  not  compel  them  to  do  so.  There  are  systemic  reasons  why  an  agency  might 
want to stick to the literal language and to allow absurdity in particular cases. As we shall see, an 
agency might want to do this if it believes that fidelity to the literal language is the best way of 
promoting planning and reducing confusion for the future. In addition, the principle is limited to 
cases  of  patent  unreasonableness  or  unintended  absurdity.  These  cases  usually  arise  in  the 
context of excessive generality, a problem that occurs when statutory language operates sensibly 
and  as  intended  in  most  of  its  applications,  but  produces  patently  unjustifiable  and  unintended 
results in a particular case. This case might be too strange or exotic to have been anticipated in 
advance; or it might be a product of changed circumstances, which makes literal language, never 
or almost never absurd when enacted, absurd because of new developments. I emphasize that the 
principle  that  I  am  discussing  should  not  be  seen  as  authorization  to  ignore  statutory 
requirements; it applies only when literal language produces an outcome that was not anticipated 
and  could not plausibly  be defended.  One of my main goals is to  show  the difference between 
ignoring statutes and counteracting this problem through an acceptable form of interpretation. 
 

The Emerging Principle 

 
For  regulatory  law,  the  interpretive  background  is  established  by  Chevron,  U.S.A.,  Inc.    v. 
Natural Resources Defense Council,10  by far the dominant case in the area, which sets out a two-
step  inquiry  for  judicial  review  of  agency  decisions.  The  first  question  (“step  one”)  is  whether 
Congress  has  “directly  decided  the  precise  question  at  issue”–more  simply,  whether  Congress 
has  unambiguously  banned  what  the  agency  proposes  to  do.11  Under  Chevron,  agencies  are 
generally permitted to construe ambiguous statutes as they see fit. Under step two, it remains to 
ask whether the agency’s interpretation of the statute is reasonable.12 I am focusing on step one 
here:  Will  the  agency  be  taken  to  have  the  power  to  depart  from  the  literal  language  of  the 
statute,  if  its  reason  for  doing  so  is  to  avoid  absurdity?  Many  cases  suggest  an  affirmative 
answer. 
 

Lead and Pipes 

 
The  leading  case  is  American  Water  Works  Association  v.  EPA.13 The  case involved a  creative 
effort  by  EPA  to  regulate  lead  in  drinking  water.  The  details  are  somewhat  technical,  but  the 
outcome  is  of  general  interest.  The  court allowed EPA to produce an outcome  that  flew  in the 
face of statutory language, but that, on a reasonable view of the facts, any sensible person would 
prefer.  The  court  permitted  EPA  to  stretch  the  statutory language in  order  to  ensure  against an 
evidently absurd outcome. 

                                                           

10 467 U.S. 837, 14 ELR 20507 (1984). 
11 Id. at 842, 14 ELR at 20508. 
12 Id.  
13 40 F.3d 1266, 25 ELR 20335 (D.C. Cir. 1994). 

The  Safe  Drinking  Water  Act14  requires  EPA  to  produce  maximum  contaminant  level  
 
goals (MCLG) for water contaminants. These goals must “be set at the level at which no known 
or  anticipated  adverse  effects  on  the  health  of  persons  occur,”  with  an  adequate  margin  of 
safety.15  Because  no  safe  threshold  had  been  established,  the  EPA’s  MCLG  for  lead  was  zero, 
Once an MCLG is established, EPA is required to set a maximum contaminant level (MCL), “as 
close to the maximum contaminant level goal as is feasible.”16  EPA is authorized not to set an 
MCL, and to require “the use of a treatment technique in lieu of establishing” that level, if (and 
only if) it finds “that  it  is  not  economically  or  technologically feasible to  ascertain the level of 
the contaminant.”17 
 
For  lead,  then,  EPA  would  be  expected  to  set  its  MCL  as  close  as  “feasible” 
(economically  and  technologically)  to  the  MCLG  of  zero,  except  if  it  was  not  “feasible”  to 
ascertain the level of lead contamination (and no one urged that the task of ascertainment was not 
feasible).  But this is not what EPA did, because of some distinctive features of the lead problem. 
Source water is basically lead-free; the real problem comes from corrosion of service lines and 
plumbing  materials.  With  this  point  in  mind,  EPA  refused  to  set  any  MCL  for  lead.  EPA 
reasoned that an MCL would require public water systems to use extremely aggressive corrosion 
control  techniques,  which,  while  economically  and  technologically  “feasible,”  would  be 
counterproductive,  because  they  would  increase  the  level  of  other  contaminants  in  the  water. 
What appeared to be the legally mandated solution would make the water less safe, not more so. 
EPA therefore chose a more subtle and modest approach. Instead of issuing an MCL, it required 
all  large  water  systems  to  institute  certain  corrosion  control  treatment,  and  required  smaller 
systems to do so if and only if representative sampling found significant lead contamination. 
EPA did not contend that an MCL was not “feasible” to implement, nor did it argue that 
 
it  was  not  “feasible,”  in  the  economic  or  technological  sense,  to  monitor  lead  levels  in  water. 
Nonetheless,  the  court  upheld  the  Agency’s  decision.18  The  court  accepted  EPA’s  seemingly 
implausible  suggestion  that  the  word  “feasible”  could  be  construed  to  mean  “capable  of  being 
accomplished in a manner consistent with the Act.”19 The court said that “case law is replete with 
examples  of  statutes  the  ordinary  meaning  of  which  is  not  necessarily  what  the  Congress 
intended.”  It  added,  pointedly  and  controversially,  that  “where  a  literal  meaning  of  a  statutory 
term would lead to absurd results,” that term “has no plain meaning.”20  Because an MCL would 
itself lead to more contamination, “it could lead to a result squarely at odds with the purpose of 
the SDWA.”21 The court therefore accepted EPA’s view “that requiring public water systems to 
design and implement custom corrosion control plans for lead will result in optimal treatment of 
drinking  water  overall,  i.e.,  treatment  that  deals  adequately  with  lead  without  causing  public 
water systems to violate drinking water regulations for other contaminants.”22  
 
It  should  be  clear  that  the  court  permitted  a  quite  surprising  and  even  countertextual 
interpretation of the Act. The critical point in the court’s opinion is the suggestion that a statutory 
term  lacks  a  plain  meaning  when  the  literal  language  would  produce  “absurd  results.”  The 

                                                           

14 42 U.S.C. §§300f-j26, ELR Stat. SDWA §§1401-1465. 
15 Id. §300g-1(b)(4)(A), ELR Stat. SDWA §1412(b)(4)(A).  
16 Id. §300g-1(b)(4)(B), ELR Stat. SDWA §1412(b)(4)(B). 
17 Id. §300g-1(b)(6)(D), ELR Stat. SDWA §1412(b)(6)(D). 
18 American Water Works, 40 F.3d at 1271, 25 ELR at 20336. 

19Id.  

20 Id.  
21 Id. 
22 Id., 25 ELR at 20337. 

statutory terms seem to make no room for EPA’s refusal to issue an MCL. In upholding EPA’s 
refusal, the court authorized the Agency to avoid absurdity. 
 

Trifles 

    
Sometimes  regulation  appears  to  require  government  to  control  small  or  trivial  harms.  To  the 
extent  that  this  is  so,  two  problems  might  arise.  The  first  is  that  significant  private  and  public 
expense might be imposed for no real gain–itself an absurdity. The second is that people might 
be  less  safe  on  balance–if,  for  example,  the  product  or  process  that  causes a trivial risk  is less 
hazardous than a product or process that is already on the market, and that will not be regulated 
in  the  future.  In  that  case,  regulation  of  a  small  or  trivial  risk  would  seem  threaten  to  produce 
absurdity from the standpoint of the statute’s proponents. Can agencies provide correctives? 
 
In  a  series  of  cases,  the  D.C.  Circuit  Court  of  Appeals  has  developed  a  principle 
authorizing (not requiring) agencies to make de minimis exceptions to regulatory requirements. 
The initial case was Monsanto Co. v. Kennedy.23 There, the Agency banned acrylonitrile on the 
ground  that  it  counts  as  a  “food  additive,”  migrating  in  small  amounts  from  bottle  into  drinks 
within bottles. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) concluded that the ban was justified on 
safety  grounds,  a  conclusion  that  the  court  found  inadequately  justified.  But  what  is  more 
important  in  the  case  is the general language  with  which the court remanded the  case to  FDA. 
The  court  stressed  that  the  Agency  had  discretion  to  exclude  a  chemical  from  the  statutory 
definition of food additives if “the level of migration into food . . . is so negligible as to present 
no public health or safety concerns.”24  
A  related  case  presented  the  question  whether  EPA  was  permitted  to  make  categorical 
 
exemptions  under  the  prevention  of  Significant  Deterioration  program  of  the  Clean  Air  Act 
(CAA).25  Here, the court spoke in far more ambitious terms, showing considerable enthusiasm 
for de minimis  exemptions. It announced that “[c]ategorical exemptions may be permissible as 
an exercise of agency power, inherent in most statutory schemes, to overlook circumstances that 
in context may fairly be considered de minimis. It is commonplace, of course, that the law does 
not  concern  itself  with  trifling  matters,  and  this  principle  has  often  found  application  in  the 
administrative  context.  Courts  should  be  reluctant  to  apply  the  literal  terms  of  a  statute  to 
mandate  pointless  expenditures.”26  In  fact  the  court  expressly  connected  this  principle  with  the 
idea that the court should “look beyond the words to the purpose of the act” to avoid “absurd or 
futile  results.”27  Thus  the  court  concluded,  in  its  broadest  statement  on  the  point,  that  “most 
regulatory  statutes,  including  the  [CAA],”  permit  de  minimis  exemptions  upon  an  adequate 
factual showing.28  
 
to  prevent  patent 
is  an  explicit  recognition  of  agency  authority 
Here, 
unreasonableness by exempting tiny risks from regulatory controls–even if the exemption seems 
to fly in the face of the statutory terms. The recognition is best seen as permission to agencies to 
avoid  regulatory  absurdity,  and  in  particular  the  sort  of  absurdity  that  comes  from  “thin 
simplications” in the form of rigid regulatory commands. 
 
                                                           
23 613 F.2d 947 (D.C. Cir. 1979). 
24 Id. at 955. 
25 Alabama Power Co. v. Costle, 636 F.2d 323, 10 ELR 20001 (D.C. Cir. 1979). 
26 Id. at 360, 10 ELR at 20011. 
27 Id. at 360 n.89, 10 ELR at 20011 n.89. 
28 Id. at 360, 10 ELR at 20011. 

then, 

Costs 

 

 
Suppose  that  a  regulatory  statute appears to ban agencies from considering costs.  Suppose that 
any such ban would produce serious problems, not because the ban is itself absurd, but because 
the  ban  prevents  the  agency  from  adopting  a  creative  approach  that  would,  in  a  sense,  involve 
more aggressive regulation. 
This  appeared  to  be  the  problem  in  State  of  Michigan  v.  EPA.29  At  issue  there  was  an 
 
EPA decision to approve a state implementation plan (SIP) for the regulation of ozone. The key 
statutory phrase provided  that SIPs must contain  provisions  adequately prohibiting “any source 
or other type of  emissions activity within  the state  from  emitting any  air pollutants in amounts 
which will . . . contribute significantly to nonattainment in, or interfere with maintenance by, any 
other  State  with  respect  to  any  such  national  primary  or  secondary  ambient  air  quality 
standard.”30  At  first  glance,  this  provision  might  well  be  read  as  a  kind  of  absolute  ban  on 
“significantly  contributing”  pollutants.  But  EPA  did  not  understand  it  that  way.  Instead,  EPA 
reached an apparently ingenious conclusion. It would adopt a low threshold for deciding whether 
a contribution was “significant.” In this way, many states would count as significant contributors. 
But  the  significant  contributors  would  be  required  to  reduce  their  ozone  only  by  the  amount 
achievable  via  “highly  cost-effective  controls,”31  meaning  those  that  could  produce  large 
reductions  relatively  cheaply.  In  states  with  high  control  costs,  then,  relatively  low  reductions 
would be required. In states with low control costs, substantial reductions would be mandatory. 
 
Was this unlawful? Challenging EPA’s interpretation, the plaintiffs urged that the statute 
banned any consideration of costs at all. In their view, “contribute significantly” made no room 
for  an  inquiry  into  the  costs  of  compliance.  The  court  rejected the argument, finding  no  “clear 
congressional intent to preclude consideration of costs.”32 But the court obviously had a difficult 
time with the statutory phrase “contribute significantly,” which seems to refer to environmental 
damage,  not  to environmental  damage  measured in light  of cost.  In  upholding EPA’s decision, 
and in ruling that EPA would be allowed (not required) to do what it did, the court insisted that 
significance should not “be measured in only one dimension,” that of “health alone.” In fact, in 
some  settings,  the  term  “begs  a  consideration  of  costs.”33  In  the  court’s  view,  EPA  would  be 
unable to determine “’significance’ if it may consider only health,” especially in light of the fact 
that ozone causes  adverse health effects  at  any level.  If adverse effects exist on all levels, how 
can EPA possibly choose a standard without giving some weight to cost?34 In any case “the most 
formidable obstacle” to a ban on consideration of cost “is the settled law of this circuit,”35 which 
requires  an  explicit  legislative  statement  to  preclude  consideration  of  cost.  The  best  way  to 
understand this decision is to see it as an effort to authorize the Agency to adopt a solution that 
would avoid patent unreasonableness. 
Here, as in American Water Works, the court permitted the Agency to read the statutory 
 
text aggressively, on the theory that the Agency’s approach was so much more sensible, and so 
much less unreasonable, than the approach that would be required by textualism. It seems clear 
that  the  Congress  that  enacted  the  SDWA  could  not  foresee  the  special  problems  creating  by 
                                                           

29 213 F.3d 663, 30 ELR 20407 (2000).  
30 42 U.S.C. §7410(a)(2)(D)(i)(I), ELR Stat. CAA §110(a)(2)(D)(i)(I). 
31 213 F.3d at 675, 30 ELR at 20408. 
32 Id. at 678, 30 ELR at 20412. 
33 Id. 
34 Id. 
35 Id.  

removing  lead  from  water,  problems  that,  EPA  plausibly  argued,  would  make  a  MCL 
counterproductive.  So  too  for  the  nonattainment  program:  From  every  point  of  view,  EPA’s 
effort  to  require  only  cost-effective  controls  seemed  better  than  an  effort  to  define  “contribute 
significantly”  in  a  cost-vacuum.36  Thus  the  Agency  was  allowed  to  depart  from  the  ordinary 
meaning of the statutory language, as court perhaps would not be; and the reason was to enable 
the  agency  to  avoid  an  outcome  that  seemed  absurd  in  light  of  the  statutory  variables  and 
common sense. 
 

The Canon Defended 

 
I now explore the legitimacy of the new canon. Why, exactly, are agencies being authorized to 
avoid  absurdity?  Why  are  they  being  authorized  to  approach  statutory  text  more  aggressively 
than courts? To approach these questions, it is necessary to know something about the theory of 
legal  interpretation.  No  one  should  deny  that  a  sensible  legal  system  might  well  allow 
interpreters—courts or administrators -- to abandon literal language in cases of absurdity. This is 
a  familiar  and  conventional  aspect  of  legal  interpretation  in  the  United  States,  England,  and 
elsewhere. Such a system would abandon textualism in some cases. But whether to abandon the 
text,  and  how  often  to  do  so,  are  questions  that  reasonable  people can dispute. My basic claim 
here is that a decision to follow literal language, or instead to allow exceptions for absurdity or 
patent unreasonableness, calls for an inquiry into (a) the capacities of the interpreter and (b) the 
effects,  on  the  relevant  system  of  law,  of  one  or  another  approach.  These  issues,  typically 
neglected  in  theories  of  interpretation,  help  show  why  agencies  might  be  permitted  to  make 
exceptions  for  absurdity  even  if  courts  are  not.  To  see  this  point,  some  jurisprudence  is 
necessary. 
 

Jurisprudence as Pragmatic, Not Metaphysical 

 
I have emphasized that according to a time-honored principle of interpretation, courts should not 
construe statutes so as to produce absurd results.  In a way this old principle is entirely familiar. 
In ordinary life, as in law, the literal meaning of words will often produce unintended absurdity. 
A  parent  tells  a  child,  “don’t  leave  the  house  under  any  circumstances”;  but if the house is on 
fire,  the  child  had  better  leave.    Someone  tells  his  best  friend,  “do  not  tell  anyone  where  I  am 
going  this  weekend”;  but  under  emergency  conditions,  disclosure  might  well  be  justified. 
Building on an understanding that literal language is not always the best guide to meaning, courts 

                                                           

36 Many cases fall in the same category as those discussed here. See, e.g., Natural Resources Defense Council v. 
EPA,  824  F.2d  1146,  17  ELR  21032    (D.C.  Cir  1987).  But  there  are  counterexamples.  Consider,  for  example, 
American Mining Congress v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1177, 17 ELR 21064 (D.C. Cir. 1987). Congress had not clearly dealt 
with  the  problem  of  how  to  handle  materials  held  for  recycling,  and  the  relevant  EPA  regulation  defined  certain 
materials involved in recycling as “solid waste.” In particular, it said that spent materials, sludges, scrap metal, and 
the like would be treated as solid waste if they were not directly reused but were instead held as part of an industry’s 
ongoing production process. EPA reasoned that materials that were stored, transported, and held for recycling were 
associated  with  the  same  kinds  of  environmental  harms  as  materials  that  were  abandoned  or  disposed  of  in  some 
final way. The court of appeals struck down EPA regulation on the ground that the governing statute defined solid 
waste as “garbage, refuse, sludge . . . and other discarded material”; for the court, material held for recycling was not 
“discarded.”  Citing  the  dictionary,  the  court  thought  that  the  “ordinary  plain-English  meaning”  was  decisive.    Cf. 
Public  Citizen  v.  Young,  831  F.2d  1108,  18  ELR  20173  (D.C.  Cir.  1987)  (court  found  it  necessary  or  at  least 
relevant to emphasis that the rigid text was not, in fact, absurd). 

 

have made unintended absurdity a central theme in two of the most controversial and celebrated 
cases in American law: Riggs v. Palmer37  and Church of the Holy Trinity v. United States.  38 In 
Riggs, a court prohibited a murderer from inheriting from the estate of the murder victim, even 
though  the  language  of  the  governing  law  made  no  exception  for  murderers,  and  seemed  to 
require the murderer to inherit. In Church of the Holy Trinity, the U.S. Supreme Court refused to 
ban a church from paying for the importation of a rector into the United States, even though the 
literal language of the statute seemed to ban the importation.  
These  are  famous  cases,  but  they  are  hardly  uncontroversial.39  Is  it  so  clear  that  courts 
 
should  be  allowed  to  allow  exemptions  for  absurd  outcomes?  How  might  we  answer  that 
question? There is a conventional answer, and we can take  the analysis of the legal philosopher 
H.L.A.  Hart as  both  classic  and  representative. Hart appear  to welcome judicial corrections for 
unintended absurdity, finding them necessary in light of our inevitable “inability to anticipate”40 
the  countless  contexts  to  which  statutory  terms  will  have  to  be  applied.  In  Hart’s  account,  a 
“feature  of  the  human  predicament  (and  so  the  legislative  one)”  is  that  we  labour  under  two 
connected handicaps whenever we seek to regulate, unambiguously and in advance, some sphere 
of  conduct  by  means  of  general  standards  to  be  used  without  further  official  direction  on 
particular  occasions.”41  These  handicaps  are  “our  relative  ignorance  of  fact”  and  “our  relative 
indeterminacy of aim.”42 Mechanical jurisprudence, involving simple application of law to fact, 
would be possibly only if “the world in which we live were characterized only by a finite number 
of  features,  and  these  together  with  all  the  modes  in  which  they  combine  could  be  known  to 
us.”43 But “[p]lainly this world is not our world.”44 The problem with a mechanical approach is 
that it secures “a measure of certainty or predictability at the cost of blinding prejudging what is 
to be done in a  range of future cases, about whose composition we are ignorant. We shall thus 
indeed succeed in settling in advance, but also in the dark, issues which can only be reasonably 
be settled when they arise and are identified.”45 The problem with that kind of decision is that it 
forces us “to include in the scope of a rule cases which we would wish to exclude in order to give 
effect to reasonable social aims. . . . “46 In the context of environmental protection, the analysis 
seems straightforward. The literal language of congressional enactments will often include cases 
that Congress could not anticipate, and hence interpreters who follow that language will produce 
judgments “in the dark,” and unreasonable, even absurd ones to boot. The cases discussed above 
seem to fall in this category. 
 
Of  course  much  of  Hart’s  account  is  sensible  and  right.  But  Hart  neglects  some  key 
issues, and he is able to do so only because of his apparently unselfconscious use of word “we” 
to identify the interpreting authority. Why should we think that “we” are interpreting the statute? 
If “we” are engaging in interpretation, it might well make sense to insist that “we” should settle 
the  relevant  issues  in  the  light  rather  in  the  dark.  But  if  the  question  of  how  to  interpret  a 
statutory text is approached in institutional terms, it will become clear that Hart fails to attend to 

                                                           

37 115 N.Y. 506, 22 N.E. 188 (1889). 
38 143 U.S. 457 (1892). 
39 See Scalia, supra note 5 (criticizing Holy Trinity). 
40 See H.L.A. Hart, The Concept of Law 125 (1972). 
41 Id. 
42 Id. 
43 Id. at 126. 
44 Id. 
45 Id. 
46 Id. 

two  crucial  points.  The  first  involves  the  risk  of  judicial  blunder;  the  second  involves  the 
dynamic effects of one or another approach to interpretation.  
 
In  cases  involving  unanticipated  problems,  the  question  is  not  what  “we”  will  do;  it  is 
what  courts  will  do.  Perhaps  they  will  make  nonsense  rather  than  sense  of  the  law.  The 
possibility  is  far  from  remote  in  the  context  of  regulatory  law  and  environmental  protection, 
where courts may lack the information that would enable them to answer the complex question 
about  what  should  be  done  “in  the  light.”  And  it  is  important  to  investigate  the  effects  of  the 
courts’ choice on future litigants and on legislative behavior. A sensible system of interpretation 
understands  the  inevitability  of  dynamic  effects;  it  sees  that  the  judges’  choice  will  not  be 
limited, in its consequences, to the immediate parties. Suppose that courts, abandoning the text 
because  it  will  produce  nonsense,  will  introduce  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  into  the  law. 
Suppose  that  if  they  proceed  blindly  and  in  the  dark,  they  will  create  good  incentives  for  the 
legislature, which will promptly correct the problems that arise. In these circumstances, perhaps 
a refusal to correct absurdities is not so bad after all. In the environmental context, these issues 
can be quite difficult. A decision to abandon the text, on the ground that it produces an absurd 
result in a particular case, might introduce a great deal of uncertainty into the future 
 
Ironically,  Ronald  Dworkin,  often  taken  to  be  Hart’s  adversary,  shares  the  same 
blindness.  Dworkin  also  rejects  literalism,  believing  that  judges  should  make  the  best 
constructive  interpretation  of  the  existing  legal  materials.47  At  first  glance,  the  belief  seems 
unexceptionable;  but  like  Hart,  Dworkin  fails  to  address  the  imperfections  of  judges  and  the 
systemic effects of one or another approach to interpretation. It is not false to say, with Dworkin, 
that the controversy in Riggs “was a dispute about what the law was, about what the real statute 
the  legislators  enacted  really  said.”48  But  it  is  hopelessly  inadequate  to  cast  the  issue  in  those 
terms.  The  dispute  was  about  the  appropriate  approach  to  a  statute  whose  literal  text  produces 
absurdity. If courts ask about the meaning of “the real statute the legislators enacted,” they will 
be neglecting some of the crucial issues. 
 
What  are  those  issues?  Three  are  central:  (a)  the  capacity  of  courts  to  make  sound 
decisions if they make such exceptions; (b) the problems, in terms of increased uncertainty, that 
would be produced by the granting of exceptions; (c) the likelihood that a legislature, faced with 
a rigid, rule-following judiciary, would correct the situation.49 It is not at all clear, in the abstract, 
how  the  empirical  issues  should  be  resolved.    In  fact,  they  cannot  be  resolved  in  the  abstract. 
Everything  depends  on  context  and  on  institutional  capacities.  In  a  legal  system  in  which 
legislatures  are  able  to  anticipate  many  potential  absurdities,  the  need  for  exemptions  will 
decrease; so too in a system in which legislatures will promptly correct absurdities as they arise. 
In the environmental  context, courts should probably take a literalist approach if Congress will 
correct absurdities and if courts lacks the tools to identify situations in which literalism does not 
fact make for absurdity. But in a legal system in which absurdities are common and unlikely to 
be anticipated or corrected, and in which judges are able to exempt absurdities without creating 
systemic harm,  the case for  literalism is  severely  weakened. In this light, those who debate the 
role of “plain meaning” in interpretation might well be taken to be disagreeing over some highly 
empirical  questions  about  the  real-world  consequences  of  one  or  another  approach.  Those 

                                                           

47  See  his  discussion  of  Tennessee  Valley  Authority  v.  Hill,  437  U.S.  153,  8  ELR  20513,  in  Ronald  Dworkin, 

Law’s Empire 345-48 (1985). 

48 Id. at 20. 
49 See Sunstein and Vermeule, supra note 3, for a detailed discussion. 
 

questions  might  not  be  easy  to  resolve;  but  if  we  focus  on  them,  we  will  know  what  we  are 
disagreeing  about,  and  some  quasi-theological  disputes  about  how  to  interpret  statutes  might 
appear to be relatively mundane. 
 
It is tempting to think this argument neglects the whole issue of legitimacy. Does it? I do 
not believe so. Almost everyone agrees that judges should not ignore statutory terms, even if the 
relevant  judges  are  superb  and  even  if  the  relevant  legislatures  are  hopelessly  inattentive  and 
confused.50  But  we  are  speaking  here  not  of  ignoring  terms,  but  of  preventing  unintended 
absurdity  and,  much  of  the  time,  of  handling  the  particular  interpretive  problem  of  excessive 
generality.    This  is  Hart’s  focus  as  well.  The  problem  is  pervasive  in  ordinary  life,  where 
language sometimes  sweeps  more broadly  than any reasonable person would like. Legislatures, 
even  the  most  attentive,  are  unable  to  avoid  the  problem.  In  such  circumstances,  judges  who 
make  sense  rather  than  nonsense  of  the  law  are  interpreting  it,  not  ignoring  it.  If  judicial 
interpreters,  like  other  sensible  people,  disregard  literal  language  to  avoid  a  result  that  (in  all 
likelihood) was not intended or sought, it is ludicrous to object that courts have committed some 
abstract sin called “illegitimacy.” But it is not ludicrous to object; perhaps courts will make the 
situation  worse  rather  than  better,  and  perhaps  they  do  better  to  interpret  the  statute  literally. 
Whether the objection is reasonable depends on the pragmatic and institutional factors that I have 
identified here. 
 

The Case of Agencies 

 
Now  let  us  turn  to  administrative  agencies,  giving  particular  attention  to  the  Environmental 
Protection Agency and other agencies involved in protecting safety, health, and the environment. 
Recall that for courts, the case for literalism, even in the case of absurdity, depends on a belief 
that courts will not always make sound decisions about what counts as absurd; a judgment that 
literalism will create good incentives for legislatures, to anticipate problems before the fact and 
to correct  them after the fact; and a  fear  that  efforts  to prevent absurdity will create systematic 
harm,  by  making  planning  more  difficult  and  by  increasing  the  level  of  uncertainty.  We  have 
seen that in the abstract, reasonable people might well disagree about how to do this calculus in 
the context of judges. But the calculus changes, in major ways, when agencies are involved.  
 
It  changes  for  two  fundamental  reasons.  First,  agencies  are  in  a  good  position  to  know 
whether  a  particular  outcome  is,  in  fact,  absurd.  In  the  environmental  setting,  a  court  may  be 
unlikely  to  have  a  clear  sense  of  whether  one  or  another  approach  would  produce  a  patently 
unreasonable outcome; but the Environmental Protection  Agency  has  far  more information. To 
say  the  least,  courts  would  have  a  hard  time  in  deciding  whether  the  language  of  the  SDWA, 
taken literally, would compromise drinking water safety in the context of regulatory controls on 
lead.  Confronted  by  an  argument  to  that  effect  from  regulated  companies,  courts  might  well 
hesitate  to  resolve  the  underlying  issues;  they  might  sensibly  choose  to  follow  the  text.  By 
contrast,  agencies  face  no  such  disabilities.  They  are  likely  to  know  whether  a  literal 
interpretation really would cause environmental harm.  

Second,  agencies  are  in  a  far  better  position  to  know  whether  systemic  harm  will  be 
created by departing from the text and trying to produce sense rather than nonsense in particular 
cases. A serious problem  with  abandoning  literalism  is  that  the  abandonment might undermine 
planning and make it hard for the agency to enforce the law, in a simple and predictable way, in 

                                                           

address the complications here. 

50  Actually,  I  believe  the  underlying  issues  are  more  complicated  than  the  agreement  suggests,  but  I  cannot 

the future. But it is difficult for courts, and other generalists, to know whether this risk is real or 
fanciful. Because of their specialized competence, agencies are in a far better position to resolve 
that  question.  Compared  to  courts,  they  are  more  likely  to  know  (for  example)  whether  a 
decision  to  allow  de  minimis  exceptions  to  a  regulatory  program  would  undo  the  regulatory 
scheme,  or  whether  a  decision  to  proceed  as  the  EPA  did  under  the  SDWA  would  make  for 
unacceptable confusion in the future.  

But this is not the only point. In resolving these questions, judgments of value might also 
be involved, and they can be extremely important.  To the extent that value judgments are being 
made,  agencies  have  advantages  over  courts  too,  precisely  because  of  their  political 
accountability.  It  is  not  inappropriate  to  conclude  that  EPA,  subject  as  it  is  to  presidential 
oversight, should be authorized to decide whether to make such exemptions, to the extent that the 
statute  might  fairly  be  described  as  ambiguous.  (Recall  that  excessive  generality  is  a  form  of 
ambiguity,  and  that  where  a  statute  produces  absurdity,  it  is  reasonable  to  say,  as  did  the 
American  Water  Works  court,  that  it  lacks  a  plain  meaning.)    This  point  means  that  the  Bush 
Administration has the authority to resolve certain issues, under Chevron step 1, differently from 
the  Clinton  Administration.  So  be  it.  In  the  ordinary  run  of  cases,  it  is  a  virtue,  not  a  vice,  of 
Chevron  that  the  decision  allows  different  administrations  to  resolve  statutory  ambiguities  in 
different  ways.  Chevron  itself,  allowing  the  Reagan  Administration  to  reject  the  view  of  the 
Carter Administration, is the most salient case in point. What I am adding here is a suggestion 
that  under  step  1,  the  relevant  administration  should  also  be  authorized,  most  of  the  time,  to 
accept  or  to  reject  literalism  when  that  approach  would  lead  to  an  absurd  or  patently 
unreasonable  outcome.  As  the  recent  cases  suggest,  agencies  should  have  significantly  more 
discretion, on this score, than federal courts. 
 
In my view, the problem in Holy Trinity  should be seen very differently in the context of 
the modern regulation, which will pose as a central question: What are the views of any agency 
charged with implementation of this law? As against occasional pleas for judicial “updating” of 
obsolete statutes, offered most influentially by Judge Guido Calabresi,51 it might be claimed that 
the  argument  needs  to  be  updated:  for  the  most  part,  solutions  to  the  problem  of  legal 
obsolescence should come from administrative agencies, immersed in the problems at hand and 
having both technocratic and democratic virtues as compared to courts. In modern Holy Trinity-
type cases, courts should not do the work on their own, but should permit agencies to engage in a 
degree  of  statutory  adaptation.  This  is  not  at  all  on  the  theory  that  agencies  are  authorized  to 
violate  the  statute  (no  agency  is  authorized  to  do  that),  but  after  a  conclusion  that  agencies 
reasonably concluded that despite the generality of the text, it is legitimate to interpret it to avoid 
absurdity, at least if there is no considered legislative judgment that the text should be applied in 
a way contrary to the agency’s view. 
To  say  this  is  not  to  deny  the  possibility  of  counterarguments.  In  defending  the  new 
 
canon  of  construction,  I  have  not  discussed  the  possibility  of  congressional  correction.  If  the 
legislature is highly responsive, then it will, by hypothesis, be less important to allow agencies to 
have the authority to avoid absurdity. And if agencies themselves should be distrusted, the new 
principle will seem much less appealing. If agencies deserve distrust, we might suspect that they 
are  not  applying  their  expertise,  and  we  might  be  skeptical  about  their  judgments  of  value. 
Suppose,  for  example,  that  agencies  will  seek  to  exempt  risks  not  because  those  risks  are 
genuinely trivial, but because  of political pressures, imposed by regulated industries with self-
serving  agendas,.  If  so,  agency  authority  to  exempt  de  minimis  risks,  as  a  way  of  avoiding 
                                                           

51 See Guido Calabresi, The Common Law in An Age of Statutes (1989). 

apparent absurdity, seems far less appealing. Or suppose that in the American Water Works case, 
the EPA was not really adopting the most sensible approach, but attempting to ease regulation in 
a way that allowed unacceptable health risks from lead. More generally, endorsement of the new 
canon that I have identified here depends on the judgment that when agencies claim that a certain 
outcome would be absurd, we have good reason to believe that they are likely to be right. 
 
There  is  no  algorithm  to  prove  that  the  new  canon  is  justified;  everything  depends  on 
context and on the reliability of our various institutions. In a world in which legislatures correct 
absurdities and agencies are confused or untrustworthy, formalism—an insistence on adherence 
to the literal language -- would make as much sense for agencies as for courts. In such a world, 
American Water Works, and the other cases I have discussed, would be wrong. But this is not our 
world.  Agencies  must  apply  statutory  language  in  countless  settings,  many  of  them  new  and 
unanticipated  and  often  in  the  face  of  changing  circumstances.  In  the  environmental  context, 
agencies must work with statutes that are frequently quite rigid, that must of course be obeyed, 
but that in some applications produce outcomes that Congress could not possibly have wanted. It 
is  far  too  much  to  expect  Congress  to  be  closely  attentive  whenever  excessive  generality 
produces  absurdity.  Indeed  a  well-functioning  system  of  interpretation  would  make  it 
unnecessary for Congress to spend its time on such comparative trivia; it would allow corrections 
through the interpretive methods discussed here.  
Of  course  regulatory  agencies  often  blunder.  But  in  the  modern  state,  statutory  terms 
 
must be engrafted onto countless situations and problems that even the most reasonable and far-
sighted  legislatures  could  not  easily  have  foreseen.  The  “thin  simplifications”52  of  enacted  law 
will inevitably fit poorly with at least some of the contexts to which they apply. Indeed this is a 
pervasive problem -- and an inevitable product of the movement from a common law system to 
one  pervaded  by  statutory  commands.  In  areas  ranging  from  safety  in  drinking  water  to 
telecommunications  and  banking,  statutory  law  cannot  possibly  fit  well  with  the  range  of 
situations  to  which,  over  decades  or  more,  to  which  it  must  be  adapted.  This  is  an  extremely 
serious  problem  for  which  it  is  important  to  find  correctives.53  The  new  canon  that  I  am 
discussing is a modest means of reducing that problem. 

Will agencies abuse their new authority? Can the EPA be trusted to use the new canon so 

as to avoid real absurdity, rather than bowing to powerful private interests? I think that the 
underlying risks are minimal. In the cases I am discussing here, there is no need for alarm; the 
usual pattern is one in which sensible regulators are attempting to counteract excessive generality 
or palpable unreasonableness, neither intended by Congress. In allowing agencies to make 
corrections, courts are merely permitting agencies to do what courts themselves have long done. 
Once we debate interpretive questions in institutional terms—in terms of who is good at what -- 
we might reasonably dispute whether courts should be authorized to interpret statutory language 
so as to avoid absurdity. But even if courts should be denied that authorization, we should 
welcome agency power to make sense rather than nonsense of regulatory law. The new canon of 
interpretation thus fits well with the displacement of the common law by regulatory programs–
and it is likely to find an increasingly receptive judiciary in the coming decades.  
 
 
 

                                                           

52 See Scott, supra note 9. 
53 The movement toward economic incentives, as opposed to command-and-control regulation, can be understood 

in these terms. See A. Denny Ellerman et al., Markets for Clean Air (2000). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 
 

csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished 
Works:  An Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in 
the Law of Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A 
Quantitative Study (August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With 
An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in 
Imperial Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone 
Else Does) (April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial 
Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the 
Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

18.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication 

(September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23.  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
24. 

J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 
1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection 
of Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 

25. 
26. 

27. 
28. 

29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 

36. 
37. 

38. 

46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

52. 

53.  

Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime 
Consumption (January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) 
Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the 
Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation 
(March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business 
Enterprise (April 1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology 
(November 1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 
J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: 
Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make 
Good Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) 

39. 
40.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the 

41. 

Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed 
Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of 
Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 

44. 
45.  William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 

42. 
43. 

1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: 
Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the 
Adoption of Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the 
Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages 
(with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  

51.  William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A 

Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: 
The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of 
Law (March 1998)  

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 
62. 

63. 

64. 
65. 

66. 
67. 

68. 
69. 

70. 
71. 

Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are 
Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and 
Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police 
Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects 
on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit 
Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of 
Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 
1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law 
(November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A AThird 
Way@ (January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods 
(February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with 
Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, 
Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 

72.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 
73. 

John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and 
Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law 
Enforcement (April 1999)  
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation Strategy: A 
Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 
1999) 

75. 

74. 

76.  William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz 

77. 

Collection (May 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal 
Deterrence? (June 1999) 

88.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When 

78. 

79. 
80. 

81. 

82. 
83. 

84. 
85. 
86. 

87. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

97. 
98. 
99. 

Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a 
Function of Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error 
(August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than 
Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference 
to Law and Economics (September 1999) 
Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: 
The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of 
Personal Characteristics (November 1999) 

Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire 
(November 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on 
Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in 
Contracts (January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s Ghost 
(February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The 
Severity Shift (February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special 
Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, 
revised May 2002)  

100.  Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
101.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
102.  Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position 

(August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
103. 
104.  Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  

105. 

Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet 
(November 2000) 

106.  Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
107.  Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent 

108. 

System (November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International 
Relations:  A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 

Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) 

109.  William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
110. 
111. 
112.  Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 

113.  William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An Economic 

Approach (December 2000) 

114.  Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
115.  George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 

2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 

116. 
117.  Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer Finance 

(February 2001) 

118.  Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) (March 

119. 

2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost-Benefit Analysis:  A Positive Political 
Theory Perspective (April 2001) 

120.  Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital Age 

121.  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the 

Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 

122.  David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
123.  William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 

(April 2001) 

2001) 

124.  Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) 
125.  Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for 

Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)  

 

126.  Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) 
127.  Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
128.    Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
129.  Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property 

Transfer (July 2001) 

130.  Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for Centralized 

Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 

131.  Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably 

Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) 

132. 
133. 

Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry:  Creating Cooperation 
through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 

134.  Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the 

Commons (August 2001) 

135.  Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
136. 

Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property 
Exemption Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete 
Contracts Perspective (September 2001) 

137. 

138.  Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 

2001) 

139.  Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board 

Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 

140.  Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha ASolution@ 

141. 

(February 2002) 
Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 
2002) 

142.  Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. 

Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) 

143.  Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and 

Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, forthcoming Journal of Legal 
Studies 2002) 

144.  Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended Consequences 

(March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 

145.  David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, forthcoming Texas 

146. 

Law Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success or 
Failure (March 2002) 

147.  Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution (April 

2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) 

148.  David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase 

Lecture February 2002) 

149.  Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) 
150.  Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal 

Regulation?  Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 

151.  Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002) 
152.  Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002) 
153. 

Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture:  What a 
Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 

154.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) 
155.  Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the 

Government as Insurer? (July 2002) 

156.  Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
157.   Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
158.  Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on 

Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) 
 

