Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. American Academy of Arts & Sciences and MIT Press are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Daedalus. 
This content downloaded from 129.93.16.3 on Sat, 31 Oct 2015 14:35:28 UTC All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Cass R. Sunstein on a 
danger of deliberative 
a highly publicized shooting local high school, a group of people 
most of them tenta the community, tively in favor of greater gun control, comes to discuss new 
the possibili gun control meas 
in if anything, will happen views as a result of this dis to punitive misconduct behavior 
The likely behavior of individuals in much 
neglected group polarization. es serious dangers democratic 
questions of deliberation, settings. 
phenomenon This reveals a striking but 
:that of phenomenon about 
the potential even in some rais 
In brief, the phenomenon of group po larization means that the members of a deliberating toward amore group predictably extreme 
point of their pre-deliberation the Texas that meets move in the di views. rection 
Thus, debate come more and extent of group polarization. 
of individuals have a comparatively toward current favorable 
attitude of the Bush ad tax rates. When involved, duce ments. 
group significant a rhetorical deliberation shifts in individual advantage will pro 
is judg 
Group polarization work in feuds, ethnic strife, and war. One is inevitably at and international of the characteristic of this features of feuds is that members ministration, whose members likely to create a strong tendency Gulick), it is urged 
have a built-in victory Reflections from World War II, that demo 
II (Adsystems advantage war over their nondemocratic during adversaries, cratic 
systems are discussed vance, occur, making corrected. 
simply members group polarization of the group 
If certain group identity." 
with liberating many ers, views will not merely but instead shifted to more points. itself 
perhaps is good - but it is certainly if diverse 
social groups predictable creasingly treme views. democracy? 
We noting Constitution erative combines of reflection party while cism. What called drawing democratic 'groupthink' attention opposing mechanisms, 
and ever more How does all this bear on the theory of might approach that question by that the framers of the American democracy, accountability attempted that is, a system with ameasure to create a delib 
that and reason-giving. From 
deliberation, the standpoint of political the central problem error and social fragmentation to result when like-minded lated from others move rections ment pools simply and parochial because 
people in extreme of limited influences. 
are likely insu di argu is that widespread Compare tion, which a system of one-party stifles dissent in part be domina cause it refuses to establish way, emergence of divergent it intensifies positions 
within space for the 
; in this polarization 
external also disabling Irvin Janis some years ago can be understood 
criti to the ways 
inwhich institutions can be subject the as to some of the same problems. 
How can this be prevented? 
is tomaintain sibility erable diversity inwhich different 
deliberating to their own internal reach different subject might ultimately In a remarkable pressures, conclusions and a system and checks and balances, 
One 
pos of consid groups, groups, whether isolate themselves views. This freedom structure, Internet. stitution cameralism passions, tion, would 
point of association, and the architecture has implications bureaucratic of the 
for Indeed, the framers of the Con understood 
the system of bi as a check on the risk that in the form of group polariza 
lead to ill-considered deci sions from one or another house. society's while also tremism violence. 
No resulting 
But a simple tional design. argument 
pools ing enclaves will increase the diversity aggregate 
increasing and instability, 'argument the danger pool' 
of ex ultimately even algorithm conundrums. 
is available 
to solve the likely to produce unfortunate correctives can be introduced effects, simply by at one point depends very much on the nature exposing group members, or another, to arguments to which are not antecedently inclined. of deliberation, as a social phenomenon, on social context 
they The value 
and the na of the process ture of the participants. 
Here institutions are crucial. 
spaces for deliberat ing groups without insulating members from those who have views, 
and without 
insulating from the views of those lesson involves 
institu To the extent that limited and social influences are 
& uncertainty group 
opposing those out 
Inwar, significant role was much scientists 
shared it for the Allied that war, science technological role. InWorld advances 
War play a 
II, that larger than ever before, a great deal of the cred victory. During had sufficient from prestige establishment the holder of twenty-one patents, author of over two hundred scientificpapers, and a member of theNational Academy of Sciences and theNa tionalAcademy of Engineering. He has done research in several interdisciplinary areas, includ ingmagnetically of supersonic high-intensity molecular beams; 
