Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
. 
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Law and Philosophy. http://www.jstor.org DoestheConstitutioncreatea rightto haveanequalchanceto have one's vote count?Is therean equalprotectionproblemif, for no apparenrteason,Linda'svoteis morelikelyto countthanJane's? 
I believe that the answer to both questions is "Yes."With this answer,I hope to put the 2000 election entirelyto one side, and to mount a qualified defense of the basic holding in Bush v. Gore.1 I suggest that the case is best understoodas an initial and properly tentativestep towardrecognizinga new, but highly appealing, constitutionalright. Because of some unusualfeatures in Bush v. Goreitself, I will not arguethatthe case was correctlydecided.Nor do I mean to defend the justices who joined the majorityopinion, or to suggest that their votes were motivatedby the argumentI will offer; it is hardlyunfairto be suspicious aboutthose justices' surprisingenthusiasm for a new and quite aggressive use of the equalprotectionclause. But I will suggest thatthe Court'sdecision is rooted in a principlewith both considerableappealand genuine constitutionalstatus. 
In brief,the Court'sdecision shouldbe takento suggest a constitutional right to the equal chance to have one's vote counted. Indeed, I will suggest that the Court's decision might suggest a still broader constitutionallyright, involving an equal chance in the context of many constitutionallyprotectedinterests.I will also attemptto supportthe minimalistcharacterof the opinion in Bush v. Gore,suggestingthatthe Court'snarrowopinioncan be defended as a sensible response to the Court'slack of informationaboutthe * KarlN. LlewellynDistinguisheSderviceProfessorL, awSchoolandDepartmentofPoliticalScience,UniversityofChicagoF.orsomesectionsofthispaperI, havedrawnonCassR.SunsteinO,rderWithouLtaw,68U ChiLRev757(2001), whichapproacheBsushv.Gorefromaverydifferenatngle.I amgratefutloColin Macleodforvaluablecommentsona previousdraft. 
1 121S Ct525(2000). ^ 
LawandPhilosophy21: 121-135,2002. ? 2002KluwerAcademicPublishers.PrintedintheNetherlands. appropriatereachof the principlethatit announced.In the process, I hope to cast some new light both on equality in voting and on minimalismas an approachto opinion-writing. 
I. THE APPEAL OF BUSH V GORE 
Constitutionaldoctrineprovidesa rangeof protectionsfor the right to vote. For example, the poll tax is unconstitutional,2and states must obey a principle of "one person, one vote."3In the last two decades, courts have moved very little beyond these basic rights. However,it shouldbe clear that thereremainnumerousdisparities in the treatmentof both votersandballots- andhence thatexisting doctrinefails to exhaustthepossible contentof anequalityprinciple in the contextof voting. 
Considera few illustrations.Some people live in areasthatuse state-of-the-arttechnology, making it highly likely that almost all votes in those areaswill count. Otherpeople live in areas with far more primitivetechnology,makingit highly likely thatsome votes in those areas will not count.4 Some people must use ballots that are confusing, and that will predictablyensure that a numberof votes will fail to register;otherpeople, in the same election in the same states, will use ballots that are not confusing, and that will baffle hardlyanyone.Presidentialelections are national,but voters in Alabamawill have very differentballots andvery differenttechnologies from voters in New York,and the resultwill be that some votes will be muchmoreequalthanothers. 
In addressingone or more of these inequalities, courts could easily havebuilt,long ago, on existing cases so as to createa constitutionalprinciplegiving each citizen an equalprobabilityof having her vote actually counted in the ultimate tabulation.In fact, it is not easy to see why, before Bush v. Gore, some such right was not recognized or even urged. The likely answer is that lawyers and judges usually think of rights as involving outcomes, ratherthan probabilities,so that a state would not violate the equal protection clause so long as it offered each citizen the ability to cast a ballot, subject to existing technology and the one person-one vote rule. But in the context of a challenge to an affirmativeaction scheme, the Courthas emphasizedthat the Constitutioncreates a right not to an outcome, but to an equal chance.5 It would not be a huge stretchfrom this idea to an equal rightto the chance to have one's vote actuallycount. This equalrightmight well be accompaniedby somethinglike a "good chance"to have one's vote actuallycount, thoughin most real-worldcircumstances,the probabilitywould be sufficientlyhigh, andinequalityis the seriousproblem. 
Of course it is not entirely clear what this principlewould ultimately be takento mean. Perhapsthe relevantrightshouldbe only presumptive,allowing governmentto show legitimate reasons for any inequalities in the probabilityof votes actually counting. But if voting qualifiesas a fundamentalright,as everyoneagrees, there does seem to be a constitutionaldifficultyin any situationin which some people's ballots are more likely to count than others, if no strongreasonjustifies the difference. 
It is possible to understandBush v. Goreas embodying,in an initial and sensibly limited way, the principlejust sketched.Announcing its fundamentalmotivation,the Courtwrote, "Theright to vote is protectedin more thanthe initial allocationof the franchise.Equal protection applies as well to the mannerof its exercise. Having once grantedthe right to vote on equal terms, the State may not, by later arbitraryand disparatetreatment,value one person's vote over that of another."Recall that the Florida SupremeCourt had asked for a manualrecount in four disputedcounties, but without specifying how it would be decided whetherballots would count. The Court'sconcern was that no official in Floridahad generated standardsby which to discipline the relativelyopen-endedinquiry into "the intent of the voter."In the Court'sview, "Florida'sbasic command ... to considerthe 'intentof the voter'" was "standardless" and constitutionallyunacceptablewithout"specificstandards 
to ensure its equal application .... The formulationof uniform rules based on these recurringcircumstancesis practicableand,we conclude,necessary."6Withoutsuchrules,similarlysituatedballots, andhence similarlysituatedvoters,wouldbe treateddifferently,and for no evidentreason. 
The Courtofferedsome detailson the resultingequalityproblem. "Amonitorin Miami-DadeCountytestifiedat trialthathe observed thatthreemembersof the countycanvassingboardapplieddifferent standards in defining a legal vote."7 Standardseven appeared to have been changed "duringthe counting process," with Palm Beach Countybeginning"theprocess with a 1990 guidelinewhich precludedcountingcompletely attachedchads,"then switching"to a rule that considereda vote to be legal if any light could be seen througha chad,"then changing "backto the 1990 rule,"and then abandoning"any pretense of a per se rule."8A serious problem was that "thestandardsfor acceptingor rejectingcontestedballots mightvarynotonly fromcountyto countybutindeedwithina single countyfromone recountteamto another."9This too was not merely speculation."BrowardCountyused a moreforgivingstandardthan Palm Beach County, and uncovered almost three times as many new votes, a result markedlydisproportionateto the differencein populationbetweenthe counties."10 
The Court also found a constitutionalviolation in the unequal treatmentof "overvotes"(meaning ballots that machines rejected because more than one vote had been cast) and "undervotes" (meaning ballots on which machines failed to detect a vote, and which had been orderedto be re-examined).The Court objected that "the citizen whose ballot was not read by a machinebecause he failed to vote for a candidatein a way readableby a machine may still have his vote counted in a manualrecount;on the other hand, the citizen who markstwo candidatesin a way discerable by the machinewill not have the same opportunityto havehis vote count, even if a manualexaminationof the ballot would revealthe 6 121 S Ct. at 529-530. 7 Id. at 529. 8 Id. 9 Id. at 531. 10 Id. requisiteindicia of intent.Furthermoret,he citizen who markstwo candidatesonly one of which is discernableby the machine, will have his vote counted even though it should have been read as an invalidballot."1lHere we seem to have an explicit recognitionof a constitutionalrightto have an equalopportunityto ensurethatone's vote is actuallycounted. 
To this, the Courtadded"furtherconcerns."12These includedan absenceof specificationof "whowouldrecountthe ballots,"leading to a situationin which untrainedmembersof "adhoc teams"would be involved in the process.13And "while otherswere permittedto observe,they were prohibitedfrom objectingduringthe recount."14 Thus, the Courtconcludedthatthe recountprocess "is inconsistent with the minimumproceduresnecessaryto protectthe fundamental right of each voter in the special instance of a statewiderecount underthe authorityof a single statejudicial officer."15 C. Minimalismin Action: Shallowand Narrow This then, is the basic holding of Bush v. Gore. If the presidential controversyis bracketed,the holding appearsto be quiteplausible. To be sure, the Courtdid breaknew ground.While previouscases suggested that people could not be deprivedof the right to vote, and even that each vote must count as one, no prior decision had suggested that the Constitutionrequiredan equal probabilitythat a vote would count. Recognizing the novelty of its approach,the Courtseemed well awarethatits suggestion,if takenas broadlyas possible, could have explosive implicationsfor the future,throwing muchof stateelection law intoconstitutionaldoubt.HencetheCourt went to greateffortsto limit the reachof its holding:"Thequestion beforethe Courtis not whetherlocal entities,in the exercise of their expertise, may develop different systems for implementingelections. Instead,we arepresentedwith a situationwhere a statecourt with the powerto assureuniformityhas ordereda statewiderecount 
Id. 2 Idat531. 13 Id. 14 Id. 15 Id. with minimalproceduralsafeguards."16Thus, the Courtattempted to limit its rulingto the particularproblembeforeit: (a) a statewide recount(b) before a singlejudge. 
In this way, the Court ensured that its decision was narrow ratherthanwide - narrowin the sense that it covered the problem at hand without also covering other,apparentlysimilar problems. The narrow ruling ensures that Bush v. Gore is an illustration of the kind of judicial minimalismthat characterizesthe current Court.17If narrownessis a plausible response to ignorance about the consequences of a wider ruling, the Court'seffort to settle the case, without ruling on much more, is not so hardto understand. Of course skeptics might urge thatthe narrownessof the judgment shows that the Courtdid not take its own principlevery seriously. This may be true;the futurewill tell. All I meanto suggest is thata narrowrulingmakesa certainsense. I will returnto thispointbelow. 
At the same time, the Court'sopinion was shallow ratherthan deep, in the sense that it lacked much in the way of theoretical ambition.The Courtsimply assertedthata manualrecount,without a clearstandardfor determiningthe intentof the voter,was constitutionallyunacceptable.It said little aboutwhatthe equalityprinciple shouldbe takento mean,in the contextof voting or elsewhere, and relied insteadon what it apparentlytook to be ordinaryintuitions. The Courtwas thereforeableto producean "incompletelytheorized agreement"on its equal protectionruling, attractingsupportfrom sevenjustices;thebroadsupportforthatrulingseems attributablea, t least in part,to the fact thatthe Courtdid not offer a deep or contentious argumenton its behalf. If incompletelytheorizedagreements have theirvirtues,18thenthe minimalismof the Court'sapproachis not hardto defend. 
D. A ThoughtExperiment:TheProblemWithoutthe Context To see the appealof the Court'sapproach,on the issue of principle andscope, let us put asidethe contextof a hotlycontestedpresidential election, and imagine that in a relativelyobscureand colorless election - involving, say, Iowa's Attorney General - a state court 16 Id. 17 See Cass R. Sunstein,One CaseAtA Time(1999). 18 As urgedin CassR. Sunstein,LegalReasoningandPolitical Conflict(1996). requireda manualrecount.Supposethatthe statecourtalso failed to providestandardsto determinewhatwouldbe countedas enoughto show the "intentof the voter,"andthatin the recount,it was alleged that similar ballots were being treatedaltogetherdifferently.In a case of this kind, it is easy to imagine thata federalcourtmight be convincedto rule thatthe absenceof standardswas constitutionally defective. 
If the equal protectionruling has some appealin the context of the election of the Attorney General of Iowa, it is also possible to see why a court might want to limit the reach of its holding, even to makethe underlyingjudgmentas narrowas possible. In any state, similarlysituatedvoters are, much of the time, being treated differently.As the Florida controversyshows, voters in different counties will often use differentballots. The differencemay mean that some voters will be confused, and theirintendedvote will fail to count, simply because of the particularballot selected by their county.Recall too thatbecause of the differentqualityof different technologies, some ballots are less likely to count thanothers.Are these inequalitiesunconstitutional?To say the least, an affirmative answerwouldplace courtsin a difficultmanagerialposition.In some situations,there might be special reasons to allow the inequalities to continue.For example, a judicial requirementof equality might requirepoor areas to purchaseand use expensive technology, and this requirementmightdivertlimitedresourcesfromotherdomains, involvingfood andshelter.Because the litigantsareunlikelyto raise these issues in advance,a courtmighttakestepsto narrowthe reach of its decision, andto leave otherquestionsundecided. 
Of coursea narrowdecision mightbe challengedas insufficiently principled. Perhaps it could be thought that if there is a constitutional right to have an equal chance to have one's vote count, then the Courtshould simply say so. Butjudge-madelaw typically operatesthroughnarrow,case-specificrulings,andfor good reasons. Judgesare not philosopher-kings;they have limitedtime and capacities; they lack the informationthatwouldpermitthemto know,at the time of one ruling, aboutthe appropriatereach of the principle thatgovernsthecase athand.19WhatI am suggestingis thata ruling 19 Thesepointsareelaboratedin id. andCass R. Sunstein,One CaseAtA lime (1999). in the Iowa case, and the decision in Bush v. Gore, can be seen as an initial stage towardthe recognitionof a principlewhose precise contours should be determinedonly throughconfrontationwith a wide rangeof contexts. 
II. PROBLEMS AND DEFECTS My hope is thatthe discussionthusfarhas been sufficientto establish the plausibilityof the equal protectionruling in Bush v. Gore and of the Court'seffort to ensure that its decision did not extend far. (Recall that I am not saying anythingaboutthe motivationsof the justices who joined the majorityopinion.) But there are two problemswiththiseffortto defendBushv. Gore.Takentogether,the problemssuggest thatif (as I am urging)thereis a rightto an equal chance to have one's vote count, the Court'sdecision might well have compromisedthat right more severely than a manualrecount would have done. The appropriatesolutionwas to remandthe case to Floridato continuethe recountundersufficientlyspecific standards.I emphasizethis point not to criticizethe Court,butto obtaina betterunderstandingof the righton which I am focussing:the right to have an equalchanceto have one's vote counted. 
Why was the Florida SupremeCourtconcernedabout allowing a manualrecount?The best explanationwould emphasizethe possibility that such a recount would count votes that machines fail to register.Underthe conditionsin Florida,the very refusalto have a manualrecountwould compromise,and did compromise,the right to have an equal probabilitythatone's vote will count. Indeed,the Court'sdecision might well have createda problemof inequality even more severethanthe problemthatit attemptedto solve. There are a numberof complexities here;political scientist HenryBrady summarizesthe evidence with the suggestion that "by any reckoning, the machinevariabilityin undervotesandovervotesexceeds the volatilitydue to differentstandardsby factorsof ten to twenty. Far more mischief, it seems, can be created by poor methods of recordingandtabulatingvotes thanby manualrecounts."20 
More particularlyt,herewere severalinequalitiesin the certified vote in Florida.Underthatvote, some machinescountedvotes that were left uncountedby othermachines,simply because of different technology. Where optical scan ballots were used, for example, voters were far more likely to have theirvotes countedthanwhere punch-cardballots were used. In Florida, fifteen of every onethousandpunch-cardballots showed no presidentialvote, whereas only three of every one-thousandoptically scannedballots showed no such vote. In all likelihood, these disparitieswould have been reducedwith a manualrecount.If the principleof Bush v. Gore is taken seriously,manualrecountsmight even seem constitutionally compelled. But the Court's decision, forbiddingmanualrecounts, ensuredthatthe relevantinequalitieswould not be corrected. 
Therewereotherproblems.Intherecountthatproducedthecertified vote, some counties merely checked the arithmetic,whereas othersputballotsthrougha tabulatingmachine.Theresultis a significantdifferencein the effect of the recount.In anycase, the manual recountwas picking up manyvotes thatmachinesfailed to include. As Pamela Karlanhas written,the Court"neverreally confronted the magnitudeof the inequalitiesproducedin the first instance by Florida's use of differentvoting technologies in differentparts of the state. The BrowardCounty recount discerned votes on about 20 percentof the undervotedballots, while the Palm Beach County recount,using a more stringentstandard,recoveredvotes on about 10 percentof the undervotedballots."21 
If the constitutionalproblemconsists of the differenttreatmentof the similarlysituated,thenit seems entirelypossible thatthe manual recount,underthe admittedlyvague "intentof the voter"standard, would have made things better ratherthan worse - and that the decisionof theUnitedStatesSupremeCourtaggravatedtheproblem of unjustifiedinequality.Now perhapsthe best responseis that,what particularlyconcernedthe Courtwas not the fact of inequality,but 20 HenryE. Brady,EqualProtectionfor Votes(unpublishedmanuscript,Dec. 11,2000). 
21 See PamelaKarlan,The Newest EqualProtection,in The Vote77, 90 (Cas R. SunsteinandRichardA. Epsteineds. 2001). the combinationof inequalityandprocessfailure,througha manual recount that seemed to have due process-type problems. Indeed, the Court did speak in due process terms on several points. But its holding was basedon unjustifiedinequalities,andon thatcount, the certifiedvote hadformidableproblems.This does not meanthat therewas no problemwith the manualrecount,butit bearsdirectly on the issue of remedy,to which I now turn. 
If the equalityprinciplerequiresan equalchancefor votes to count, and if a manual recount would thus be unconstitutionalwithout clear standards,what is the appropriatefederalresponse?Thereare questionshere of bothFloridalaw andfederalconstitutionallaw. 
The SupremeCourt halted the manual recount for one simple reason:The Courtthoughtit clear that the FloridaSupremeCourt would interpretFloridalaw so as to halt the process. As the Court wrote, "The Supreme Court of Florida has said that the legislatureintendedthe State's electors to 'participate[ ] fully in the federalelectoralprocess .... Because it is evidentthatany recount seeking to meet the December 12 date will be unconstitutionalfor the reasons we have discussed, we reverse the judgment of the SupremeCourtof Floridaorderinga recountto proceed."22Thus, the Courtconcludedthat as a matterof Floridalaw, a continuation of the manualrecount"couldnot be partof an 'appropriate'order authorizedby" Floridalaw.23 
Especially if there is a constitutionalright to an equal chance to have one's vote count, this seems to have been a blunder.The Florida courts had never been asked to say whether they would interpretFloridalaw to requirea cessationin the countingof votes, if the consequence of the counting would be to extend the choice of electorspast December 12. In fact, the FloridaCourt'spervasive emphasison the need to ensurethe inclusionof lawful votes would seem to indicate that if a choice must be made between the safe harborand the inclusion of votes, the latter might have priority. NotwithstandingwhatI havesaidhere,it is hardtojustify theUnited StatesSupremeCourt'sfailureto allowtheFloridaCourtto consider 22 Bush v. Gore, 121 S Ct at 533. 23 Id. this issue of Floridalaw.The morenaturalremedywould havebeen to say that a manualrecountcould continue, but only pursuantto standardsthatwould ensureagainstunjustifiedinequality. 
All this leaves some simple conclusions. It was plausiblefor the Bush v. Gore Courtto recognize a constitutionalright to an equal chance to have one's vote count.The Courtwas quitecorrectto see thatthis rightraises seriousquestionsabouta standard-freerecount, especially when the record shows that the absence of standards will result in genuine inequality.But the Courtwas wrong to focus myopically on the problemsintroducedby the standardlessrecount, withoutseeing thatsimilarproblemsof inequalityexisted underthe certifiedvote, and could be curedby a standard-governedrecount. The correctremedy was thereforeto remandto Floridafor such a recount.On this count,the Court'sdecision cannotbe justified.24 
With each passing day, the remedy issue is becoming ancient history.Forthe future,whatmattersis notthe remedy,butthe underlying right.What is its nature?Whatis its ultimatereach?I offer a few speculationshere. 
III. RIGHTSTOPROBABILITIES? A. Voting In Bush v. Gore, the Court attempted,in conventionalminimalist fashion,to limit the reachof its decision. But it shouldbe clearthat the attemptmight not prove successful. To know whetherBush v. Gore should be taken as unique or instead as the initial step in a long line of cases, we need to know whetherother situations,also involvingan apparentviolationof the as-yet-undefinedright,can be meaningfullydistinguished.Considerthe following cases, given in descendingorderof closeness to Bush v. Gore itself: in separatecounties, and no single judge oversees the entire process. percent of votes; wealthy counties have newer machinerythat 24 I discuss this point in more detail in Sunstein, Order WithoutLaw, supra note*. successfully counts 99 percentof votes. Those in poor counties mounta constitutionalchallenge,claimingthatthe differencein rejectionratesis a violationof the EqualProtectionClause. does not involve poor and rich counties. It is simply the case that some areasuse machinesthathave a near-perfectcounting rate,andothersdo not.Thedistributionof machinesseems quite random. versionof the controversial"butterflyballot";most do not. It is clear thatwherethe butterflyballot is used, an unusualnumber of voters are confused, and do not successfully vote for the candidateof theirchoice. Does this violate the equalprotection clause? machinery from that used by citizens in New York. The consequence is that citizens in Alabama are far more likely to have their votes uncountedthan citizens in New York.Do they have a valid equal protectionclaim?Whatif the statistical disparityis very large? 
The Bush v. Gore Court'ssuggestion thatordinaryvoting raises "many complexities" is correct; but how do those complexities justify unequaltreatmentin the cases just given? The best answer would point to three practical points: logistical considerations, which can makeit hardto provideuniformity;budgetaryconsiderations, which can makeit difficultfor some areasto providethe same technologyas others;andthetraditionof local control,whichmakes federaljudges reluctantto mandatesimilartreatmentof people in different areas. In case (1), logistical considerationsare the only distinguishingfeature from Bush v. Gore, and it is hard to argue thatthose considerationsshouldbe decisive. It is certainlyfeasible, in case (1), to ensurea degreeof uniformity. 
unusualfor federal courts to requiredifferentcounties to have the same technology.Wealthycounties might preferto purchasemore expensive machinery,whereas poorer communities might devote theirlimitedresourcesto otherproblems.Perhapsjudicialcautionin cases ( entirelyclear.Case ( it thereforeseems a strongercase forjudicial involvementthancase ( comparative disadvantage.But can the randomnessbe justified? On what grounds?It is not clear thatthe traditionof local controlshould be sufficient.In case ( and it would be easy to imagine a plausibleconstitutionalattackif votersin one areaare subjectto confusingballots not used in other counties.Case (5) is the least likely settingforjudicial involvement, simply because of the longstandingpractice of state control over ballots andtechnologies, andbecausea constitutionalattackon that practicewould place courtsin an uncomfortablemanagerialrole. 
My goal here is to give a flavorof the relevantquestions,not to resolve them. But at the very least, Bush v. Gore plainly suggests the legitimacyof both state andnationalactiondesigned to combat disparitiesof this kind.It is for this reasonthatthe Court'sdecision, howevernarrowlyintended,set out a rationalethatmightwell create an extremely important(and appealing) innovationin the law of voting rights. Perhapslegislatureswill respondto the invitationif courtsrefuse to do so. 
In fact, the Court's rationale might extend more broadly still. Outsidethe context of voting, governmentsdo not impose the most severely imaginableconstraintson official discretion,andthe result is to deprive people of equal probabilitiesof facing constitutionally significant burdens and receiving constitutionallysignificant benefits.Because discretionexists, the similarlysituatedaretreated differently.25 
In the abstract,the question might seem fanciful; but related constitutionalchallenges are hardlyunfamiliar.In the 1960's and 1970's,therewas an effortto use the Due Process andEqualProtection Clauses to try to ensure more rule-bounddecisions, in such contexts as licensing and admissionto public housing.26Plaintiffs 25 This is the basic theme of KennethCulp Davis, DiscretionaryJustice: A PreliminaryInquiry(LouisianaState 1969). 
26 Horsby v.Allen, 326 F2d 605 (5th Cir 1964); Holmesv. NYCHA,398 F2d 262 (2d Cir 1968). arguedthatwithoutclearcriteriato disciplinethe exerciseof discretion, therewas a riskthatthe similarlysituatedwould not be treated similarly,and that this risk was constitutionallyunacceptable.But outsideof the most egregioussettings,these effortsfailed,27apparently on the theorythatrule-bounddecisions producearbitrariness of theirown, andcourtsarein a poorpositionto know whetherrules are betterthandiscretionaryjudgments.Does Bush v. Gore require courtsto extendthe limitedprecedentshere? 
Perhapsnot. Perhapsit can be suggestedthatbecause the choice between rule-boundand more discretionaryjudgments is difficult in many cases, judicial deference is generally appropriate- but not when fundamentalrights, such as the right to vote, are at risk. If so, Bush v. Gore has a limited scope. But the scope is still quite large. Perhapsthe most obvious example is the "beyond a reasonabledoubt"standardfor criminal conviction, a standard that differentjuries will inevitably interpretin different ways. Is this unacceptable?A possible answer is that no more rule-bound approachwould be better, all things considered. This is a difference fromBush v. Gore, whereit was easy to imagine a rule-bound approachthat would add constraintson discretionwithout sacrificing any importantvalue. But does this mean thatmethodsmustbe in place to ensureagainstdifferentialtreatmentof those subjectto capital punishment?To life imprisonment?I cannot resolve these questions here. But for better or for worse, the rationalein Bush v. Gore, sympatheticallyviewed, appearsto make it necessary to considerthese issues anew. 
CONCLUSION In this essay, I have attemptedto defendtwo aspectsof the Court's opinion.First,I have urgedthatthe equalprotectionclause is plausibly readto createan equalchance to have one's vote actuallycount - and that the context of a manualrecount,before a single judge, is an exceedingly strongone for the initialrecognitionof thatright. 
27 Forexamplesof unsuccessfulattemptsto challengeunconditioneddiscretion violativeof EqualProtectionin thesecontexts,see Phelps v.HousingAuthorityas of Woodward7,42 F2d 816 (4th Cir 1984);AtlantaBowling Center,Inc v.Allen, 389 F2d 713 (5thCir 1968). Second, I have urged that the minimalistcharacterof the Court's opinion also makes a great deal of sense, because in a single case, let aloneone decidedundersuchpressure,it is simplytoo difficultto decide the reachof the equal protectionholding.If we put together the equal protection principle with some enthusiasmfor judicial minimalism, we will be well on the way toward a sympathetic understandingof muchof the opinionin Bush v. Gore. 
At the same time, I have urgedthatthe defense of the outcome ultimately fails. The decision to stop the manual recount created equal protectionproblemsat least as great as those that the Court attemptedto prevent.Therewas no sufficientreasonnot to remand the case to permit votes to be counted under a properly disciplined process. But in a way, these qualificationsare a matter of detail. Once the PresidentialElection of 2000 is put to one side, it is possible to see that in the domainof voting, as in many other contexts, the right to an equal chance has large and inadequately appreciatedpossibilities. 
