University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2002 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Is There a Constitutional Right to Clone? 
Is There a Constitutional Right to Clone? 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Is There a Constitutional Right to Clone?," 53 Hastings Law Journal 987 (2002). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Is There a Constitutional Right to
Clone?

by
CASS  R. SUNSTEIN*

Introduction

As  currently  interpreted,  the  Constitution  protects  a  range  of
fights  involving  marriage,  bodily  integrity,  and  reproduction.  Does
the Constitution  guarantee the right to clone?

The  question  is  not as fanciful  as  it might  appear.1  Cloning  is  a
possible  method  for "reproduction."  For  some people,  cloning  would
undoubtedly  be the preferred choice.  Among this group,  some would
choose  cloning  on  the  ground  that  it  is  the  only  way  to  produce
children with  some genetic  connection  to them.  For such  people, the
potential  value  of  cloning  should  not be  understated.  And  because
reproduction  is  involved,  the individual right  to  choose  might well  be
thought  to fall  within  the  doctrinal  protection  given  by Roe v.  Wade
and  other  cases.  At the same time, it is  not clear  that the  government
can  offer  constitutionally  adequate  grounds  for  interfering  with  a
the  most  common
presumptively  protected  right. 
justifications  seem  speculative,  and  others  could  be  taken  care  of
through  narrower  means,  falling  short  of  a  flat  ban  on  cloning.
Indeed,  the justifications  for banning  cloning  might wel  seem,  at first
glance,  to  be  weaker  than  the  justifications  for  banning  abortion,
which  involves  the  intentional  destruction  of  what  many  people

Some  of 

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn,  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  Law  School  and
Department  of Political  Science, University  of Chicago.  This essay  is  a written  version  of
the keynote  luncheon  address for the Hastings  Law Journal symposium  on human cloning,
held  on January 26,2002.

1.  See John Robertson,  Liberty, Identity, and Human Cloning, 76 TEx. L. REv.  1371,

1441-42 (1998).

2.  410 U.S.  113  (1973).
3.  See,  e.g.,  Griswold  v.  Connecticut,  381  U.S.  479  (1965);  Eisenstadt  v.  Baird,  405

U.S. 438  (1972);  Carey v. Population  Servs., 431 U.S.  113  (1973).

[987]

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 987 2001-2002

HASTINGS  LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 53

consider  innocent  human  life. 
If  government  cannot  ban  the
intentional  destruction  of  human  life,  why-it  might  be  asked-is
government  allowed  to forbid the intentional creation of human life?
Notwithstanding  these  points,  I  will  argue  here  that  under
existing law,  there is  no constitutional  right  to clone  for reproductive
purposes, and indeed  that the argument  for such a right is quite  weak
under  the  law  as  it now  stands.  I  will  also  argue  that  there  is  no
constitutional  right  to  clone  for  therapeutic  purposes,  though  the
analysis must be quite  different from  that in the reproductive  context.
In  the  process  of  engaging  the  legal  issues,  I  will  offer  a  few  more
general  remarks  as  well. 
Some  of  those  remarks  involve  the
appropriate  judicial  posture  in  cases  involving  "substantive  due
process."  I will  suggest that  it is  desirable  for courts  to be  extremely
cautious  in  extending  the  reach  of  cases  that  do  not  involve  an
element  involving  inequality  or  some  other  kind  of  failure  from the
democratic  point  of view.  Judicial  caution  is justified  in  light  of the
complexity  of  the  underlying  scientific  issues  and  the  existence  of  a
reasonable  debate  over the  questions of  policy and value.  These  are
institutional  points  about  the  sense  of  a  general  posture  of judicial
deference in a situation of this sort.

But some  of  my  remarks  bear  on  the  general  question  whether
government  should,  in  principle,  ban  reproductive  and  therapeutic
cloning.  I  do  not  mean  to  resolve  those  questions  here,  but  I  will
suggest  that  many  of  the  most  commonly  offered  arguments  are
extremely  weak,  resting  as  they  do  on  a  mixture  of  ignorance  and
confusion.  With  respect  to  nonreproductive  cloning,  the  argument
for  a  presumptive  constitutional  right 
the
precedents;  but 
for
intruding  on  freedom  of  choice  are  very  weak  indeed.  Here,  as
elsewhere,  we  should  distinguish  sharply  between  the  legal  question
and  the  political  question. 
is  no
constitutional  right  to  clone  does  not  say  whether  a  reasonable
legislature  would  ban  the  practice  of  cloning;  and  in  the  context  of
therapeutic  cloning, we shall see many reasons for doubt.  At the very
least, we  should  distinguish  between  the strongest  justifications,  now
involving  the  doubtful  safety  of  the  procedure,  and  the  weaker
justifications,  based on mistakes  of fact or simple distaste.

is  strained  under 
justifications 

the  government's 

The  suggestion 

that  there 

ironically, 

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 988 2001-2002

July 2002]

CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHT TO CLONE?

I.  Reproductive  Cloning:  Is There a Presumptively
Protected Right?

For  purposes  of  substantive  due  process,  the  first  question  is
whether  the  right  to  clone  counts  as  a  fundamental  one, with  which
the government  can  interfere  only to protect  a "compelling"  interest.
If there is no fundamental  right, the government  is required merely to
show a "rational  basis"  for its action, a much  easier burden to meet.4

A  Puzzling Pattern

This  is not the simplest  question  to answer.  The Supreme  Court
has  not-to  say  the  least-given  clear  criteria  for  deciding  when  a
right  qualifies for special  constitutional  protection.  The cases  leave  a
great  deal  of  ambiguity  and  the  doctrine  lacks  much  coherence.5
There  are two  common ways of reading the cases.  One reading is that
the Court has issued  a firm "this far, and no more"  and  is unwilling to
recognize  additional  fundamental  rights unless  they  find  specific  and
extremely  strong  recognition  in  Anglo-American  traditions.  Chief
Justice Rehnquist  appeared  to accept  this  argument  for a majority  of
the  Supreme  Court  in  Washington  v.  Glucksberg.6  This  approach
most  certainly  would  not  see  cloning  as  a  presumptively  protected
right.  The  other reading is that the  cases should be taken to establish
a  presumptive  right to  noninterference  with  decisions  that  are  highly
personal and intimate,  at least if those decisions involve choices  about
sexuality  and reproduction.  This  approach might  well require  strong
government  justification  for  any  interference  with  an  individual
decision to clone.  I explore the two approaches  in sequence.

B.  Due Process Traditionalism

On  occasion,  influential  Justices  and the  Court  as  a  whole  have
said  that  fundamental  rights  qualify  as  such  largely  because  of  their
traditions,  understood  at  a  level  of
origins  in  Anglo-American 
considerable  specificity.7  Chief  Justice  Rehnquist's  opinion  for  the
Court  in  Glucksberg8  draws  upon  this  theme, 
though  Justice
O'Connor's  separate  and  narrower  opinion  places  its  status  into

4. See, e.g., Williamson  v. Lee  Optical, 348 U.S.  483 (1955).
5.  See Bowers v. Hardwick,  478 U.S.  186  (1986).
6.  521  U.S.  702  (1997)  (upholding  ban on physician-assisted  suicide).
7.  See Michael  H. v. Gerald  D.,  491  U.S.  110, 127-28  n.  6 (1989)  (plurality  opinion of
Scalia,  J.);  Bowers, 478  U.S.  186;  Moore  v.  City  of  East  Cleveland,  431  U.S.  494  (1977)
(plurality opinion  of Powell, J.);  Griswold, 381  U.S.  479  (Harlan, J., concurring).

8.  521 U.S.  at 710.

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 989 2001-2002

HASTINGS  LAW JOURNAL

[Vol.  53

doubt.9  A  central  goal  of  due  process  traditionalism  is to  discipline
judicial discretion  and to  draw upon views  that  are time-honored  and
therefore unlikely to be idiosyncratic.

Let  us for the  moment  assume  that  due process  traditionalism  is
correct-that it describes the appropriate  approach to the due process
clause.  If the  right  to  clone  must  emerge  from  such  traditions,  the
case  is  simple:  There  is  no  such  right.  The  right  to  clone  is  not
something  that  Anglo-American  law  traditionally  protects.  Of
course,  we  could  say  that  the  absence  of  a  tradition  of  protection  is
not relevant, because the relevant technology  is so  new.  But if such  a
tradition  is  a  necessary  condition  for  constitutional  protection,  there
can  be no right to clone.

the 

traditionalist 

terms,  and  hence 

But  there  are  severe  problems  with  defining  fundamental
interests  solely by  reference  to tradition,  specifically  described.  The
first  problem is that many  of the  Court's cases  cannot  be understood
in  purely 
traditionalist
understanding  of the  privacy  cases fits  poorly  with  existing  law.  Roe
v.  Wade  presents  the  clearest  example;  there  is  no  clear  tradition
establishing  a right to abortion.  But this is not true  only of abortion.
The cases establishing  a right to contraceptives  outside  of marriage do
not vindicate  a longstanding  tradition.0  Nor is there  any general right
to  marry  within  Anglo-American 
traditions;  hence  Loving  v.
Virginia," striking  down  a ban on  interracial  marriage  under the due
process  clause,  and  Zablocki v. Redhail'2  recognizing  a fundamental
right to marry, fit poorly  with due process  traditionalism.  Traditions,
taken at a level of specificity  and as  brute facts,  explain  few of the key
cases, and hence traditionalism  does not make sense  of existing law.

Should  the  Court  consider  its  own  decisions  doubtful  and  use
traditionalism  in  the  future  notwithstanding  its  inconsistency  with
past  decisions?  This  course  has  considerable  support  within  the
Court;  it  is  suggested  by  the  Court's  opinion  in  Washington  v.
Glucksberg, the  plurality  opinion  in  Michael H. v.  Gerald D.,  and
Bowers  v.  Hardwick.3  And  such  a  course  might  be  deemed
reasonable if traditionalism  was extremely  appealing in principle  and
if the  alternatives  were  unacceptable.  Perhaps  a  firm  "no  more!"
would  make  sense  despite  its  failure  to  fit  with  existing  law;  the

9.  Id. at 736-38  (O'Connor, J., concurring).
10.  See Eisenstadt v.  Baird, 405  U.S. 438  (1972);  Carey v. Population  Servs.,  431  U.S.

113 (1973).

11.  388  U.S. 1 (1967).
12.  434  U.S. 374 (1978).
13.  521  U.S. at 702; 491  U.S.  110 (1997); 478 U.S. 186  (1986).

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 990 2001-2002

July 2002]

CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHT TO  CLONE?

Court's occasionally  cavalier  treatment  of its  own precedents  implies
a judgment  of this  sort.  But if we  assume  that  at least  some  kind  of
substantive  due  process  is  legitimate,'4  as  all  of the Justices  appear  to
assume,  we  will  find  large  problems  with  using  traditions,  narrowly
and  specifically  conceived,  as  the  sole  source  of rights  under the  due
process  clause.  To  be  sure,  such  a  use  of  tradition  does  help  to
discipline  judicial  discretion,  and  that  is  an  important  gain. 
If
traditions  were  extremely  reliable  as sources  of  rights,  and  if judges
thinking  more  independently  about  the  appropriate  scope  of  rights
were  systematically  unreliable,  due  process  traditionalism  might  be
justified  on  balance.  That  is,  due  process  traditionalism  might  be
justified  as  a  way  of  minimizing  the  costs  of  decision  and  aggregate
judicial  errors even  if it were  quite imperfect  as a source  of rights.

But  this  is  not  a  very  plausible  view,  for  there  is  no  reason  to
think  that  traditions,  understood  at  a  level  of  great  specificity,  are
systematically  reliable  or  so  close  to  systematically  reliable  as  to
exclude  a  somewhat more reflective  and  critical judicial role."  Anglo-
American  traditions include  a  great  deal  of good  but also  significant
confusion  and  injustice  (consider,  for  example,  bans  on  racial
intermarriage);  it is sensible for  courts to engage in  a degree of critical
scrutiny of intrusions  on liberty even  if those intrusions  do not offend
tradition.  Nor  is  there  sufficient  reason  to  think  that  judges  will
inevitably do very badly if they think critically  about rights.

Of  course,  judges  should  be  very  cautious  about  rejecting
judgments  made  by elected  officials;  judges  should  also  avoid  hubris
in  examining  the  past.  Certainly  it is  plausible  to  think  that  judges
should  generally  proceed  incrementally  and  in  good  common  law
fashion  from  previous  decisions. 
It  also  makes  sense  to  say  that
substantive  due  process  should  be  used  sparingly,  because  of  its
uncertain  textual  basis  and  because  of  the  unreliability  of  judicial
judgments  about  which  rights  should  qualify  as  fundamental.
Understandings  of this kind  provide important constraints  on judicial
power  under  the  Due  Process  Clause.  But  at  the  very  least  it  is
appropriate  for courts  to ask  whether  the  interest said  to qualify  as  a
fundamental right is, in principle, at all  different from rights that have

14.  Actually the whole  idea of "substantive  due process"  is quite  doubtful  as  a  matter
of  text  and  history.  But  we  might see  that idea  as  doing  the  work  of  the  privileges  and
immunities  clause,  which  could  plausibly  have  been  used  for  an  enterprise  of  this  kind.
See  Charles  Fairman,  Does the Fourteenth Amendment  Incorporate the Bill of Rights?, 2
STAN.  L. REV. 5  (1949).

15.  I  try to defend  this view  in  CASS  R. SUNSTEIN,  DESIGNING  DEMOCRACY:  WHAT

CONSTITUTIONS  Do  (2001).

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 991 2001-2002

HASTINGS LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 53

been  sanctified  by tradition.  If, for  example,  there were  no  relevant
difference,  in principle,  between  a  traditionally-unrecognized  right to
clone  and  (let  us  suppose)  a  traditionally-recognized  right  to  use
contraceptives  within marriage, courts  should not say  that the latter is
constitutionally  protected  and the former is not.

To  make  the point  more  vivid,  assume  that  a  state  banned  the
use  of  all  reproductive  technologies,  requiring  all  reproduction  to
occur  the old-fashioned  way.  For many  couples,  the consequence  of
such  a ban  would  be  to  prevent  reproduction  at  all.  It would  seem
sensible, in  a  case of that  sort, to require the state  to justify its  action
in highly persuasive terms.

In short:  If tradition  is the exclusive  basis for special  protection
under the due process  clause, then the right  to clone  cannot  possibly
qualify  for such  protection.  But  there  are  good  reasons  to  question
the  idea  that  tradition  should  be  the  exclusive  basis  for  this  special
protection.

C.  Reproduction  and Sexuality

If  tradition  is  not  decisive,  what  is  the  source  of  fundamental

rights for purposes of substantive  due process?

(1)  An Illuminating False Start

It  is  tempting  to  resort  to  terms  such  as  "intimate"  and
"personal";  but  these  terms  provide  little  help.  They  tend  to  be
conclusions  masquerading  as  analytic  devices.  In  any  case,  some  of
the  cases  deny  protection  to  interests  that  seem  highly  intimate  and
highly  personal;  consider  both  Hardwick,6  refusing  to  recognize  a
right  to  homosexual  sodomy,  and  Village of Belle  Terre v.  Boraas,7
refusing  to  recognize  an  associational  right  to  enable  people  to  live
together.  Thus,  the  Court's  cases  refuse  to  accept  the  view  that
intimate  and  personal  decisions  deserve  constitutional  protection  as
such.  Putting  previous  cases  to  one  side,  we  can  see  that  some
seemingly  intimate  and  personal  decisions  are  not  strong  candidates
for  constitutional  protection.  Consider  the  decision  to  work longer
than  the  maximum  hour  laws  allow  in  order  to  provide  for  one's
family,  the decision  to take  medicines  or  drugs  of  a certain  sort,  the
decision to marry  one's cousin  or  aunt, or for that matter the decision
to  commit  suicide.  There 
to  think  that  the
Constitution  does  not protect  these  decisions,  however  intimate  and

is  good  reason 

16.  478 U.S.  186 (1986).
17.  416 U.S.  1 (1974).

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 992 2001-2002

July 2002]

CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHT TO CLONE?

personal  they  seem.  For  this  reason,  a  reference  to  "intimacy"  or
"personal"  decisions is insufficiently helpful.

(2)  Reproduction and Sexuality

But  the  Court  could  find  a  narrower  principle  of  some  appeal,
and  considerable  consistency  with  the cases,  if it said  that  there  is  a
presumptive right against government intrusions into the decision how
and whether  to  produce children.  This  idea  might  be  invoked  to
explain  both Roe v. Wade and cases involving governmental  efforts to
prevent people  from  diminishing  risks  of pregnancy.  The suggested
standard  also has the advantage of distinguishing  Bowers v. Hardwick
on the ground that there is no  prohibition on the regulation  of sexual
conduct if decisions  about pregnancy  and childbirth  are not involved.
In  any  event,  the  standard  seems  to  provide  a  sufficient  if  not
necessary  condition  for constitutional  concern.  There  do  not  appear
to be any cases that fail to find  a constitutionally  protected interest  in
cases in which the standard is met.

(3)  Problems and Difficulties

It would not be frivolous to take the precedents  in this way. 8  But

there are two problems with the argument.

The first  is  that it  is not  clear  why  the right  to  decide  how  and
whether  to produce  children  should have  this  special  status,  if  other
rights,  such  as  the  right to  choose  physician-assisted  suicide  and the
right  to  engage  in  consensual  sexual  activities,  do  not. 9  Surely  it  is
true  that  decisions  about  reproduction-about  whether  and  how  to
reproduce-are  central  to  individual  autonomy.  But  many  other
decisions  seem  equally  central,  or at  least  not less  central, and  those
decisions  do  not  receive  special  constitutional  protection.  Why
should  reproduction  be  singled  out?  The  question  suggests  that the
cases  involving reproduction  and contraception  may not, in fact, only
involve those issues,  and that they may  be marked by another feature,
one that involves  sex equality.  Perhaps  issues of that kind also helped
motivate  the  Court.  A ban  on  abortion  has  disproportionate  effects
on  women,  to  say  the  least;  and  when  a  law  forbids  the  use  of
contraceptives,  women  are  likely  to  face  especially  strong  adverse
effects,  in  the  form  of  an  involuntary  pregnancy. 
Indeed,  several
members  of  the  Court  have  acknowledged  that  Roe  v.  Wade  owes

18.  As the  district court  seemed to in Lifchez v. Hartgan,  735 F. Supp. 1365  (N.D.  Ill.

1990), rev'd sub nom. Scholberg v. Lifchez,  914 F.2d 260 (7th  Cir. 1990).

19.  Hardwick, 478 U.S.  at 186; Washington v. Glucksberg,  521 U.S. 702 (1997).

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 993 2001-2002

HASTINGS  LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 53

something  to  equality  concerns,20  and it does  seem clear  that bans  on
contraception  have disproportionate  effects  on women.

This equality  concern  does not appear to be present  with bans on
cloning.  Do such  bans treat  women  worse  than men?  Do such  bans
treat  any disadvantaged  group  especially  badly?  To be sure,  it would
be  possible  to  urge  that  people  who  are  disabled,  in  the  sense  that
they lack  the ability  to produce  children  in the  standard  fashion,  are
distinctly  harmed by bans  on  cloning.  But whenever  the government
imposes  barriers  on the use  of some medicine  or  medical technology,
there  is  a  disproportionate  burden  on  those  who  believe  that  they
need  it.  By  itself  that  burden  is  not  enough  to  create  a  serious
constitutional issue.

The  second  problem  in  the  argument  is  that  it  defines  the
relevant  interests  very  broadly,  and  in  a  way  that  is  not  at  all
compelled  by the cases.  People  might have  a right to decide  whether
to  abort,  and whether  to  use  contraceptives,  without  also  having  a
right to choose any  available  means to have,  or not to have,  a child-
even  if that means  is,  for some people,  the  only realistic means.  We
should  agree  that  it  would  be  presumptively  unacceptable  for  the
government to ban certain couples from having children, or to impose
a  one-child  policy  on  the  nation.  We  should  also  agree  that  the
government  may not require  people to have children,  and indeed that
government  may  not bar  women from  availing themselves  of what is,
for  most people,  the usually  indispensable  means  of  preventing  the
birth of unwanted  children  (such  as  contraception  and abortion).  But
none  of this  means  that  there  is  a  presumptive  right  to  do  whatever
might  be  done  to increase  the  likelihood  of having,  or  not having,  a
child: 
to  enter  into  surrogacy  arrangements,  or  to  use  in  vitro
fertilization,  or  to attempt to clone  a child.  The central  point is  that a
ban  on cloning, or  on surrogacy  arrangements,  leaves  open  numerous
other channels  by which  most people  may bear a  child.  If numerous
channels  remain  open,  perhaps  the  government  need  not  face  the
strongest possible burden  when it merely closes  off one.

The  point should  not be  overstated.  There  are  many  means  to
prevent  unwanted  childbirth  (I  omit  the  details);  abortion  and
contraception  are  hardly  the  only  methods.  And  for  some  people,
cloning  might  be  the  only  feasible  way  to  produce  a  biological
offspring.  It would  certainly  not be  ludicrous to  say that  as  a  matter
of constitutional law, the state  has to produce  a strong justification for
intruding on that choice in cases in which it is the only realistic  option.

20.  See Planned  Parenthood v. Casey, 505  U.S. 933 (1992).

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 994 2001-2002

July 2002]

CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHT TO  CLONE?

Indeed,  there is reason to  question  a  doctrine  that would  apply strict
scrutiny  to  a  ban  on  "natural"  reproductive  practices  while  applying
only  deferential  review  to  a  ban  on  new  technologies.  But  where
there  is  no  problem  of  inequality,  courts  would  probably  not,  and
should  probably  not, demand  the kind  of  overwhelming  justification
that  is  required  in  some  cases. 
Indeed,  it  seems  sensible  to
understand  the Court's precedents  as reflecting  special circumstances:
the potentially  large intrusion  on women's  bodies that is entailed by a
ban  on  abortion  or  contraception,  and  the  fact  that  when  such  bans
are in place,  women's equality is at risk.

1.  Reproductive  Cloning:  State Justifications

that  government  has  a  compelling 

I now turn to the arguments  that might be offered to justify  a ban
on reproductive  cloning.  These arguments  can be taken in two  ways.
First,  they  might  be  an  effort  to  show  that  the  government  has  a
rational  basis  for  the  ban-all  that  is  required  if,  as  I  believe,  a
fundamental  right is not involved.  Second,  they might be invoked  to
show 
in  banning
cloning-the  showing  that  is  required  under  strict
reproductive 
scrutiny.  My  basic  conclusion  is  that  most  of  the  arguments,  and
perhaps even  all of them, are sufficient  to satisfy rational  basis review.
I  also  urge  that  if  a  compelling  interest  must  be  shown,  the  most
stringent  standard  is  met  by  the  significant  risk  that  cloning  would
result in a greater deal of illness, suffering, and death.

interest 

A.  Three Weak  Arguments

(1)  Moral Repugnance

In  a widely  discussed  article,  Leon  Kass  has  pointed to  what  he
calls  the  "wisdom"  of  repugnance,  and  urged  that  disgust  or
repugnance  is by itself a sufficient reason to ban a  practice.21  There is
an  interesting  claim  in  the background  here.  Perhaps  repugnance,
even of the visceral sort, reflects  a kind  of wisdom and rationality that
is  moral
are  superior  to  readily  accessible  arguments. 
repugnance,  felt  by  many  people,  enough  to  meet  the government's
burden?

But 

The Supreme Court has indicated that it is, at least in the context
of  a prohibition  of homosexual  sodomy.'  And  undoubtedly  it is  true

21.  See  Leon  Kass,  The  Wisdom  in  Repugnance, in  CLONING:  FOR  AND  AGAINST

(1998).

22.  See 478 U.S.  at  196.

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 995 2001-2002

HASTINGS  LAW JOURNAL

[Vol.  53

that "disgust"  sometimes  captures  a sound moral intuition and  that on
reflection,  we  will  find  that  moral  repugnance  is  based  on  good
grounds.  Sometimes  repugnance  is  fully  rational.  But  standing  by
itself, and  not subject  to reason  or  scrutiny,  moral  repugnance  seems
to be  a weak  basis  for  intruding  on  a  human  choice,  no  matter what
the Court said in Hardwick.2  Moral repugnance  has been invoked for
many  bans  that  could  not  easily  withstand  analysis;  consider
prohibitions  on  racial  intermarriage  or  masturbation.  In  the  context
of  cloning,  moral  repugnance  might  well  be  a  response  to  vaguely
remembered  science 
fiction  stories  or  horror  movies,  or  to
perceptions  based  on  ignorance  and  confusion  (as  in  the  idea  that  a
clone is  a complete  "copy"  of the original,  or a  "copy"  that is  going to
be evil).  The real task is to see  if moral repugnance  can be defended,
not simply asserted.

But  these  points  remain  to  be  translated  into  constitutional
terms.  If  we  are  speaking  of  strict  scrutiny,  moral  repugnance  by
itself cannot  be  sufficient;  Loving v.  Virgini24 is  enough  to  establish
the point.  Moral  repugnance  must be  explained, not merely asserted.
But  if rational  basis  review  is  at  work,  and  if the  task  is  merely  to
describe  current  law,  moral  repugnance  does  seem  adequate  under
the  authority of Bowers v.  Hardwick. At the  same time, there is  every
reason  to  be  uneasy  with  this  conclusion.  Indeed,  in  the  context  of
discrimination  against the mentally  retarded,  offense  and repugnance
were  expressly  found  to  be  irrational  and  hence  constitutionally
inadequate.'  To  uphold  a  ban  on  reproductive  cloning,  we  should
seek some other rationale, even  under the rational basis test.

(2)  Lessening the Worth of Individuals and Threatening Individuality

Would  cloning  lessen  the  worth  of individuals?  Would  it  make
the  clone  less  of  an  individual?  The  person  whose  genetic  materials
were  used?  Would  it  diminish  the  uniqueness  of  human  identity?
Some people  think so.  No less  an authority than Ian Wilmut has said,
"I think  that each  child  should be treated  as  an  individual;  and  if you

23.  A possible  view would be  that moral repugnance  is enough  to support a law  that is
challenged  on due process clause grounds, but that it is not enough to support a law  that is
challenged  on  equal  protection  grounds.  See  Cleburne  v.  Cleburne  Living  Center,  473
U.S.  432  (1985).  This view might be  supported on the ground  that the due  process  clause
is  rooted  in  tradition,  and  hence  traditional  repugnance  is  adequate,  whereas  the  equal
protection  clause  is  not  rooted  in  tradition,  and  hence  traditional  repugnance  is
inadequate.

24.  388 U.S.  1, 11  (1967).
25.  Cleburne Living Ctr., 473 U.S. at 448.

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 996 2001-2002

July 2002]

CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHT TO  CLONE?

have chosen to make a child, who is  a copy of someone who is already
here,  you  can't  possibly  treat  that  person  as  an  individual."26  My
speculation  is  that  for  many  people,  the  idea  of  "copying"  human
beings  is unacceptable,  simply  because  of what it  seems  to  do to  the
individuals  involved.

Here  too,  however, 

the  argument  seems  to  dissolve  on
reflection.  Wilmut is making  an  empirical  claim  ("you  can't  possibly
treat  that  person  as  an  individual"),  and  taken  as  such,  the claim  is
very weak.  Identical twins are  genetically identical, and the existence
of  identical  twins  does  not lessen  the worth  of  individuals,  or  make
anyone  less  of  an  individual. 
If  John  and  Jim  are  genetically  the
same,  they are  likely to be similar  in many  ways  for that very  reason;
but  they will  not be identical,  simply because  they  will have  different
experiences,  and experiences  affect  personality  and  development.  It
is not necessary  to set out  controversial  claims  about the precise mix
of genetic  endowments  and environment in order  to make  the point.
The individuality  of the person  whose  DNA is  used to  create  a  clone
would not be compromised  by the fact; nor would the individuality  of
the  clone  be  affected  as  a  result." 
Indeed,  the  difference  between
cloning  and  ordinary  reproduction  should  not  be  overstated  on  this
count.  Many  children are  extremely close,  as  a genetic  matter, to one
or another parent.

If  we  are  speaking  of  strict  scrutiny,  a  ban  on  cloning  cannot
plausibly be  defended  on  this  ground.  Because  rational  basis  review
is so deferential,  the individuality  argument might well be sufficient to
support a ban.  But even  here, the argument is  extremely shaky.

(3)  Genetic Diversity

A  species  does  well  if it  has  a  large  stock  of  genetic  diversity.
Some people  who  are  concerned  about  human  cloning  fear  that if it
occurs, the stock will  be diminished-making  the world, or parts of it,
a  bit  like  the  English  royal  family. 
If  this  is  a  plausible  threat,
wouldn't it be legitimate  for a state  or  a nation to ban cloning for that
reason alone?

On reflection,  this too  is  an  extremely  weak  argument,  certainly
insufficient  to  satisfy  strict  scrutiny,  and  probably  insufficient  to
satisfy  rational  basis  review.  The  reason  is  simple:  it  simply  defies
belief  to  suggest  that  cloning would  become  so  popular  as  to reduce,
in  any significant  way, the existing level of genetic diversity.

26.  CNN Larry King Live (CNN television broadcast, June 24,1997).
27.  Below I address  some psychological  complications.

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 997 2001-2002

HASTINGS LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 53

B.  Three Stronger Arguments

(1)  Protecting Against Suffering and Early Death

The first  and simplest justification,  of the stronger  ones, is that in
light of the current  state  of medical  technology,  it is highly likely that
cloned  human  beings  would  face  serious  medical  problems-leading,
in  many  cases,  to  serious  illness  and  early  death.'  The  underlying
risks include  high rates  of miscarriage,  deformed  children,  premature
aging,  and  high  rates  of  cancer  and  other  diseases."  There  are
possible risks to the mother as well.'

that  standard, 

Let  us  assume  that  this  pessimistic  account  of  the  current
situation  is  accurate  as  a  scientific  matter.  If it  is  true, it  should  be
easily sufficient to satisfy rational  basis review.  Indeed, it is  probably
sufficient  to  satisfy  even  the  most  stringent  standard  of  review,
the  scientific  claims  would  be
though  under 
investigated  closely. 
If  the  claims  are  taken  to  be  adequate-as
prominent  groups have  concluded 31-then  a ban is  likely to be upheld
even  if the consequence  is to prevent the development  of technology
that  would  reduce  the  relevant  risks.  By  hypothesis,  the practice  of
cloning  would  lead  to  much  suffering  and  many  deaths.  The
government  would  therefore  have  strong  reason  to  prevent  that
practice.  Compare  the  question  of animal  welfare.  If scientists  are
experimenting  with  animals  in a  way  that will  lead  to  a  great  deal  of
suffering, the government is certainly allowed to intervene, even if the
experiments  would have many benefits too.

There  is,  however,  a  possible  counter-argument.  Roe  v.  Wade
held  that  the  interest  in  protecting  fetal  life  is  not  sufficient  to
override  the  right  of  privacy.32  Suppose  that  many  or  most  of  the
early deaths would  involve fetuses,  not viable  human beings.  Is it not
clear,  after  Roe,  that  the  interest  in  protecting  fetal  life  cannot
overcome  the  right  to  choose?  The  simplest  answer  is  that  strict
scrutiny  is  likely  not  to  be  involved,  and  hence  the  interest  in
protecting  fetal  life  is indeed  sufficient.  A slightly less  simple  answer
is  that in  light  of current technology,  a ban on  cloning would  protect
fetuses,  young  children,  and  mothers  themselves,  and  hence  the
question  turns  out  to  be  easy  after  all.  If we  are  speaking  of  strict

28.  See  REP.  OF  THE  CAL.  ADVISORY  COMMITTEE  ON  HUM.  CLONING,  CLONING
CALIFORNIANS?,  53  HASTINGS  L.J.  1145.  (2002)  [hereinafter  CLONING  CALIFORNIANS?].

29.  See id.; see also Robertson, supra note  1, at 1411.
30.  See CLONING  CALIFORNIANS?,  supra note 28, at 1164-68.
31.  See id.
32.  Roe v. Wade, 410  U.S. 113,  153  (1973).

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 998 2001-2002

July 2002]

CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHT TO  CLONE?

scrutiny,  the  best  answer  is  that  a  ban  on  cloning  is  justified  as  an
effort  to  protect  not  only  fetuses,  but  also  people  who  are  actually
born.  Even  if  a  relatively  small  percentage  of  clones  (10%?  20%?)
would  suffer  in  the  predicted  way,  the  state  almost  certainly  has
sufficient reason, as  a constitutional matter, to ban the practice.

(2)  Psychological Harm to the Clone

It is  possible  to  urge  that  the  clone  would  suffer  psychological
harm,  even psychological  trauma.  Imagine  the  likely  emotional  state
of  someone  who  knows  that  he  or  she  is  genetically  identical  to
someone  who  has  already  lived  a number  of  years.  Perhaps  such  a
person  would  believe  that  her  future  course  was  in  many  ways
preordained-that  some  possibilities  were  open  and  others  were
closed  off.  If the  clone's  genetic  equivalent suffered  from high blood
pressure,  or  diabetes,  or  cancer,  she  might  believe,  with  very  good
reason, that she  would  face  those  problems  as  well.  Other problems
are more subtle.  If the genetically  identical parent  faced  a depressing
career  path,  or  had  unappealing  physical  features  or  an  unpleasant
smile or  laugh, or was  severely  overweight,  it might prove  difficult-
far worse than distressing-for  the clone.

These  are  hardly  implausible  concerns,  but  they  do  involve  a
degree  of  speculation.  We  do  not  know  whether  in  most  or  many
cases,  the  psychological  harms  would  be  serious. 
Identical  twins
appear  to  do  very  well  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  psychological
harm  could  be  predicted  in  the  abstract.  To  be  sure,  the  case  of
human  cloning  would  be  different,  simply  because  of  the  age
difference  between  the  people  involved;  the  harms  I  am  discussing
would  be  a  product  of  seeing  a  life  that  has  run much  of  its  course.
But  biology  is  not  (entirely)  destiny,  and  we  could  easily  imagine
young people  concluding  that  even  if they  are  genetically  equivalent
to  one  or  another  parent,  or  some  other living  person,  their path  is
hardly  foreordained.  Is  cloning  so  radically  different,  on  this  count,
from ordinary  reproduction?  I am not sure.

As far  as the  Constitution  is  concerned,  however,  the  issue  will
be  resolved  by  selection  of  the  governing  standard.  If  the  rational
basis  test  is  involved,  the  arguments  from  psychological  harm  are
undoubtedly  sufficient.  If strict  scrutiny is  the  appropriate  standard,
the  speculative  nature  of  the  argument  is  probably  decisive,  and  the
ban could not be defended  on this ground alone.

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 999 2001-2002

1000

HASTINGS LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 53

(3)  Use and Exploitation of Human Beings

Of the stronger arguments  for banning  reproductive  cloning, the
third is the most interesting.  Imagine  a situation in which  cloning was
freely permitted-in which  individuals  could clone  themselves, and in
which  people interested  in children with  a certain genetic  endowment
could assure themselves of that very endowment.  If a family wanted a
terrific  athlete,  it could  obtain  a  genetic  equivalent  of,  say,  Michael
Jordan;  if  it  wanted  a  terrific  musician,  it  could  obtain  a  genetic
equivalent  of, say, Bob  Dylan;  if it  wanted a  terrific  scientist, it  could
obtain  a  genetic  equivalent  of, say,  Ian Wilmut; if it wanted  a terrific
philosopher,  it  could  clone  John  Rawls.  Why  would  this  be
objectionable?  The  reason  is  that  people  would  be  treating  their
children-to-be  as  means,  with  prearranged  agendas,  rather  than  as
ends, to seek  their own path.  Someone who  seeks  a clone  of Michael
Jordan  might  well have  a  particular  plan  in mind for that  individual.
So  too with  anyone who  has sought,  and been  able, to  choose people
with  one or  another  genetic  endowment.  In  such  cases,  the parents
would  be  carefully  programming  their  children's  future,  and  likely,
perhaps, to keep the program in mind throughout childhood.

Of  course  this  is  not  altogether  different  from  ordinary  life.
Many  parents  have particular  plans for their  children.  Many  parents
are  insistent  on  those  plans.  Sperm  and  egg  donations  depend,  in
part,  on  perceptions  about  genetic  endowments.  But  the  particular
programming  that  I am  now discussing  cannot  be achieved.  Perhaps
parents  who  produce  clones  will,  too  much  of  the  time,  treat  their
own  children  not  as  ends  but  as  means.3  If  we  see  a  significant
increase 
there  would  seem  to  be
considerable  reason for concern.

in  that  kind  of  treatment, 

Is this  an adequate  justification,  by itself, for banning  cloning?  If
the  rational  basis  test  is  at  work,  it  certainly  is;  and  for  reasons
suggested  above,  rational  basis  should  be all that  should  be required
here.  But  if  we  probe  a  bit  more  deeply,  we  will  uncover  some
complexities.  The  argument  depends  on  a  speculation  about  what
people  would  do,  and  we  do  not  know  if  the  speculation  can  be
supported.  Perhaps  most people  would  clone  themselves,  or  would
seek  clones  of strangers who  meet some  genetic minimum,  and would
not  attempt  to  clone  particular  individuals  with  particular  traits  and
career paths.  Perhaps this would be rare.  Probably  those who  cloned
people  with  particular  characteristics  would,  almost  all  of  the  time,

33.  Robertson, supra note 1, at 1418.

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 1000 2001-2002

July 2002]

CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHT TO CLONE?

treat their  children with  love  and respect.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  strict
scrutiny  is not  easy to  satisfy,  and  here, as  elsewhere,  a  widespread
argument  against human cloning seems to rest on weak  grounds.

I1.  Therapeutic Cloning

Therapeutic  cloning  presents  quite  different issues.'  Here  there
is no  effort to create actual  human beings.  Children  are not involved.
My basic conclusion  is that it is not at all easy  to argue that there is  a
fundamental  right  to  engage  in  therapeutic  cloning-indeed,  the
argument  for  that  right  is  weaker,  as  a  legal  matter,  than  the
argument for a right to engage  in reproductive  cloning.  On the other
hand,  the  justifications  for  banning  therapeutic  cloning  are  also
relatively  weak-much  weaker, 
the  strongest
justifications  for  banning  reproductive  cloning.  To  understand  the
constitutional  issues  associated  with  a  ban  on  therapeutic  cloning,  a
brief background is in order.

than 

fact, 

in 

A.  A (Very) Little Science

Here,  in  brief,  is  how  therapeutic  cloning  would  work.  An
embryo  would  be  created  and  allowed  to  grow  for  a  short  period,
perhaps  fourteen  days.  Its  stem  cells  would  then  be  extracted  and
grown  into  human  tissue  or  a  complete  human  organ  for transplant.
The result  of the process would not be a human  being, but a piece  of
nerve  tissue,  or  a  replacement  organ,  or  a  certain  amount  of  skin.
The  goal  would  be  to  grow  replacement  organs  from  a  sample  of
someone's DNA.

It is  not clear  if and when  therapeutic  cloning  will  succeed,  but
the potential benefits  are  enormous.  In theory, people  could receive
perfectly  matched  replacement  organs,  with  little  or  no  danger  of
rejection  of  the  transplant.  Insulin-secreting  cells  could  be  used  to
treat  diabetes;  nerve  cells  could  be  used  for  Parkinson's  disease  or
strokes;  liver  cells  could  be  used  to  repair  damaged  organs.  There
would be no need  to wait for the death  of a donor.  Nonreproductive
cloning  could  also  produce  significant  benefits  for  knowledge  and
research, with eventual medical advances  as well.

B.  No  Fundamental Right

Is  there  a  fundamental  right  to  engage  in  therapeutic  cloning?
The issue  is quite  different from  the case of reproductive  cloning,  for

34.  As recognized  in national and  California reports on the point.  See supra note 28.

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 1001 2001-2002

1002

HASTINGS  LAW JOURNAL

[Vol.  53

childbirth  is  not  in  any  sense  involved.  Hence  the  precedents  that
might support a right to reproductive  cloning cannot  be invoked  here.
For constitutional purposes,  the central  question is whether there is a
presumptive right to  select medical treatments.  Those  who  seek  to
engage  in therapeutic  cloning might  be  protected  if the Constitution
recognizes  such  a  presumptive  right.  We  can  imagine  patients,  or
derivatively  scientists  and researchers, urging that the right to privacy
includes  a  presumptive  right  to  noninterference  with  choices  among
medical treatments  that are crucial to people's well-being.

At  first  glance,  however,  the  mere  statement  of  the  question
serves  as  an  answer.  No  Supreme  Court decision  suggests that  there
is  any  such  right.  Indeed,  daily  practice  argues  against  its  existence.
The Food  and  Drug Administration  controls  the kinds  of medicines
that doctors  may prescribe and that patients may choose.  It would be
fanciful  to  attack  those  controls  on  constitutional  grounds.  Now
perhaps  it  could  be  urged  that  in  the  relevant  cases,  the  FDA  is
attempting  to  protect  people  against  fraud  or  deception,  or  against
the effects  of their  own ignorance,  and that  these are not the grounds
for  forbidding  nonreproductive  cloning.  Probably  this  is  true.  But
the key point is that the FDA is not required to justify its decisions  in
the terms of strict scrutiny, on pain of constitutional invalidation.

We have seen  that it is not  implausible  to argue,  on  the  strength
of Roe v.  Wade, that the government would  be required  to produce a
strong  justification  for  any  effort  to  ban  in  vitro  fertilization  or
surrogacy  arrangements.  But  nothing  in  Roe  v.  Wade  supports  the
right to choose medical  treatments.  Recall that the Court has  upheld
a ban on physician-assisted  suicide,  applying rational  basis review. 5  If
people  do  not  have  a  right  to  choose  death,  it  is  unlikely  that  they
have  a  right  to  a  particular  set  of  medical  experiments  that  might
ultimately  benefit  them.  Or  consider  another  analogy: 
scientific
experiments  on  animals.  Must the government justify  a limitation  on
such  experiments  in  the  terms  of  strict  scrutiny,  simply  because
important  medical  advances  might result?  This is most  doubtful.  No
court has  ever suggested  that strict  scrutiny will  apply to  government
efforts to protect  animals in the process of experimentation.

I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  the  area  lacks  complexities.
Perhaps  it could  be argued  that while  there is  no  right to die,  there is
a  right  to  live,  and  that  when  a  patient  seeks  to  use  medical
technology  that  is  the  (only)  means  of  saving  his  life,  that  the
government  should  be required  to  produce  an  unusually  convincing

35.  Washington v. Glucksberg,  521  U.S. 702,735 (1997).

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 1002 2001-2002

July 20021

CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHT TO CLONE?

1003

justification.  This  is  not  entirely  implausible.  But  it  would  go  well
beyond 
the  existing  precedents,  and  it  would  also  have  the
disadvantage  of  requiring  careful  judicial  oversight  of  numerous
decisions  by the FDA.  One  of my general  themes has been  the value
of  judicial  deference,  under  the  due  process  clause,  in  the  face  of
complex  disputes  of  fact  and  value.  A  posture  of  deference  makes
best sense here  as elsewhere. 6

C.  Elusive Justifications

What interests support a ban on therapeutic cloning?  The  answer
is not simple.  Those who object to  therapeutic cloning  tend to believe
that  personhood  begins  at  conception,  and  that  the  state  should  not
use  "persons"  for  the  benefit  of  others. 
Is  this  an  adequate
justification?  In the case of rational basis review?

It  might  be  tempting  to  say  that  this justification  is  inadequate
after Roe v.  Wade.  In Roe, after all, the  Court held that the interest in
protecting  fetal  life  was  not  sufficient  to justify  a  ban  on  abortion.
But  the  temptation  should  be  resisted.  Roe  holds  only  that  the
interest in  protecting  fetal  life  is  inadequate  to override  the  woman's
right  to  choose;  it  does  not  hold  that  the  interest  is  illegitimate  or
weightless.  It  seems  clear  that  government  can  make  it  a  crime  for
third  parties  to  kill  first-trimester  fetuses,  whether  they  are  inside
women's  wombs  or  in 
the  laboratory;  and  to  justify  such  a
prohibition,  it  is  not  necessary  for  government  to  say  that  first-
trimester fetuses  are human beings.

But what  is  the  reason  for  forbidding  nonreproductive  cloning?
Those  who  object  to  therapeutic  cloning  may  be  unsure  whether
personhood  begins  at  conception,  but  may  nonetheless  press  two
points.  First,  they  may  think  that  the  use  of human  pre-embryos  is
itself a  moral  wrong.  Second,  they may  urge  that  the  use  of  human
embryos  could  tend to have  subtle but ultimately  corrosive  effects  on
human values,  in ways that will lead  to  an  assortment  of problems-a
point  that might  seem  especially  powerful  in  light of  the  prospect  of
"embryo  factories."  If rational  basis  review  is  at  work,  these  points
should  be  sufficient  to  support  the  ban  as  a  matter  of  constitutional
law.  But  I  am  not  sure  whether  to  endorse  the  claims  in  principle.
Why  is  it  a  moral  wrong  to  use  pre-embryos  in  the  suggested  way?
Animals  are frequently  used  as means;  most  of these  uses  are lawful,
and  at least  some of them  seem morally  acceptable.  Do pre-embryos

36.  I do not  discuss  the question whether  there is a first amendment right to engage in

medical  or scientific research.  The law  is ill-developed  on this  point.

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 1003 2001-2002

HASTINGS  LAW JOURNAL

[Vol. 53

have  such  a  strong  claim  to  protection?  Or  consider  the  view  that
human  values  will  be  corroded  by  nonreproductive  cloning.  Why,
exactly,  should this  be feared,  if nonreproductive  cloning  is  not itself
morally  wrong  for  the  purposes  and  in  the  circumstances  I  am
describing?  The empirical  claim seems most doubtful.  If the relevant
"embryo  factories"  really  involve  tiny  cell  combinations,  is  the
problem so serious?

Perhaps  the  strongest  ground  for  banning  nonreproductive
cloning has  nothing to  do with  these  points.  Perhaps  it is  a  different
sort  of  empirical  claim,  to  the  effect  that  a  ban  on nonreproductive
cloning  is  a  necessary  means  for  enforcing  the  ban  on  reproductive
cloning. 
It  might  be  feared  that  if  nonreproductive  cloning  is
permitted,  some  people,  at  some  point, will  inevitably  use  the  pre-
embryos  in the forbidden way,  so  as to produce,  or  to try to produce,
children.  Here too, there are many  doubts.  If reproductive  cloning is
a  crime,  should we really fear that  nonreproductive  cloning would be
used for that by-hypothesis  unlawful  end?  But if rational basis  review
is at work, this justification should be sufficient.

Conclusion

This has been a lawyer's  essay, exploring the constitutional  issue,
not the  question  of  policy.  I  have  argued  that  bans  on  cloning  are
constitutional, not that they are a good idea.

With respect  to substantive  due process, I have  offered  a  general
claim.  The Court should be most reluctant  to invoke  the due process
clause  to strike  down  legislation  on  substantive  grounds.  Where  the
Court  has  acted,  it  has  usually  done  so  because  of  an  implicit
understanding  that  the  case  did  not  simply  involve  substantive  due
process.  In cases  involving  sexuality  and reproduction,  a  question  of
sex equality was also involved.  The argument  for a cautious  approach
to  the due process  clause  depends  in part on  a  belief that  the  idea  of
"substantive  due process"  is  awkward  as a matter  of text and history.
But it also  depends  on  a belief  in judicial fallibility,  especially  in the
domain of complex  facts  and contested  values.  Simply  because  of its
complexity, the area  of cloning is a prime arena for judicial deference.
Unless  there is  some problem in the process  that led to the law under
review, courts should be hesitant to interpose their  own views,  at least
outside  of  the  most  egregious  cases.  Tradition  is  indeed  relevant
here,  at least  as  a  way  of undertaking  the inquiry  into  egregiousness;
an  unprecedented  intrusion  is  likely  to  be  especially  egregious.
Tradition  does not exhaust  the substantive  content  of the due process

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 1004 2001-2002

July 20021

CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHT TO  CLONE?

clause.  But the intrusion marked by bans  on cloning  does not rise  to
the level of intrusions the Court has marked for invalidation;  and that
is sufficient for my basic conclusion here.

In  both  cases, 

I have argued  that there is no constitutional right to clone  human
beings  for  reproductive  purposes,  and  hence  a  ban  on  cloning,  for
those purposes, would and should be upheld.  I have  also  argued  that
there is no  constitutional  right to clone  human beings  for  therapeutic
purposes. 
the  Constitution  does  not  create  a
presumptively  protected  right-and  thus  the  government  is  not
required to show more  than  a rational justification for its  actions.  In
both  cases,  the  government  has  such  a justification.  In  the  case  of
reproductive  cloning, the best argument  is the least  sectarian-that  a
ban  is  necessary  to  protect  against  human  suffering.  In the  case  of
therapeutic  cloning,  a  ban  is  far  harder  to  justify.  But  so  long  as
rationality  review  is  at work,  it is  probably  sufficient  to  say  that  the
ban  on  therapeutic  cloning  is  a  means  of  making  the  ban  on
reproductive  cloning effective.

At  the  same  time,  the  analysis  has  shown  that  many  of  the
standard  objections  to  human  cloning  are  extremely  weak.  Some  of
those objections  depend  on ignorance  and confusion,  or  on  a kind  of
half-remembered  message  from  old  science fiction  movies.  By itself,
repugnance  should  not be, in principle,  an  adequate  justification  for
law.  An unintended  by-product  of  a discussion  of the  constitutional
issue  may be  to take  some  small steps  toward  something  that is  long
overdue and much needed  in the political arena:  A disaggregation  of
the  issues  that  are  involved  in  reproductive  and  nonreproductive
cloning,  and  a  separation  of  the  diverse,  sometimes  strong,  but
sometimes  implausible  grounds  that  are  invoked  on  behalf  of
statutory bans in both domains.

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 1005 2001-2002

HeinOnline  -- 53 Hastings L.J. 1006 2001-2002

