University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2002

Conformity and Dissent
Cass R. Sunstein

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Conformity and Dissent" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 164, 2002).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 164 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
Conformity and Dissent 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: 
http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
 
The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=341880

 

 

 

 

Preliminary draft 9/26/02 
All rights reserved 
 
 
 

Conformity and Dissent 

 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
 
 
Abstract 

 
Much of the time, human beings do what others do. This is perfectly sensible, because the 
actions and statements of other people convey valuable information about what should be 
done. In addition, most people want the good opinion of others, and this desire promotes 
conformity.  But  conformity  can  lead  both  groups  and  institutions  in  unfortunate  and 
even catastrophic directions. The most serious problem is that by following others, people 
fail  to  disclose  what  they  know  and  believe,  thus  depriving  society  of  important 
information. Those who dissent, and who reject the pressures imposed by others, perform 
valuable  social  functions,  often  at  their  own  expense,  material  or  nonmaterial.  These 
points  are  illustrated  by  reference  to  theoretical  and  empirical  work  on  conformity, 
cascades, and group polarization.  An understanding of the role of conformity and dissent 
casts new light on a variety of legal issues, including the expressive function of law; the 
institutions  of  the  American  constitution;  the  functions  of  free  speech  in  wartime;  the 
debate  over  the  composition  of  the  federal  judiciary;  and  affirmative  action  in  higher 
education. 
 
 
“If I were to choose between living in a society which enjoys freedom of 
 
expression,  but  not  having  the  right  myself,  or  enjoying  the  right  in  a  society 
which  does  not  have  it,  I  would  have  no  hesitation  in  judging  that  my  own 
personal interest is better served by the first option.”1 
 
                                                 
*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  Law  School  and 
Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. For valuable comments, I am grateful to 
Jacob  Gersen,  Reid  Hastie,  David  Hirshleifer,  Christine  Jolls,  Catharine  MacKinnon,  Martha 
Nussbaum, Susan Moller Okin, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Lior Strahilevitz, Adrian Vermeule, 
and Richard Zeckhauser.  
1 Joseph Raz, Ethics in the Public Domain 39 (1994). 

 

“As soon as a person is in the midst of a group he is no longer indifferent 
 
to it. He may stand in a wholly unequivocal relation to an object when alone; but 
as soon as a group and its direction are present he ceases to be determined solely 
by his own coordinates. In some way he refers the group to himself and himself 
to  the  group.  He  might  react  to  the  group  in  many  different  ways;  he  might 
adopt  its  direction,  compromise  with  it,  or  oppose  it;  he  might  even  decide  to 
disregard  it.  But  even  in  the  latter  instance  (which  superficially  seems  to  be  an 
‘absence  of  group  influence’)  there  is  a  clear  and  determined  reference  to  the 
group as fully as in the preceding cases.”2 
 

“Justice Marshall brought a special perspective. . . . His was the mouth of 
a man who knew the anguish of the silenced and gave them a voice. . . . I have 
been  perhaps  most  personally  affected  by  Justice  Marshall  as  a  raconteur  .  .  .  . 
Occasionally, at Conference meetings, I still catch myself looking expectantly for 
his  raised  brow  and  his  twinkling  eye,  hoping  to  hear,  just  once  more,  another 
story that would, by and by, perhaps change the way I see the world.”3 
 

“A child, however, who had no important job and could only see things as 
his eyes showed them to him, went up to the carriage. ‘The Emperor is naked,’ he 
said.”4 
 
“[W]hile individual ideology and panel composition both have important 
effects on a judge’s vote, the ideology of one’s colleagues is a better predictor of 
one’s vote than one’s own ideology.”5 
 

 
I. Introduction 
 

 

Consider some clues: 

How  do  people  influence  each  other?  What  are  the  social  functions  of 
dissenters,  malcontents,  and  skeptics?  How  do  the  answers  to  these  questions 
bear on law and policy, and on the design of private and public institutions?  

                                                 
2 Solomon Asch, Social Psychology 483 (1952). 
3 See Sandra Day O’Connor, Thurgood Marshall: The Influence of a Raconteur, 44 Stan. L. Rev. 
1217, 1217, 1220 (1992). 
4  See  Hans  Christian  Anderson,  The  Emperor’s  New  Suit,  in  Hans  Christian  Anderson,  Shorter 
Tales (Jean Hersholt trans. 1948; originally published 1837). 
5 Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the DC Circuit, 83 Va L Rev 1717, 
1764 (1997). 

2 

 

 
—A large number of judicial votes and decisions were investigated to see 
if it matters whether a panel, on a federal court of appeals, includes two judges, 
or  instead  three,  appointed  by  a  President  of  the  same  party.6  It  is  tempting  to 
suggest  that  this  should  not  matter  at  all;  two  judges,  after  all,  are  able  to 
produce a majority decision. But this suggestion turns out to be wrong. A panel 
with three judges appointed by Republican presidents is much more likely than a 
panel with two to reverse an environmental decision at the behest of an industry 
challenger.7 A group of three like-minded judges behaves very differently from a 
group with more diverse views. No less remarkably, a single Democratic judge, 
sitting  with  two  Republicans,  turns  out  to  be  more  likely  to  vote  in  favor  of  an 
industry  challenge  to  a  regulation  than  a  single  Republican,  sitting  with  two 
Democrats.8  It  is  not  entirely  wrong  to  conclude  that  when  sitting  with 
Republicans,  Democratic  judges  vote  like  Republicans,  and  that  when  sitting 
with  Democrats,  Republican  judges  vote  like  Democrats.  But  this  conclusion  is 
itself  misleading,  because  how  Democrats  vote,  and  how  Republicans  vote,  is 
very  much  dependent  on  whether  they  are  sitting  with  one  or  two  judges 
appointed by presidents of the same party.9  
 

—Ordinary  citizens  were  asked  to  say,  as  individuals,  how  much  a 
defendant should be punished for specified misconduct.10 Their responses were 
measured on a scale of 0 to 8, where 0 meant no punishment at all and 8 meant 
“extremely  severe”  punishment.11  After  recording  their  individual  judgments, 
people were sorted into six-person juries, which were asked to deliberate and to 
reach unanimous verdicts. When the individual jurors favored little punishment, 
the  group  showed  a  "leniency  shift,"  meaning  a  rating  that  was  systematically 
lower than the median rating of individual members before they started to talk 

                                                 
6 The statements in this paragraph are based on my independent research, presented below, and 
on Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the DC Circuit, 83 Va L Rev 1717, 
1755  (1997).  To  the  same  effect,  see  Frank  Cross  and  Emerson  Tiller,  Judicial  Partisanship  and 
Obedience  to  Legal  Doctrine,  107  Yale  LJ  2155  (1998)  (finding  that  a  panel  of  three  Republican 
judges  is  far  more  likely  to  reject  agency  action,  in  order  to  reach  a  conclusion  that  would  be 
predicted of that panel on political grounds, than a panel of two Republicans and one Democrat). 
7 See the data discussed below; see also Revesz, supra note, at 1754-55 (also finding that a panel of 
three judges appointed by the president of the same party behaves differently from a panel with 
judges appointed by presidents of different parties) . 
8 See id. at 1752. 
9 Id. at 1752, 1754. 
10 See David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating About Dollars, 100 
Colum L Rev 1139 (2001). 
11 Id. at 1150. 

3 

 

with  one  another.12  But  when  individual  jurors  favored  strong  punishment,  the 
group  as  a  whole  produced  a  "severity  shift,"  meaning  a  rating  that  was 
systematically higher than the median rating of individual members before they 
started to talk.13 The direction and the extent of the shift were determined by the 
median ranking of individual jurors, and because one or two dissenters from the 
majority view could shift the median, they could make a significant difference. 

 
My principal claim in this Article is that for each of us, conformity is often 
a rational course of action, but when all or most of us conform, society can end 
up  making  large  mistakes.  One  reason  we  conform  is  that  we  often  lack  much 
information  of  our  own,  and  the  decisions  of  others  provide  the  best  available 
information  about  what  should  be  done.14  The  central  problem  is  that 
widespread conformity deprives the public of information that it needs to have. 
Conformists  are  often  thought  to  be  protective  of social interests, keeping quiet 
for  the  sake  of  the  group,  while  dissenters  tend  to  be  seen  as  selfish 
individualists, embarking on projects of their own. But in an important sense, the 
opposite is closer to the truth. In many situations, dissenters benefit others, while 
conformists benefit themselves.  

 
In  a  well-functioning  democracy,  institutions  reduce  the  risks  that 
accompany  conformity,  in  part because they meet conformity with dissent,  and 
hence increase the likelihood that more information will emerge, to the benefit of 
all.  A  high-level  official  during  World  War  II  attributed  the  successes  of  the 
Allies, and the failures of Hitler and the other Axis powers, to the greater ability 
of  citizens  in  democracies  to  scrutinize  and  dissent,  and  hence  to  improve  past 
and  proposed  courses  of  action.15  Dissent  and  scrutiny  were  possible  because 
skeptics were not punished by the law and because informal punishments, in the 
form  of  social  pressures,  were  relatively  weak.  I  will  suggest  that  an 
understanding  of  group  influences,  and  their  potentially  harmful  effects,  casts 
new  light  on  a  wide  range  of  issues,  including  the  nature  of  the  American 

                                                 
12 Id. at 1152, 1154-55. 
13 Id.  
14 See the discussion of imitation as a fast and frugal heuristic in Joseph Henrich et al., What Is the 
Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality, in Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox 343, 344 
(Gerd  Gigerenzer  and  Richard  Selten  eds.  2002)  (“Cultural  transmission  capacities  allow 
individuals to shortcut the costs of search, experimentation, and data processing algorithms, and 
instead  benefit  from  the  cumulative  experience  stored  in  the  minds  (and  observed  in  the 
behavior) of others.”). 
15  See  Luther  Gulick,  Administrative  Reflections  from  World  War  II  (1948).  Irving  Janis, 
Groupthink (2d ed. 1985), can be seen as a generalization of this theme. 

4 

 

constitutional  structure;  the  functions  of  bicameralism;  the  sources  of  ethnic 
hostility and political radicalism; the importance of civil liberties in wartime and 
during  social  panics  and  witch-hunts;  the  performance  of  juries;  the  effects  of 
diversity on the federal judiciary; affirmative action in higher education; and the 
potentially large consequences of law even when it is never enforced.  

 
Throughout  I  focus  on  two  influences  on  individual  belief  and  behavior. 
The  first  involves  the  information  conveyed  by  the  actions  and  statements  of 
other people. If a number of people seem to believe that some proposition is true, 
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  that  proposition  is  in  fact  true.  Most  of  what  we 
think—about facts, morality, and law—is a product not of first-hand knowledge, 
but  of  what  we  learn  from  what  others  do  and  think.  This  is  true  even  though 
they too may be merely following the crowd. As we shall see, this phenomenon 
can  create  serious  problems  for  the  system  of  precedent,  as  when  courts  of 
appeals  follow  previous  courts  that  are  in  turn  following  their  predecessors, 
creating  a  danger  of  widespread,  self-perpetuating  error.  And  of  course  some 
people  have  more  influence  than  others,  simply  because  the  decisions  of  those 
people  convey  more  information;  we  are  especially  likely  to  follow  those  who 
have special expertise, those who seem most like us, those who fare best, or those 
whom we otherwise have reason to trust.16 

 
The second influence is the pervasive human desire to have and to retain 
the  good  opinion  of  others.  If  a  number  of  people  seem  to  believe  something, 
there  is  reason  not  to  disagree  with  them,  at  least  not  in  public.  The  desire  to 
maintain  the  good  opinion  of  others  breeds  conformity  and  squelches  dissent, 
especially but not only in groups that are connected by bonds of affection, which 
can  therefore  impair  group  performance.  We  shall  see  that  close-knit  groups, 
discouraging  conflict  and  disagreement,  often  do  badly  for  that  very  reason.  In 
any case much of human behavior is a product of social influences. For example, 
employees are far more likely to file suit if members of the same workgroup have 
also done so17; teenage girls who see that other teenagers are having children are 
more  likely  to  become  pregnant  themselves18;  the  perceived  behavior  of  others 

                                                 
16  See  Daniel  Goldstein  et  al.,  Why  and  When  Do  Simple  Heuristics  Work?,  in  Bounded 
Rationality,  note  supra,  at  174–76;  Robert  Boyd  and  Peter  Richerson,  Norms  and  Bounded 
Rationality, in id. at 284–87. 
17  See  Harold  H.  Gardner,  Nathan  L.  Kleinman,  and  Richard  J.  Butler,  Workers’  Compensation 
and Family and Medical Leave Act Claim Contagion, 20 J Risk and Uncertainty 89, 101–110 (2000) 
18 See, e.g., George A. Akerlof, Janet L. Yellen & Michael L. Katz, An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock 
Childbearing in the United States, 111 Q.J. Econ. 277 (1996). 

5 

 

has a large effect on the level of violent crime19; broadcasters mimic one another, 
lower  courts 
producing  otherwise 
fads 
sometimes  do  the  same,  especially  in  highly  technical  areas,  and  hence  judicial 
mistakes may never be corrected.21 

in  programming20; 

inexplicable 

 
We should not lament social influences or wish them away. Much of the 
time, people do better when they take close account of what others do. Some of 
the  time,  we  even  do  best  to  follow  others  blindly.  But  social  influences  also 
diminish  the  total  level  of  information  within  any  group,  and  they  threaten, 
much  of  the  time,  to  lead  individuals  and  institutions  in  the  wrong  directions. 
Dissent  can  be  an  important  corrective;  many  groups  and  institutions  have  too 
little of it.22 As we shall see, conformists are free-riders, whereas dissenters often 
confer  benefits  on  others;  and  it  is  tempting  to  free-ride.  As  we  shall  also  see, 
social  pressures  are  likely  to  lead  groups  of  like-minded  people  to  extreme 
positions.  When  groups  become  caught  up  in  hatred  and  violence,  it  is  rarely 
because of economic deprivation23 or primordial suspicions24; it is far more often 
a  product  of  the  informational  and  reputational  influences  discussed  here.25 
Indeed, unjustified extremism frequently results from a “crippled epistemology,” 
in  which  extremists  react  to  a  small  subset  of  relevant  information,  coming 
mostly from one another.26  

 

                                                 
19  See  Edward  Glaeser,  E.  Sacerdote,  and  Jose  Scheinkman,  Crime  and  Social  Interactions,  111 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 507 (1996). 
20  See  Robert  Kennedy,  Strategy  Fads  and  Strategic  Positioning:  An  Empirical  Test  for  Herd 
Behavior in Prime-Time Television Programming, J. Industrial Economics (2002). 
21 See Andrew F. Daughtety and Jennifer F. Reinganum, Stampede to Judgment, 1 Am Law and 
Ec. Rev. 158 (1999). 
22 Hence Mill’s claim that “the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is 
robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing generation; those who dissent from the 
opinion,  stil  more  than  those  who  hold  it.  If  the  opinion  is  right,  they  are  deprived  of  the 
opportunity of exchanging error for truth; if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, 
the clearer perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with error.” John 
Stuart  Mill,  On  Liberty,  in  John  Stuart  Mill,  Utilitarianism,  On  Liberty,  Considerations  on 
Representative Government 85 (H.B. Acton ed. 1972) 
23 See Alan B. Krueger and Jitka Maleckova, Education, Poverty, Political Violence and Terrorism: 
Is There a Causal Connection? (unpublished manuscript 2002).  
24 See Timur Kuran, Ethnic Norms and Their Transformation Through Reputational Cascades, 27 
J Legal Stud 623, 648 (1998). 
25  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Why  They  Hate  Us:  The  Role  of  Social  Dynamics,  25  Harv  J  Law  and 
Public Policy 429 (2002). 
26  See  Russell  Hardin,  The  Crippled  Epistemology  of  Extremism,  in  Political  Rationality  and 
Extremism 3, 16 (Albert Breton et al. eds. 2002). 

6 

 

Similar  processes  occur  in  less  dramatic  forms.  Many  large-scale  shifts 
within legislatures, bureaucracies, and courts are best explained by reference to 
social  influences.  When  a  legislature  suddenly  shows  concern  with  some 
formerly neglected problem—for example, hazardous waste dumps or corporate 
misconduct—the  concern  is  often  a  product  of  conformity  effects,  not  of  real 
engagement with the problem. Of course the new concern might be justified. But 
if social influences are encouraging people to conceal information that they have, 
or if the blind are leading the blind, serious problems are likely. There is a further 
point.  With  relatively  small  "shocks,"  similar  groups  can  be  lead,  by  social 
pressures, to dramatically different beliefs and actions. When societies differ, or 
when  large-scale  changes  occur  over  time,  the  reason  often  lies  not  where  we 
usually look, but in small and sometimes elusive factors.27  

  
An  appreciation  of  informational  influences,  and  of  people’s  concern  for 
the good opinion of others, helps to show how, and when, law can alter behavior 
without  being  enforced—and  merely  by  virtue  of  the  signal  that  it  provides.28 
The central point here is that law can provide reliable evidence both about what 
should be done and about what most people think should be done. In either case, 
it  can  convey  a  great  deal  of  relevant  information.29  Consider  bans  on  public 
smoking and on sexual harassment. If people think that the law is speaking for 
the view of most or all, potential violators are less likely to engage in smoke or to 
engage  in  sexual  harassment.  Potential  victims  are  also  more  likely  to  take  the 
steps to enforce the law privately, as, for example, through reminding people of 
their legal responsibilities, and insisting  that  violators come into compliance. In 
this light we can better understand the much-disputed claim that the law has an 
“expressive  function.”30  By  virtue  of  that  function,  law  can  even  stop  or 

                                                 
27  See  Joseph  Henrich,  What  is  the  Role  of  Culture  in  Bounded  Rationality?,  in  Bounded 
Rationality:  The  Adaptive Toolbox 353-54 (2001), for an entertaining outline in connection with 
food  choice  decisions.  For  example:  “Many  Germans  believe  that  drinking  water  after  eating 
cherries  is  deadly;  they  also  believe  that  putting  ice  in  soft  drinks  is  unhealthy.  The  English, 
however,  rather  enjoy  a  cold  drink  of  water  after  some  cherries;  and  Americans  love  icy 
refreshments.  ”  Id.  at  353.  See  also  Paul  Omerod,  Butterfly  Economics  (1993),  for  a  popular 
account. 
28 See Robert Kagan and Jerome Skolnick, Banning Smoking: Compliance Without Enforcement, 
in  Smoking  Policy  (Robert  Rabin  and  Stephen  Sugarman  eds.)  (New  York:  Oxford  University 
Press, 1993). 
29 See Richard McAdams, Norms Theory: An Attitudinal Theory of Expressive Law, 79 Oregon L. 
Rev. 339 (2000). 
30  Mathew  Adler,  Expressivist  Theories  of  Law:  A  Skeptical  Overview,  148  U  Pa  L  Rev  1363 
(2000); Symposium, The Expressive Dimension of Governmental Action: Philosophical and Legal 
Perspectives, 60 Maryland L. Rev. 465 (2001). 

7 

 

accelerate a social cascade.31 Here too the areas of cigarette smoking and sexual 
harassment  are  relevant  examples.  But  if  would-be  violators  are  part  of  a 
dissident subcommunity, they might well be able to resist law’s expressive effect; 
fellow  dissidents  can  band  together  and  encourage  one  another  to  violate  the 
law.  Indeed,  informational  and  reputational  factors  can  even  encourage 
widespread  noncompliance,  as,  for  example,  in  drug  use  and  failure  to  comply 
with the tax laws.32 The law’s expressive power is partly a function of its moral 
authority, and when law lacks that authority within a subcommunity, its signal 
may be irrelevant or even counterproductive. 
 

This  Article  is  divided  into  seven  parts.  Parts  II,  III,  and  IV  investigate 
social science evidence involving, respectively, conformity, cascades, and group 
polarization.  A  unifying  theme  is  that  in  all  three  contexts,  individuals  are 
suppressing their private signals—about what is true and what is right—and that 
this suppression can cause significant social harm. Groups of like-minded people 
are especially vulnerable on this count. Part V focuses on the expressive function 
of  law  and  in  particular  on  the  phenomenon  of  “compliance  without 
enforcement.”  Part  VI  catalogues  some  implications  of  social  influences  for 
judicial  confirmations,  and  affirmative  action  in  higher 
constitutionalism, 
education.  Here  I  urge  that  the  principal  contribution  of  the  framers  of  the 
American  Constitution  lay  not  in  their  endorsement  of  deliberative  democracy, 
but  in  their  insistence  that  diversity  is  an  affirmative  good,  likely  to  improve 
deliberation.  This  enthusiasm  for  diversity  helps  account  for  the  systems  of 
checks and balances and federalism. I also suggest that it is important to attempt 
to provide a mix of views on the federal bench; indeed, consideration should be 
given  to  increasing  the  likelihood  that  panels,  on  courts  of  appeals,  contain 
judges  appointed  by  president  of  different  parties.  I  urge  as  well  that  in  those 
cases  in  which  racial  diversity  will  improve  discussion,  it  is  entirely  legitimate 
for colleges and universities to attempt to promote racial diversity. Part VII is a 
brief conclusion. 

 

II.  Conformity and Independence 

 
Why,  and  when,  do  people  do  what  others  do?  To  answer  this  question, 
we need to distinguish between hard questions and easy ones. Intuition suggests 

                                                 
31 See Dan Kahan, Gentle Nudges vs. Hard Shoves: Solving the Sticky Norms Problem, 67 U. Chi. 
L. Rev 607 (2000). 
32  See  Robert  Kagan  and  Jerome  Skolnick,  in  Banning  Smoking:  Compliance  Without 
Enforcement, in Smoking Policy: Law, Politics, and Culture 78 (Robert Radin ed. 1999). 

8 

 

 

that when people are confident that they are right, they will be more willing to 
do  what  they  think  best  and  to  reject  the  views  of  the  crowd.  Several  sets  of 
experiments  confirm  this  intuition,  but  they  also  offer  some  significant  twists. 
Most important, they suggest three points that I will emphasize throughout: 

 

 

1.  Those who are confident and firm will have particular influence, and can lead 

otherwise identical groups in dramatically different directions.33 

2.  People are extremely vulnerable to the unanimous views of others and hence 

a single dissenter, or voice of sanity, is likely to have a huge impact.34 

3.  If people are, by our lights, from some kind of “out group,” they are far less 
likely to influence us, even on the simplest questions.35 And if people are part 
of a group to which we also belong, they are far more likely to influence us, 
on both easy and hard questions.36  

My ultimate goal is to see how these points bear on the behavior of those 
involved  in  making,  enforcing,  and  interpreting  law.  But  let  us  begin  by 
reviewing some classic studies. 

A. Hard Questions 

 
In  the  1930s,  the  psychologist  Muzafer  Sherif  conducted  some  simple 
experiments  on  sensory  perception.37  Subjects  were  placed  in  a  very  dark  room 
and  a  small  pinpoint  of  light  was  positioned  at  some  distance  in  front  of  them. 
Because  of  a  perceptual  illusion,  the  light,  which  was  actually  stationary, 
appeared to move. On each of several trials, Sherif asked people to estimate the 
distance  that  the  light  had  moved.  When  polled  individually,  subjects  did  not 
agree with one another, and their answers varied from one trial to another. This 
is  not  surprising;  because  the  light  did  not  move,  any  judgment  about  distance 
was a stab in the dark. But Sherif found some striking results when subjects were 
                                                 
33 See p. below. 
34  See  p.  below.  Note  a  parallel  finding:  A  minority  is  especially  likely  to  have  influence  if  it 
consists  of  more  than  one  person  and  if  all  members  of  the  minority  group  are  in  basic 
agreement. See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 81-82 (1999). 
35 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What to think By Knowing Who You Are: Self-Categorization 
and he Nature of Norm Formation, Conformity, and Group Polarization, 29 British J. Soc. Psych. 
97  (1990).  Group  membership  and  self-categorization  are  emphasized  in  John  Turner  et  al., 
Rediscovering the Social Group: A Self-Categorization Theory 42-67 (1987). 
36 Dominic Abrams et al., supra note, at 97-110. 
37 Muzafer Sherif, An Experimental Approach to the Study of Attitudes, 1 Sociometry 90 (1937). A 
good outline can be found in Lee Ross and Richard Nisbet, The Person and the Situation 28-30 
(1991). 

9 

 

asked  to  act  in  small  groups.  Here  the  individual  judgments  converged  and  a 
group norm, establishing the right distance, quickly developed. Indeed, the norm 
remained stable within groups across different trials, thus leading to a situation 
in  which  different  groups  made,  and  were  committed  to,  quite  different 
judgments.38  There  is  an  important  clue  here  about  how  similar  groups,  indeed 
similar  nations,  can  converge  on  very  different  beliefs  and  actions  simply 
because of modest and even arbitrary variations in starting points.  

 
When  Sherif  added  a  confederate—his  own  ally,  unbeknownst  to 
subjects—something else happened.39 The judgment of the confederate, typically 
much  higher  or  much  lower  than  those  made  by  individual  subjects,  helped 
produced  correspondingly  higher  or  lower  judgments  within  the  group.  The 
large  lesson  is  that  at  least  in  cases  involving  difficult  questions  of  fact, 
judgments “could be imposed by an individual who had no coercive power and 
no special claim to expertise, only a willingness to be consistent and unwavering 
in  the  face  of  others’  uncertainty.”40  Perhaps  more  remarkable  still,  the  group’s 
judgments  became  thoroughly  internalized,  so  that  subjects  would  adhere  to 
them  even  when  reporting  on  their  own,  even  a  year  later,  and  even  when 
participating  in  new  groups  whose  members  offered  different  judgments.41  The 
initial  judgments  were  also  found  to  have  effects  across  “generations.”  In  an 
experiment  in  which  fresh  subjects  were  introduced  and  others  retired,  so  that 
eventually  all  participants  were  new  to  the  situation,  the  original  group 
judgment  tended  to  stick,  even  after  the person who was  originally responsible 
for it had been long gone.42  

 
What  accounts  for  these  results?  The  most  obvious  answer  points  to  the 
informational  influences  produced  by  other  people’s  judgments.  After  all,  the 
apparent movements are a perceptual illusion, and the system of perception does 
not readily assign distances to those movements. In those circumstances, people 
are especially likely to be swayed by a confident and consistent group member. 
This  finding  has  implications  outside  of  the  laboratory  and  for  classrooms, 
courtrooms,  bureaucracies,  and  legislatures.  If  uninformed  people  are  trying  to 
decide whether global warming is a serious problem, or whether they should be 

                                                 
38 Id. at 29. 
39 Id. 
40 Id. 
41 Id. 
42 Id. at 29-30. 

10 

 

concerned about existing levels of arsenic in drinking water, they are likely to be 
responsive to the views of confident and consistent others.43  

 
What is true for factual issues is true for moral, political, and legal issues 
as well. Suppose that  a  group of  legislators  is  trying  to decide  how  to handle a 
highly  technical  issue.  If  a  “confederate”  is  planted  among  the  group,  showing 
considerable confidence, she is highly likely to be able to move the group in his 
preferred  direction.  So  too  if  she  is  not  a  confederate  at  all,  but  simply  an 
ordinary  legislator  with  great  confidence  on  the  issue  at  hand.  If  judges  are 
trying  to  resolve  a  complex  issue  on  which  they  lack  certainty,  they  too  are 
vulnerable  to  conformity  effects.44  And  for  judicial  panels  as  well,  Sherif-type 
effects can be expected on technical matters if one judge is confident and seems 
expert. The problem is that the so-called specialists may have biases and agendas 
of their own, leading to large errors. Note that there is an important qualification 
to these claims, to which I will return: Sherif’s conformity findings significantly 
decrease if the experimenter uses a confederate whose membership in a different 
social group is made salient to subjects.45  

B. Easy Questions 

 
But  what  if  perception  does  provide  reliable  guidance?  What  if  people 
have good reason to know the right answer? The leading experiments, conducted 
by  Solomon  Asch,  explored  whether  people  would  be  willing  to  overlook  the 
apparently  unambiguous  evidence  of  their  own  senses.46  In  these  experiments, 
the  subject  was  placed  into  a  group  of  seven  to  nine  people  who  seemed  to  be 
other subjects in the experiment but who were actually Asch’s confederates. The 
simple task was to “match” a particular line, shown on a large white card, to one 
of  the  three  “comparison  lines”  that  was  identical  to  it  in  length.  The  two  non-
matching lines were substantially different, with the differential varying from an 
inch and three quarters to three quarters of an inch.  

 

 

                                                 
43 See the discussion of authority in Robert Cialdini, Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion 208-
36  (1993).  For  evidence  that  minority  views  can  be  influential  if  they  are  held  by  consistent, 
confident  people,  see  Robert  Bray  et  al.,  Social  Influence  By  Group  Members  With  Minority 
Opinions, 43 J Personality and Social Psych. 78 (1982). 
44 See section below. 
45 Abrams, supra note, at 99-104. 
46 See the overview in Solomon Asch, Opinions and Social Pressure, in Readings About the Social 
Animal 13 (Elliott Aronson ed. 1995).  

11 

 

In the first two rounds of the Asch experiments, everyone agrees about the 
right  answer.  “The  discriminations  are  simple;  each  individual  monotonously 
calls  out  the  same  judgment.”47 But “suddenly  this  harmony  is  disturbed  at the 
third round.”48 All other group members make what is obviously, to the subject 
and to any reasonable person, a clear error, matching the line at issue to one that 
is conspicuously longer or shorter. In these circumstances, the subject, in all cases 
showing initial confusion and disbelief at the apparent mistakes of others, has a 
choice: He can maintain his independent judgment or instead accept the view of 
the unanimous majority. A large number of people end up yielding at least once 
in a series of trials. When asked to decide on their own, subjects erred less than 
1%  of  the  time;  but  in  rounds  in  which  group  pressure  supported  the  incorrect 
answer, subjects erred 36.8% of the time.49 Indeed, in a series of twelve questions, 
no less than 70% of subjects went along with the group, and defied the evidence 
of  their  own  senses,  at  least  once.50  Conformity  experiments  of  this  kind  have 
now produced 133 total sets of results from seventeen countries, including Zaire, 
Germany, France, Japan, Lebanon, and Kuwait.51 A meta-analysis of these studies 
uncovers  a  variety  of  refinements  on  Asch’s  basic  findings,  but  his  basic 
conclusion has held up. For all results, the mean percentage error is 29%.52 People 
in  some  nations,  with  “conformist”  cultures,  do  err  more  than  people  in  other 
nations,  with  more  “individualist”  cultures.53  The  variations  are  real,  but  the 
overall pattern of errors—with subjects conforming between 20% and 40% of the 
time—does not show huge differences across nations. 

 
Note  that  Asch’s  findings  contain  two  conflicting  lessons.  First,  a 
significant number of people are independent all or much of the time. About 25% 
of people are consistently independent,54 and about two-thirds of total individual 
answers  do  not  conform.  Hence  “there  is  evidence  of  extreme  individual 
differences”  in  susceptibility  to group  influences, with some subjects remaining 
independent,  and  others  “going  with  the  majority  without 
completely 
exception.”55  While  independent  subjects  “present  a  striking  spectacle  to  an 
                                                 
47 Solomon Asch, Social Psychology 453 (1952). 
48 Asch, Opinion and Social Pressures, supra note, at 13. 
49 Id. at 16.  
50 Id. 
51  See  Rod  Bond  and  Peter  Smith,  Culture  and  Conformity:  A  Meta-Analysis  of  Studies  Using 
Asch’s Line Judgment Task, 119 Psych. Bulletin 111, 116 (1996). 
52 Id. at 118. 
53 Id. at 128. 
54  Ronald  Friend  et  al.,  A  Puzzling  Misinterpretation  of  the  Asch  “Conformity”  Study,  20 
European J of Social Psych 29, 37 (1990). 
55 Solomon Asch, Social Psychology, supra note, at 457-58. 

12 

 

observer,”  giving  “the  appearance  of  being  unshakable,”56  other  people  show  a 
great deal of anxiety and confusion.57 Second, most subjects, at least some of the 
time,  are  willing  to  yield  to  the  group  even  on  an  apparently  easy  question  on 
which  they  have  direct  and  unambiguous  evidence.  For  present  purposes,  the 
latter finding is the most important. 
 
C. Reasons and Blunders 
 

though  believing 

Why  do  people  sometimes  ignore  the  evidence  of  their  own  senses?  The 
two  principal  explanations  involve  information  and  peer  pressure.  Some  of 
Asch’s subjects seem to have thought that the unanimous confederates must be 
right;  but  other  people, 
that  group  members  were 
unaccountably mistaken, were unwilling to make, in public, what those members 
would see as an error. In Asch’s own studies, several conformists said, in private 
interviews,  that  their  own  opinions  must  have  been  wrong58—a  point  that 
suggests that information, rather than peer pressure, is what was moving them.59 
This  informational  account  is  strengthened  by  one  study  in  which  people 
recorded their answers anonymously but gave nearly as many wrong answers as 
they had under Asch’s own conditions.60 A similar study finds that conformity is 
not  lower  when  the  subject’s  response  is  unavailable  to  the  majority.61  On  the 
other  hand,  these  are  unusual  results,  and  experimenters  generally  find 
in  the  same  basic  circumstances  as  Asch’s 
significantly  reduced  error, 
experiments, when the subject is asked to give a purely private answer.62 In the 
same way, easily identifiable conformity or deviation has been found to produce 
higher conformity.63 These findings suggest that peer pressure matters as well.  

 
Asch’s own conclusion was that his results raised the possibility that “the 
social process is polluted” by the “dominance of conformity.”64 He added, “That 
we  have  found  the  tendency  to  conformity  in  our  society  so  strong  that 
reasonably  intelligent  and  well-meaning  young  people  are  willing  to  call  white 
                                                 
56 Id. at 466.  
57 Id. at 470. 
58 See Asch, supra. 
59 It would be possible to question this explanation, however, on the ground that some of these 
conformists might have been embarrassed to admit that they were vulnerable to peer influence, 
entirely apart from a belief that the peers might have been right. 
60 See Robert Shiller, Irrational Exuberance 149-50 (2000). 
61 Bond and Smith, supra note, at 124. 
62 See Aronson, supra note, at 23-24. 
63 See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 66 (1999). 
64 Asch, supra note, at 21. 

13 

 

black  is  a  matter  of  concern.”65  As  I  have  noted,  Asch’s  experiments  produce 
broadly  similar  findings  across  nations,  and  so  in  Asch’s  sentence  just  quoted, 
the word “society” could well be replaced with the word “world.” But I want to 
stress  another  point  here:  Many  people  are  not  willing  to  disclose  their  own 
information  to  the  group,  even  though  it  is  in  the  group’s  interest,  most  of  the 
time,  to  learn  what  it  is  known  or  thought  by  individual  members.  To  see  this 
point,  imagine  a  group  almost  all  of  whose  members  believe  something  to  be 
true even though it is false. Imagine too that one member of the group, or a very 
few  members  of  the  group,  know  the  truth.  Are  they  likely  to  correct  the 
dominant view? If Asch’s findings generalize, the answer is that they may not be. 
They are not reticent because they are irrational. They are making is a perfectly 
sensible response to the simple fact that the dominant view is otherwise—a fact 
that suggests either that the small minority is wrong or that they are likely to risk 
their  own  reputations  if  they  insist  that  they  are  right.  As  we  shall  see,  Asch’s 
findings help explain why groups can end up making unfortunate and even self-
destructive decisions. 

 
Would  those  findings  apply  to  judgments  about  morality,  policy,  and 
law?  It  seems  jarring  to  think  that  people  would  yield  to  a  unanimous  group 
when the question involves a moral, political, or legal issue on which they have 
great confidence. But if Asch is correct, such yielding should be expected, at least 
some  of  the  time.  We  will  find  powerful  evidence  that  this  happens  within 
federal courts of appeals.66 The deadening effect of public opinion was of course 
a  central  concern  of  John  Stuart  Mill,  who  insisted  that  protection  “against  the 
tyranny  of  the  magistrate  is  not  enough,”  and  that  it  was  also  important  to 
protect  “against  the  tyranny  of  the  prevailing  opinion  and  feeling;  against  the 
tendency of society to impose, by other mans than civil penalties, its own ideas 
and  practices  as  rules  of  conduct  on  those  who  dissent  from  them  .  .  .”67  Mill’s 
focus  here  is  on  the  adverse  effects  of  coerced  conformity  not  only  on  the 
individuals who are thus tyrannized, but also on society itself, which is deprived 
of important information.68  
 

                                                 
65 Id.  
66 See below. 
67 John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, in John Stuart Mill, Utilitarianism, On Liberty, Considerations on 
Representative Government 73 (H.B. Acton ed. 1972). 
68 See id. at 72-76. 

14 

 

D. How To Increase (or Decrease) Conformity 
 
 
What  factors  increase  or  decrease  conformity?  Consistent  with  Sherif’s 
findings,  people  are  less  likely  to  conform  if they have high social  status or are 
extremely confident about their own views.69 They are more likely to conform if 
the task is difficult or if they are frightened.70 Consider also the following: 
 

1.  Financial  rewards  for  correct  answers  affect  performance,  and  in  two 
different ways.71 When people stand to make money if they are right, the rate of 
conformity  is  significantly  decreased  in  the  same  basic  condition  as  the  Asch 
experiments, if the task is easy. People are less willing to follow group members 
when they stand to profit from a correct answer. But there is a striking difference 
when  the  experiments  are  altered  to  make  the  underlying  task  difficult.  In  that 
event,  a  financial  incentive,  rewarding  correct  answers,  actually  increases 
conformity. People are more willing to follow to crowd when they stand to profit 
from a correct answer if the question is hard. Perhaps most strikingly, the level of 
conformity  is  about  the  same,  when  financial  incentives  were  absent,  in  low-
difficulty  and  high-difficulty  tasks—but  the  introduction  of  financial  rewards 
splits  the  results  on  those  tasks  dramatically  apart,  with  significantly  decreased 
conformity  for  low-difficulty  tasks  and  significantly-increased  conformity  for 
high-difficulty tasks.72  
 

These results have simple explanations. A certain number of people, in the 
Asch experiments, actually know the right answer, and give conforming answers 
only  because  it  is  not  worthwhile  to  reject  the  shared  view  of  others  in  public. 
But  when  a  financial  incentive  is  offered,  peer  pressure  is  outweighed  by  the 
possibility  of  material  gain.  The  simple  lesson  here  is  that  an  economic  reward 
can  counteract  the  effects  of  social  pressures.  By  contrast,  difficult  tasks  leave 
people  with  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  about  whether  they  are  right.  In  such 
circumstances,  people  are  all  the  more  likely  to  give  weight  to  the  views  of 
others,  simply  because  those  views  are  the  most  reliable  source  of  information. 
Consider in this regard the parallel finding that people’s confidence in their own 
judgments  is  directly  related  to  the  confidence  shown  by  the  experimenter’s 
confederates.73  When  the  confederates  act  with  confidence  and  enthusiasm, 
                                                 
69 See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 66 (1999). 
70 Id. 
71  See  Robert  Baron  et  al.,  The  Forgotten  Variable  in  Conformity  Research:  Impact  of  Task 
Importance on Social Influence, 71 J Personality and Social Psych. 915 (1996). 
72 Id. at 923. 
73 Id. 

15 

 

subjects  also  show  heightened  confidence  in  their  judgments,  even  when  they 
were simply following the crowd. Consider also the general claim that imitation 
of most other people can operate as a kind of fast and frugal heuristic, one that 
works  well  for  many  creatures,  including  human  beings,  in  a  wide  variety  of 
settings.74  Like  most  heuristics,  the  imitation  heuristic,  while  generally  sensible 
and often the best available, also produces errors in many situations.75 

 
There  is  a  disturbing  implication.  A  “majority  consensus”  is  “often 
capable  of  misleading  individuals  into  inaccurate,  irrational,  or  unjustified 
judgments.” Such a consensus “can also produce heightened confidence in such 
judgments  as  well.”  76  It  follows  that  “so  long  as  the  judgments  are  difficult  or 
ambiguous, and  the  influencing  agents  are united and confident, increasing the 
importance  of  accuracy  will  heighten  confidence  as  well  as  conformity—a 
dangerous  combination.”77  The  point  very  much  bears  on  the  sources  of 
unjustified  extremism,  especially  under  circumstances  in  which  countervailing 
information  is  unavailable.78  The  same  point  helps  explain  group  influences 
within the federal courts.79 

 
2.  Asch’s  original  studies  found  that  varying  the  size  of  the  group  of 
confederates, unanimously making the erroneous decision, mattered only up to a 
number  of  three;  increases  from  that  point  had  little  effect.80  Using  one 
confederate  did  not  increase  subjects’  errors  at  all;  using  two  confederates 
increased  errors  to  13.6%;  and  using  from  three  confederates  increased  error  to 
31.8%,  not  substantially  different  from  the  level  that  emerged  from  further 
increases  in group size. But Asch’s  own  findings appear unusual on this count. 
Subsequent  studies have found that, contrary to Asch’s own findings, increases 
in the size of the group of confederates usually do increase conformity.81  

 
More  significantly,  a  modest  variation  in  the  experimental  conditions 
made  all  the  difference:  the  existence  of  at  least  one  compatriot,  or  voice  of 
sanity,  dramatically  reduced  both  conformity  and  error.  When  one  confederate 

                                                 
74  See  Daniel  Goldstein  et  al.,  Why  and  When  Do  Simple  Heuristics  Work?,  in  Bounded 
Rationality, supra note, at 174. 
75 See id. 
76 Baron et al., supra note, at 925. 
77 Id. at 925. 
78 See Hardin, supra note. 
79 See below. 
80 Asch, supra note. 
81 Baron, supra note, at 119-20. 

16 

 

made a correct match, errors were reduced by three-quarters, even if there was a 
strong  majority  the  other  way.82  There  is  a  clear  implication  here:  If  a  group  is 
embarking on an unfortunate course of action, a single dissenter might be able to 
turn it around, by energizing ambivalent group members who would otherwise 
follow  the  crowd.  It  follows  that  affective  ties  among  members,  making  even  a 
single dissent less likely, might well undermine the performance of groups and 
institutions.  Consider  here  a  study  of  the  performance  of  investment  clubs—
small groups of people who pool their money to make joint decisions about stock 
market  investments.83  The  worst-performing  clubs  were  built  on  affective  ties 
and  primarily  social;  the  best-performing  clubs  limited  social  connections  and 
were  focused  on  increasing  returns.  Dissent  was  far  more  frequent  in  the  high-
performing clubs.  The  low  performers usually had unanimous votes, with little 
open debate. The problem is that the votes in low performing groups were “cast 
to build social cohesion rather than to make the best financial choice.”84 In short, 
conformity resulted in significantly lower returns. 
 

3.  Much  depends  on  the  subject’s  perceived  relationship  to  the 
experimenters’  confederates  and  in  particular  on  whether  the  subject  considers 
himself  part  of  the  same  group  in  which  those  confederates  fall.  If  the  subject 
identified  himself  as  a  member  of  a  different  group  from  the  majority,  the 
conformity  effect  is  greatly  reduced.85  People  are  especially  likely  to  conform 
when  the  group  consists  of  people  whom  subjects  like  or  admire,  or  otherwise 
identify  with.86  The  general  point  explains  why  group  membership  is  often 
emphasized by those who seek to increase or decrease the influence of a certain 
point  of  view.  Perhaps  an  advocate  can  be  discredited,  without  the  relevant 
group,  by  showing  that  he  is  a  “conservative”  or  a  “liberal,”  prone  to  offer 
unacceptable views. 
 

Thus  conformity—and  hence  error—is  dramatically  increased,  in  public 
statements,  when  the  subject  perceives  himself  as  part  of  a  reasonably  discrete 
                                                 
82 Id. at 18. The finding here is reminiscent of the tale of The Emperor’s New Clothes, in which a 
single  voice  of  sanity  was  necessary  and  sufficient  to  expose  the  truth.  See  Hans  Christian 
Anderson,  The  Emperor’s  New  Suit,  in  Hans  Christian  Anderson,  Shorter  Tales  (Jean  Hersholt 
trans. 1948; originally published 1837). 
83  Brooke  Harrington,  Cohesion,  Conflict  and  Group  Demography  (unpublished  manuscript 
2000), 
84 Id.  
85 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What To Think By Knowing Who You Are, 29 Brit J Soc Psych 
97, 104-110 (1990). 
86 Baron et al., supra, at 66. The point is stressed at various places in Turner, supra note; see, e.g., 
pp. 151-170. 

17 

 

group that includes the experimenter’s confederates (all, like himself, psychology 
majors,  for  example).87  By  contrast,  conformity  is  dramatically  decreased,  and 
hence error is also dramatically decreased, in public statements when the subject 
perceives  himself  as  in  a  different  group  from  the  experimenter’s  confederates 
(all but himself ancient history majors, for example).88 Notably, private opinions, 
expressed  anonymously  afterwards,  were  about  the  same  whether  or  not  the 
subject  perceived  himself  as  a  member  of  the  same  group  as  others  in  the 
experiment. And people who thought that they were members of the same group 
as the experimenter’s confederates gave far more accurate answers, and far less 
conforming  answers,  when  they  were  speaking  privately.89  In  the  real  world, 
would-be  dissenters  might  silence  themselves  partly  when  and  because  they 
trust  group  members  to  be  right,  partly  because  they  do  not  want  to  risk  the 
opprobrium  of  like-minded  others,  and  partly  because  they  fear  that  they  will, 
through  their  dissent,  weaken  the  effectiveness  and  reputation  of  the  group  to 
which  they  belong.  There  is  a  large  lesson  here.  Publicly  expressed  statements, 
showing  agreement  with  a  majority  view,  may  be  both  wrong  and  insincere, 
especially  when  relevant  speakers  identify  themselves  as  members  of  the  same 
group  as  the  majority.90  The  finding  of  heightened  conformity  is  linked  with 
evidence  of  poor  performance  by  groups  whose  members  are  connected  by 
                                                 
87 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What To Think By Knowing Who You Are, 29 Brit J Soc Psych 
97, 106-08 (1990).  
88 Id. 
89 See Abrams et al., supra note, at 108. By contrast, people who thought that they were members 
of  a  different  group  actually  gave  more  accurate,  nonconforming  answers  when  speaking 
publicly,  which  creates  an  interesting  puzzle:  Why  was  there  more  accuracy  in  public  than  in 
private statements? The puzzle is solved if we consider the likelihood that subjects could consider 
it  an  affirmative  good  to  disagree  with  people  from  another  group  (even  if  they  secretly 
suspected that those people might be right). In the real world, this effect may well be heightened 
when people are asked whether they agree with opponents or antagonists; they might well say 
“no” even when the answer is “yes,” simply because agreement carries costs, either to reputation 
or to self-conception. 
 
There is a noteworthy finding about the nature of minority influences:   They  have  a 
larger impact on people’s privately expressed views than on their publicly expressed views. See 
Baron  et  al.,  supra  note,  at  79-80.  For  example,  minority  members  who  express  enthusiasm  for 
gay  rights,  or  opposition  to  gay  rights,  affect  anonymous  opinions  more  than  publicly  stated 
opinions.  See  id.  at  80.  This  point  has  obvious  implications  for  the  effects  of  secret  votes  and 
ballots. 
90 Consider the fact that the least conformity, and the greatest accuracy, was found when people 
who  thought  of  themselves  in  a  different  group  were  speaking  publicly.  At  the  same  time,  the 
largest number of conforming, inaccurate responses came when people thought of themselves in 
the  same  group  and  were  speaking  publicly  --  even  though  the  number  of  inaccurate  private 
responses  in  that  experimental  condition  was  not  notably  higher  than  in  other  conditions.  See 
Abrams et al., supra note, at 108. 

18 

 

 

affective  ties;  in  such  groups,  people  are  less  likely  to  say  what  they  know  and 
more  likely  to  suppress  disagreement.  A  system  of  checks  and  balances, 
attempting to ensure that ambition will check ambition,91 can be understood as a 
way of increasing the likelihood of dissent, and of decreasing the likelihood that 
members of any particular group, or institution, will be reluctant to disclose what 
they think and know.92  

E. Shocks, Authority, and Expertise 
 
In  the  Sherif  and  Asch  experiments,  no  particular  person  has  special 
 
expertise.  No  member  of  the  group  shows  unusual  measurement  abilities  or 
wonderful  eyesight.  But  we  might  safely  predict  that  subjects  would  be  even 
more  inclined  to  blunder  if  they  had  reason  to  believe  that  one  or  more  of  the 
experimenters’ confederates was particularly likely to be correct. This hypothesis 
receives  support  from  a  possible  interpretation  of  one  of  the  most  alarming 
findings in modern social science, involving conformity not to the judgments of 
peers, but to the will of an experimenter.93 These experiments are of independent 
interest,  because  they  have  implications  for  social  influences  on  judgments  of 
morality, not merely facts. 
 

                                                 
91 THE FEDERALIST No. 51, at 322 (James Madison) (Clinton Rossiter ed., 1961) ("Ambition must 
be made to counteract ambition."). 
92  There  are  other  noteworthy  findings  about  the  Asch  experiments.  For  example,  cultures  that 
are  traditionally  described  as  collectivist  show  greater  conformity  effects  than  cultures  that  are 
traditionally  described  as  individualist.  “On  the  basis  of  our  discussion,  we  would  expect 
differences in susceptibility to social influence between individualist and collectivist cultures to 
be even greater when the task was, for example, an opinion issue.” Bond and Smith, supra note, 
at 128. Since the 1950s, there has been a linear reduction in conformity, suggesting that over time 
people have become more willing to reject the views of the majority. Id. at 129. Women are more 
likely to conform than men. Id. at 130. The latter finding is worth emphasizing; it fits well with 
the  general  finding  that  members  of  low-status  groups  are  less  likely  to  speak  out  within 
heterogeneous  organizations.  See  Caryn  Christenson  and  Ann  Abbott,  Team  Medical  Decision 
Making,  in  Decision  Making  in  Health  Care  (Gretchen  Chapman  and  Frank  Sonnenberg  eds. 
2000),  at  267,  273-76.  This  last  point  suggests  the  importance  of  creating  mechanisms  to  ensure 
that  low-status  people  speak  and  are  heard.  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Deliberative  Trouble:  Why 
Groups Go To Extremes, 110 Yale L.J. 71 (2000). 
93 This unconventional interpretation is set out in Thomas Blass, The Milgram Paradigm After 35 
Years: Some Things We Now Know About Obedience to Authority, in Obedience to Authority: 
Critical Perspectives on the Milgram Paradigm 35, 38-44 (Thomas Blass ed. 1999). Shiller, supra 
note, at 150-51. 

19 

 

The  experiments,  conducted  by  the  psychologist  Stanley  Milgram,  ask 
 
people  to  administer  electric  shocks  to  a  person  sitting  in  an  adjacent  room.94 
Subjects are told, falsely, that the purpose of the experiment is to test the effects 
of punishment on memory. Unbeknownst to the subject, the victim of the electric 
shocks  is  a  confederate  and  there  are  no  real  shocks.  The  apparent  shocks  are 
delivered  by  a  simulated  shock  generator,  offering  thirty  clearly  delineated 
voltage levels, ranging from 15 to 450 volts, accompanied by verbal descriptions 
ranging  from  “Slight  Shock”  to  “Danger:  Severe  Shock.”95  As  the  experiment 
unfolds,  the  subject  is  asked  to  administer  increasingly  severe  shocks  for 
incorrect answers, to and past the “Danger: Severe Shock” level, which begins at 
400 volts. 
 
In  Milgram’s  original  experiments,  the  subjects  included  forty  men 
 
between the ages of 20 and 50. They came from a range of occupations, including 
engineers,  high  school  teachers,  and  postal  clerks.96  They  were  paid  $4.50  for 
their participation—and also told that they could keep the money no matter how 
the  experiment  went.  The  “memory  test”  involved  remembering  word  pairs; 
every mistake, by the confederate/victim, was to be met by an electric shock and 
a  movement  to  one  higher  level  on  the  shock  generator.  To  ensure  that 
everything  seems  authentic,  the  subject  is,  at  the  beginning  of  the  experiment, 
given an actual sample shock at the lowest level. But the subject is also assured 
that the shocks are not dangerous, with the experimenter declaring, in response 
to  a  prearranged  question  from  the  confederate,  “Although  the  shocks  can  be 
extremely painful, they cause no permanent tissue damage.”97  
 

In the original experiments, the victim does not make any protest until the 
300-volt  shock,  which  produces  a  loud  kick,  by  the  victim,  on  the  wall  of  the 
room where he is bound to the electric chair. After that point, the victim does not 
answer further questions, and is heard from only after the 315-volt shock, when 
he  pounds  on  the  wall  again—and  is  not  heard  from  thereafter,  even  with 
increases  in  shocks  to  and  past  the  400-volt  level.  If  the  subject  indicates  an 
unwillingness to continue, the experimenter offers prods of increasing firmness, 
from  “Please  go  on”  to  “You  have  no  other  choice;  you  must  go  on.”98  But  the 
experimenter has no power to impose sanctions on subjects. 
                                                 
94 See Stanley Milgram, Behavioral Study of Obedience, in Readings About the Social Animal 23 
(7th ed. 1995). 
95 Id. at 24.  
96 Id. at 25. 
97 Id. at 27. 
98 Id. at 29. 

20 

 

 
 
Most  people  predict  that  in  such  studies,  over  95%  of  subjects  would 
refuse  to  proceed  to  the  end  of  the  series  of  shocks.  When  people  are  asked  to 
make  predictions  about  what  people  would  do,  the  expected  breakoff  point  is 
“Very  Strong  Shock,”99  of  195  volts.  But  in  Milgram’s  experiment,  every  one  of 
the  forty  subjects  went  beyond  300  volts.  The  mean  maximum  shock  level  was 
405  volts;  and  a  strong  majority—26  of  40,  or  65%—went  to  the  full  450-volt 
shock, two steps beyond “Danger: Severe Shock.” 100  
 

Later  variations  on  the  original  experiments  produced  even  more 
remarkable results. In those experiments, the victim expresses a growing level of 
pain and distress as the voltage increases.101 Small grunts are heard from 75 volts 
to  105  volts,  and  at  120  volts,  the  subject  shouts,  to  the  experimenter,  that  the 
shocks  were  starting  to  become  painful.  At  150  volts,  the  victims  cries  out, 
“Experimenter,  get  me  out  of  here!  I  won’t  be  in  the  experiment  any  more!  I 
refuse to go on!”102 At 180 volts, the victim says, “I can’t stand the pain.” At 270 
volts he responds with an agonized scream. At 300 volts he shouts that he will no 
longer answer the questions. At 315 volts he screams violently. At 330 volts and 
after,  he  is  not  heard.  In  this  version  of  the  experiment,  there  is  no  significant 
change  in  Milgram’s  results:  25  of  40  participants  went  to  the  maximum  level, 
and  the  mean  maximum  level  was  over  360  volts.  In  a  somewhat  gruesome 
variation,  the  victim  says,  before  the  experiment  begins,  that  he  has  a  heart 
condition, and his pleas to discontinue the experiment include repeated reference 
to the fact his heart is “bothering” him as the shocks continue.103 This too did not 
lead subjects to behave differently.104 
 

Milgram himself explains his results as showing obedience to authority, in 
a  way  reminiscent  of  the  behavior  Germans  under  Nazi  rule;  and  indeed 
Milgram was partly motivated by the goal of understanding how the Holocaust 
could  have  happened.105  Milgram  concluded  that  ordinary  people  will  follow 
orders  even  if  the  result  is  to  produce  great  suffering  in  innocent  others. 
Undoubtedly  simple  obedience  is  part  of  the  picture.  But  there  is  another 

                                                 
99 Id. at 30. 
100 See Stanley Milgram, Obedience to Authority 35 (1974). 
101 Id. at 23 (1974). 
102 Id. 
103 Id. at 55-57. 
104 Id. at 58. 
105 Id. at 34. 

21 

 

explanation.106 Subjects who are invited to an academic setting, to participate in 
an experiment run by an apparently experienced scientist, might well defer to the 
experimenters’  instructions  in  the  belief  that  the  experimenter  is  likely  to  know 
what should be done, all things considered. If the experimenter asks subjects to 
proceed,  most  subjects  might  believe,  not  unreasonably,  that  the  harm 
apparently done to the victims is not serious and that the experiment actually has 
significant  benefits  for  society.  On  this  account,  the  experimenter  has  special 
expertise. If this is right, then the participants in the Milgram experiments might 
be  seen  as  similar  to  those  in  the  Asch  experiments,  with  the  experimenter 
having  a  greatly  amplified  voice.  And  on  this  account,  many  of  the  subjects 
might have put their moral qualms to one side, not because of blind obedience, 
but because of a judgment that those qualms are likely to have been ill-founded. 
That  judgment  might  be  based  in  turn  on  a  belief  that  the  experimenter  is  not 
likely to ask subjects to proceed if the experiment is truly objectionable.  

 
In  short,  Milgram’s  subjects  might  be  responding  to  an  especially  loud 
informational  signal—the  sort  of  signal  sent  by  a  specialist  or  a  crowd.  And  on 
this view, Milgram was wrong to draw an analogy between the behavior of his 
subjects and the behavior of Germans under Hitler. His subjects were not simply 
obeying  a  leader,  but  responding  to  someone  whose  credentials  and  good  faith 
they thought they could trust. Of course it is not simple, in theory or in practice, 
to  distinguish  between  obeying  a  leader  and  accepting  the  beliefs  of  an  expert. 
The  only  suggestion  is  that  the  obedience  of  subjects  was  hardly  baseless;  it 
involved  a  setting  in  which  subjects  had  some  reason  to  think  that  the 
experimenter  was  not  asking  them  to  produce  serious  physical  harm  out  of 
sadism or for no reason at all. 

 
A  subsequent  study,  exploring  the  grounds  of  obedience,  offers  support 
for this claim.107 In that study, a large number of subjects watched the tapes of the 
Milgram  experiments,  and  were  asked  to  rank  possible  explanations  for 
compliance  with  the  experimenter’s  request.  Deference  to  expertise  was  the 
highest-rank  option.  This  is  not  definitive,  of  course,  but  an  illuminating 
variation  on  the  basic  experiment,  by  Milgram  himself,  provides  further 
support.108  In  this  variation,  the  subject  is  among  three  people  asked  to 
administer the shocks, and two of those people, actually confederates, refuse to 
go  past  a  certain  level  (150  volts  for  one  and  210  volts  for  the  other).  In  such 

                                                 
106 See Blass, supra note; Shiller, supra note. 
107 Blass, supra note, at 42-44. 
108 Milgram supra note, at 113-122. 

22 

 

cases,  the  overwhelming  majority  of  subjects,  92.5%,defy  the  experimenter.109 
This  was  by  far  the  most  effective  of  Milgram’s  many  variations  on  his  basic 
study, all designed to reduce the level of obedience.110  

 
Why  was  the  defiance  of  peers  so  potent?  I  suggest  that  the  subjects,  in 
this  variation,  were  very  much  like  those  subjects  who  had  at  least  one 
supportive confederate in Asch’s experiments. One such confederate led Asch’s 
subjects to say what they saw; so too, peers who acted on the basis of conscience 
freed  Milgram’s  subject  to  follow  their  consciences  as  well.  Milgram  himself 
established,  in  yet  another  variation,  that  without  any  advice  from  the 
experimenter,  and  without  any  external  influences  at  all,  the  subject’s  moral 
judgment was clear: do not administer shocks above a very low level.111 Indeed 
that moral judgment had nearly the same degree of clarity, to Milgram’s subjects, 
as  the  clear  and  correct  factual  judgments  made  by  Asch’s  subjects  when  they 
were deciding about the length of lines on their own (and hence not confronted 
with  Asch’s  confederates).  In  Milgram’s  experiments,  it  was  the  experimenter’s 
own  position—that  the  shocks  should  continue  and  that  no  permanent  damage 
would be done—that had a high degree of influence, akin to the influence of the 
Asch’s  unanimous  confederates.  But  when  the  subject’s  peers  rejected  the 
position  of  Milgram’s  experimenter,  the  informational  content  of  that  position 
was  effectively  negated  by  the  information  presented  by  the  refusals  of  peers. 
Hence  subjects  could  rely  on  their  own  moral  judgments,  or  even  follow  the 
moral signals indicated by the peers’ refusals.  

 
The  general  lessons  are  not  obscure.  When  the  morality  of  a  situation  is 
not clear, people might well be influenced by someone who seems to be a expert, 
able  to  weigh  the  risks  involved.  But  when  the  expert’s  questionable  moral 
judgment  is  countered  by  reasonable  people,  who  bring  their  own  moral 
judgments to bear, most people are unlikely to follow experts. They are far more 
likely to do as their conscience dictates. As we shall see, compliance with law has 
similar  features.  A  legal  pronouncement  about  what  should  be  done  will  often 
operate  in  the  same  way  as  an  expert  judgment  about  what  should  be  done.  It 
follows  that  people  will  follow  the  law  even  when  it  is  hardly  ever  enforced—
and even if they would otherwise be inclined to question the judgment that the 
law embodies. But if peers are willing to violate the law, violations may become 
widespread, especially but not only if people think that the law is enjoining them 

                                                 
109 Id. at 119. 
110 Id. at 118. 
111 Id.  

23 

 

 
III. Cascades 
 

from  doing  something  that  they  wish  to  do,  either  for  selfish  reasons  or  for 
reasons  of  principle.  In  this  way,  Milgram’s  experiments  offer  some  lessons 
about  when  law  will  be  ineffective  unless  vigorously  enforced—and  also  about 
the preconditions for civil disobedience. 

I  now  examine  how  informational  and  reputational  influences  can 
produce  social  cascades—large-scale  social  movements  in  which  many  people 
end up thinking something, or doing something, because of the beliefs or actions 
of a few early movers. As in the case of conformity, participation in cascades is 
fueled  by  social  influences.  But  where  the  idea  of  conformity  helps  to  explain 
social  stability,  an  understanding  of  cascades  helps  to  explain  social  and  legal 
movements,  which  can  be  stunningly  rapid,  and  which  can  also  produce 
situations that are highly unstable.  
 

Cascades  can  involve  judgments  about  facts  or  values.  They  operate 
within  legislatures  and  the  judicial  system  as  well  as  within  groups  of  citizens. 
And when people have affective connections with one another, the likelihood of 
cascades  increases.  In  the  area  of  social  risks,  cascades  are  especially  common, 
with people coming to fear certain products and processes not because of private 
knowledge,  but  because  of  the  apparent  fears  of  others.112  The  system  of  legal 
precedent also produces cascades, as early decisions lead later courts to a certain 
result,  and  eventually  most  or  all  courts  come  into  line,  not  because  of 
independent  judgments,  but  because  of  a  decision  to  follow  the  apparently 
informed decisions of others.113 The sheer level of agreement will be misleading if 
most  courts  have  been  influenced,  even  decisively  influenced,  by  their 
predecessors, especially in highly technical areas. 

 
By  themselves  cascades  are  neither  good  nor  bad.  It  is  possible  that  the 
underlying  processes  will  lead  people  to  sound  decisions  about  risks,  morality, 
or  law.  The  problem,  a  serious  one,  is  that  people  may  well  converge,  through 
the same processes, on erroneous or insufficiently justified outcomes. But to say 
this is to get ahead of the story; let us begin with the mechanics. 

 

                                                 
112 See Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan L 
Rev 683, 703-05 (1999). 
113 See Andrew F. Daughtety and Jennifer F. Reinganum, Stampede to Judgment, 1 Am Law and 
Ec. Rev. 158 (1999). 

24 

 

A. Informational Cascades: The Basic Phenomenon 

 
In  an  informational  cascade,  people  cease  relying,  at  a  certain  point,  on 
their  private  information  or  opinions.  They  decide  instead  on  the  basis  of  the 
signals conveyed by others. Once this happens, the subsequent actions, made by 
few or many others, add no new information. It follows that the behavior of the 
first few actors can, in theory, produce similar behavior from countless followers. 
A particular problem arises if people think that the large number of people who 
say or do something are acting on independent knowledge; this can make it very 
hard to stop the cascade. 

 
1. A simple illustration. Begin with a stylized example, and suppose that 
doctors  are  deciding  whether  to  prescribe  hormone  therapy  for  menopausal 
women.  If  hormone  therapy  creates  significant  risks  of  heart  disease,  its  net 
value, let us assume, is –1; if it does not create such risks, its net value is +1.114 Let 
us also assume that the doctors are in a temporal queue, and each doctor knows 
his place on that queue. From his own experience, each doctor has some private 
information  about  what  should  be  done.  But  each  doctor  also  cares,  rationally, 
about  the  judgments  of  others.  Anderson  is  the  first  to  decide,  and  prescribes 
hormone therapy if his judgment is low risk but declines if his judgment is high 
risk.  Suppose  that  Anderson  prescribes.  Barber  now  knows  that  Anderson’s 
judgment was low risk and that she too should certainly urge hormone therapy if 
she makes that independent judgment. But if her independent judgment is that 
the risk is high, she would—if she trusts Anderson no more and no less than she 
trusts herself—be indifferent about whether to prescribe, and might simply flip a 
coin.  
 

Now  turn  to  a  third  doctor,  Carlton.  Suppose  that  both  Anderson  and 
Barber  have  prescribed  hormone  therapy,  but  that  Carlton’s  own  information 
suggests  that  the  risk  is  high.  In  that  event,  Carlton  might  well  ignore  what  he 
knows  and  prescribe  the  therapy.  It  is  likely,  in  these  circumstances,  that  both 
Anderson  and  Barber  saw  a  low  risk,  and  unless  Carlton  thinks  that  his  own 
information is better than theirs, he should follow their lead. If he does, Carlton 
is  in  a  cascade.  To  the  extent  that  Carlton  is  not  acting  on  the  basis  of  his  own 
information,  and  to  the  extent  that  subsequent  doctors  know  what  others  have 
done and why, they will do exactly what Carlton did: prescribe hormone therapy 
regardless  of  their  private  information.  “Since  opposing  information  remains 

                                                 
114  I  draw  here  on  David  Hirschleifer,  The  Blind  Leading  the  Blind,  in  The  New  Economics  of 
Human Behavior 188, 193-94 (Marianno Tommasi and Kathryn Ierulli eds.,1995); 

25 

 

hidden,  even  a  mistaken  cascade  lasts  forever.  An  early  preponderance  toward 
either adoption or rejection, which may have occurred by mere coincidence or for 
trivial reasons, can feed upon itself . . .”115  

 
Notice  that  the  serious  problem  here  lies  in  the  fact  that  for  those  in  a 
cascade,  actions  do  not  disclose  privately  held  information.  In  the  example  just 
given,  doctors’  actions  will  not  reflect  the  overall  knowledge,  or  the  aggregate 
knowledge,  of  the  health  consequences  of  hormone  therapy—even  if  the 
information  held  by  individual  doctors,  if  actually  revealed  and  aggregated, 
would give a quite accurate picture of the situation. The reason for the problem is 
that  individual  doctors  are  following  the  lead  of  those  who  came  before.  As 
noted, this problem is aggravated if subsequent doctors overestimate the extent 
to  which  their  predecessors  relied  on  private  information  and  did  not  merely 
follow those who came before. If this is so, subsequent doctors might fail to rely 
on,  and  fail  to  reveal,  private  information  that  actually  exceeds  the  information 
collectively held by those who started the cascade. The problem here is that the 
medical  profession  generally  will  lack  information  that  it  needs  to  have. 
Participants  in  cascades  act  rationally  in  suppressing  their  private  information, 
whose disclosure would benefit the group more than the individual who has it.116 
The  failure  to  disclose  private  information  therefore  presents  a  free-rider 
problem. To overcome that problem, some kind of institutional reform seems to 
be necessary. 
 

Of course cascades do not always develop, and of course they usually do 
not  last  forever.  Often  people  have,  or  think  that  they  have,  enough  private 
information  to  reject  the  accumulated  wisdom  of  others.  Medical  specialists 
sometimes fall in this category. When cascades develop, they might be broken by 
corrective  information,  as  has  apparently  happened  in  the  case  of  hormone 
replacement  therapy  itself.117  In  the  domain  of  science,  peer-reviewed  work 
provides  a  valuable  safeguard.  But  even  among  specialists  and  indeed  doctors, 
cascades are common. “Most doctors are not at the cutting edge of research; their 
inevitable  reliance  upon  what  colleagues  have  done  and  are  doing  leads  to 
numerous surgical fads and treatment-caused illnesses.”118 Thus an article in the 
prestigious New England Journal of Medicine explores “bandwagon diseases” in 
which  doctors  act  like  “lemmings,  episodically  and  with  a  blind  infectious 
                                                 
115 Id. at 195. 
116 See  
117 Gina Kolata, “Risk of Breast Cancer Halts Hormone Replacement Study,” New York Times, at 
http://site.mumsweb.com/article.php?sid=759 (July 11, 2002). 
118 Hirshleifer, supra note, at 204. 

26 

 

enthusiasm pushing certain diseases and treatments primarily because everyone 
else  is  doing  the  same.”119  Some  medical  practices,  including  tonsillectomy, 
“seem to have been adopted initially based on weak information,” and extreme 
differences  in  tonsillectomy  frequencies  (and  other  procedures)  provide  good 
evidence that cascades are at work.120 And once several doctors join the cascade, 
it is liable to spread. There is a link here with Sherif’s experiments, showing the 
development  of  divergent  but  entrenched  norms,  based  on  group  processes  in 
areas in which individuals lack authoritative information. In fact, prescriptions of 
hormone replacement therapy were fueled by cascade-like processes.121  

 
What is true for doctors is highly likely to be true for lawyers, engineers, 
legislators, bureaucrats, judges, investors,122 and academics123 as well. It is easy to 
see  how  cascades  might  develop  among  groups  of  citizens,  especially  but  not 
only if those groups are small, insulated, and connected by affective ties. If Barry 
does  not  know  whether  global  warming  is  a  serious  problem,  and  if  Alberta 
insists that it is, Barry might well be persuaded, and their friend Charles is likely 
to go along, making it unlikely that Danielle will be willing to reject the shared 
judgment  of  the  developing  group.  When  small  communities  of  like-minded 
people  end  up  fearing  a  certain  risk,  or  fearing  and  hating  another  group, 
cascades are often responsible.  

 
2. Precedential cascades. Consider a legal analogue124: There is a disputed 
issue under the Endangered Species Act. The first court of appeals to decide the 
question  finds  the  issue  genuinely  difficult,  but  resolves  the  issue  favorably  to 
the government. The second court of appeals favors, very slightly, the view that 
the government is wrong, but the holding of another circuit is enough to tip the 
scales  in  the  government’s  favor.  A  third  court  of  appeals  is  also  slightly 
predisposed to rule against the government, but it lacks the confidence to reject 
the  shared  view  of  two  circuits.  Eventually  all  circuits  come  into  line,  with  the 
final  few  feeling  the  great  weight  of  the  unanimous  position  of  others,  and 
perhaps insufficiently appreciating the extent to which that weight is a product 

                                                 
119 John F. Burnham, 317 New England Journal of Medicine 1220, 1201 (1987). 
120 See Sushil Bikhchandani et al., Learning from the Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and 
Informational Cascades, 12 J Econ Persp 151, 167 (1998). 
121  Tim  O’Shea,  “The  Creation  of  a  Market:  How  Did  the  Whole  HRT  Thing  Get  Started  in  the 
First Place?” at www.mercola.com/2001/jul/4/hrt5.htm (July 2001). 
122 See Hirshleifer, supra note, at 205; Shiller, supra note. 
123 See Cass R. Sunstein, On Academic Fads and Fashions, 99 Mich. L. Rev. 1251 (2001). 
124 Cf. Andrew F. Daughtety and Jennifer F. Reinganum, Stampede to Judgment, 1 Am Law and 
Ec. Rev. 158 (1999).  

27 

 

of an early and somewhat idiosyncratic judgment. Because the courts of appeals 
are in agreement, the Supreme Court denies certiorari. 
 

To be sure, precedential cascades do not always happen, and splits among 
courts of appeals are common.125 One reason is that subsequent courts often have 
sufficient  confidence  to  conclude  that  predecessor  courts  have  erred.  But  it  is 
inevitable  that  cascades  will  sometimes  develop,  especially  in  highly  technical 
areas,  and  it  will  be  hard  to  detect  them  after  they  have  occurred.  The 
prescriptive implication is clear: Judicial panels should be cautious about giving 
a  great  deal  of  weight  to  the  shared  view  of  two  or  more  courts  of  appeals.  A 
patient who seeks a second opinion does well not to disclose the first opinion to 
his new doctor, so as to ensure independence; so too, a court of appeals should 
be  alert  to  the  possibility  that  the  unanimity  of  previous  courts  does  not  reflect 
independent  agreement.  And  when  the  Supreme  Court  rejects  the  unanimous 
view  of  a  large  number  of  courts  of  appeals,  a  precedential  cascade  might  well 
have  been  responsible  for  the  unanimity.126  For  the  legal  system,  the  danger  is 
that a cascade, producing agreement among the lower courts, might prove self-
insulating as well as self-reinforcing. Unless there is clear error, why should the 
Supreme Court become involved? 

 
3.  Rationality  and  error.  In  informational  cascades  as  discussed  thus  far, 
each  participant  is  being  entirely  rational;  they  are  acting  as  they  should  in  the 
face  of  limited  information.  But  as  I  have  suggested,  it  is  possible  that 
participants  in  the  cascade  will  fail  to  see  the  extent  to  which  the  decisions  of 
their  predecessors  carry  little  independent  information.  If  most  scientists  think 
that global warming is a serious problem, can they really be wrong? A possible 
answer is that they might indeed be wrong, especially if they are not relying on 
their private information and are following the signals sent by other people. And 
people often seem to mistake a cascade for a series of separate and independent 
judgments. In 2001, for example, hundreds of law professors signed a statement 
condemning,  on  constitutional  grounds,  President  Bush’s  decision  to  permit 
military  tribunals  to  try  suspected  terrorists.127  The  sheer  number  of  signatures 
seems  extremely  impressive.  But  it  is  perhaps  less  so  if  we  consider  the 
likelihood that most signatories lacked reliable information on the esoteric legal 
issue in question, and were simply following the apparently reliable but actually 
uninformative judgment of numerous others.  

                                                 
125 See Eric Talley, Precedential Cascades: An Appraisal, 73 So. Cal. L. Rev. 87 (1999).  
126 See Daughety and Reinganum, supra note, at 161-65. 
127 See XX 

28 

 

 
Despite the rationality of those who participate in informational cascades, 
there  is  a  serious  risk  of  error.  People  might  easily  converge  on  an  erroneous, 
damaging, or dangerous path, simply because they are failing to disclose and to 
act on the basis of all the information that they have.128 

 
4. Laboratory evidence. Cascades are easy to create in laboratory settings. 
Some of the experiments are detailed and a bit technical, but four general lessons 
are clear. First, people will often neglect their own private information and defer 
to  the  information  provided  by  their  predecessors.  Second,  people  are  alert  to 
whether  their  predecessors  are  especially  informed;  more  informed  people  can 
shatter  a  cascade.  Third,  and  perhaps  most  intriguingly,  cascade  effects  are 
greatly reduced if people are rewarded not for correct individual decisions, but 
for  correct  decisions  by  a  majority  of  the  group  to  which  they  belong.  Fourth, 
cascade effects, and blunders, are significantly increased if people are rewarded 
not for correct decisions, but for decisions that conform to the decisions made by 
most  people.  As  we  shall  see,  these  general  lessons  have  implications  for 
institutional  design.  They  suggest  that  errors  are  most  likely  when  people  are 

                                                 
128  See  Hirchleifer,  supra  note,  at  204-05  (discussing  evidence  from  medicine  and  science).  This 
suggestion  does  not  mean  that  when  people  participate  in  cascades,  they  do  worse  than  they 
would  do  if  they  did  not  see  the  decisions  of  their  predecessors.  In  some  cases,  they  do  better. 
Imagine  if  the  early  movers  have  relatively  good  information,  or  are  lucky,  and  if  the  later 
decisionmakers  have  little  information,  or  are  systematically  confused.  In  such  situations, 
cascades will make the situation better than it would be if prior decisions were not observed. Lisa 
Anderson and Charles Holt, Information Cascades in the Laboratory, 87 Am Econ Rev 847, 852 
(1997),  showing  four  sessions  in  which  people  did  better  because  they  did  not  rely  on  their 
private information. But we could also imagine situations in which the early movers do not have 
especially good information, or are unlucky, and in which later decisionmakers have fairly good 
information. In those situations, independent judgments would produce far better outcomes than 
cascade  behavior.  See  id.,  showing  a  session  in  which  a  cascade  produced  more  error  s  than 
would  have  resulted  from  reliance  on  private  information.  As  compared with non-observation, 
cascades systematically produce greater variance, simply because the early movers have so much 
influence. See Edward Parson, Richard Zeckhauser, and Cary Coglianese, Collective Silence and 
Individual  Voice:  The Logic of Information Games, forthcoming in Collective Choice: Essays in 
Honor  of  Mancur  Olson  (J.  Heckelman  and  D.  Coates  eds.  2003);  Eric  Posner,  Four  Economic 
Perspectives  on  American  Labor  Law  and  the  Problem of Social Conflict, J. of Institutional and 
Theoretical  Economics  (forthcoming  2003).  But  it  cannot  be  said,  in  the  abstract,  that  cascades 
produce greater inaccuracy than non-observation. 

In short, the basic claim is not that those who participate in cascades generally do worse 
than  those  who  cannot  observe  the  choices  of  others.  The  claim  is  instead  that  those  who 
participate  in  cascades  fail  to  disclose  information  that  they  have,  and  that  as  a  result,  they 
produce worse outcomes than would result if people revealed that information. 

29 

 

rewarded  for  conforming,  and  least  likely  when  people  are  rewarding  for 
helping groups and institutions to decide correctly. 

 
The simplest experiment asked subjects to guess whether the experiment 
was using Urn A, which contained two red balls and one white, or Urn B, which 
contained  two  white  balls  and  one  red.129  In  each  period,  the  contents  of  the 
chosen urn were emptied in a container. A randomly selected subject was asked 
to  make  one  (and  only  one)  private  draw  of  a  ball.  After  that  draw,  the  subject 
recorded, on an answer sheet, the color of the draw and his own decision about 
the  urn.  The  subject’s  draw  is  not  announced  to  the  group,  but  the  subject’s 
decision about the urn is disclosed. Then the urn is passed to the next subject for 
his  own  private  draw,  which  is  not  disclosed,  and  his  own  decision  about  the 
urn,  which  is  disclosed.  This  process  continued  until  all  subjects  had  made 
decisions,  and  at  that  time  the  experimenter  announced  the  actual  urn  used. 
Subjects could earn $2 for a correct decision.  
 

In  this  experiment,  cascades  often  developed.  After  a  number  of 
individual  judgments  were  revealed,  people  sometimes  announced  decisions 
that  were  inconsistent  with  their  private  draw,  but  that  fit  with  the  majority  of 
previous announcements.130 Over 77% of “rounds” resulted in cascades, and 15% 
of  private  announcements  did  not  reveal  a  “private  signal,”  that  is,  the 
information  provided  by  people’s  own  draw.  Consider  cases  in  which  one 
person’s draw (say, red) contradicted the announcement of his predecessor (say, 
Urn  B).  In  such  cases,  the  second  announcement  nonetheless  matched  the  first 
about 11% of the time—far less than a majority, but enough to ensure occasional 
cascades.  And  when  one  person’s  draw  contradicted  the  announcement  of  two 
or more predecessors, the second announcement was likely to follow those who 
went before. Notably, the majority of decisions followed Bayes’ rule, and hence 
were rationally based on available information131—but erroneous cascades were 

                                                 
129 See Lisa Anderson and Charles Holt, Information Cascades in the Laboratory, 87 Am Econ Rev 
847 (1997). 
130  See  Angela  Hung  and  Charles  Plott,  Information  Cascades:  Replication  and  an  Extension  to 
Majority Rule and Conformity-Rewarding Institutions, 91 Am Econ Rev 1508, 1515 (2001). 
131 Thus 72% of subjects followed Bayes’ rule in the Anderson/Holt experiment, and 64% in Marc 
Willinger  and  Anthony  Ziegelmeyet,  Are  More  Informed  Agents  Able  To  Shatter  Information 
Cascades in the Lab, in The Economics of Networks: Interaction and Behaviours 291, 304 (Patrick 
Cohendet et al. eds. 1996). 

30 

 

nonetheless  found.  Here  is  an  actual  example  of  a  cascade  producing  an 
entertainingly inaccurate outcome (the urn used was B)132: 

 

 

 
Private Draw 
Decision 
 

1 
a 
A 

2 
a 
A 

3 
b 
A 

4 
b 
A 

5 
b 
A 

6 
b 
A 

What  is  noteworthy  here,  of  course,  is  that  the  total  amount  of  private 
information —four whites and two reds—justified the correct judgment, in favor 
of Urn B. But the existence of two early signals, producing rational but incorrect 
judgments, led all others to fall in line. “[I]nitial misrepresentative signals start a 
chain  of  incorrect  decisions  that  is  not  broken  by  more  representative  signals 
received later.”133 It should be simple to see how this result might map onto real-
world  assessments  of  factual,  moral,  and  legal  issues,  especially  in  insulated 
groups, where external correction is less likely.  

B. How To Make and Break Cascades 

 
Is  the  likelihood  of  cascades  affected  by  institutional  arrangements  and 
social norms? Can legal arrangements diminish or increase the risk of erroneous 
cascades, inadvertently or through conscious decision134? A central point here is 
that in an informational cascade, everyone is equal; people are simply trying to 
get  the  right  answer;  and  people  pay  attention  to  the  views  and  acts  of  others 
only because they want to be right. But it is easy to imagine slight alterations of 
the situation, so that some participants know more than others, or so that people 
do  not  only  care  whether  they  are  right.  How  would  these  alterations  affect 
outcomes?  

 
1.  Fashion  leaders  and  informed  cascade-breakers.  In  the  real  world  of 
cascades,  “fashion  leaders”  have  unusual  importance.135  A  prominent  scientist 
might  declare  that  global  warming  is  a  serious  problem;  a  well-respected 
political leader might urge that war should be made against Iraq; a lawyer with 

                                                 
132  See  Marc  Willinger  and  Anthony  Ziegelmeyet,  Are  More  Informed  Agents  Able  To  Shatter 
Information Cascades in the Lab, in The Economics of Networks: Interaction and Behaviours 291 
(Patrick Cohendet et al. eds. 1996). 
133 Anderson and Holt, supra note, at 859. 
134 See Talley, supra note, for a suggestion that certain features of the legal system, including long 
judicial  tenures  and  non-opaque  decisions,  reduce  the  likelihood  of  bad  cascades.  Talley 
persuasively shows that the likelihood is reduced – but not eliminated. 
135 Hirshleifer, supra note, at 197-98. 

31 

 

particular credibility might conclude that recent  antiterrorist legislation  violates 
the  Constitution.  In  any  of  these  cases,  the  speaker  provides  an  especially  loud 
informational signal, perhaps sufficient to start or to stop a cascade.  

 
Now  turn  to  the  actions  of  followers.  In  the  hormone  therapy  case,  no 
doctor is assumed to have, or to believe that she has, more information than her 
predecessors. But in many cases, people know, or think that they know, a great 
deal. It is obvious that such people are far less likely to follow those who came 
before.  Whether  they  will  do  so  should  depend  on  a  comparison  between  the 
amount of information provided by the behavior of predecessors and the amount 
of  private  information  that  they  have.  And  in  principle,  more  informed  people 
will  shatter  cascades,  possibly  initiating  new  and  better  ones.  Whether  this  will 
happen,  in  practice,  depends  on  whether  the  people  who  come  later  know,  or 
believe,  that  the  deviant  agent  was  actually  well-informed.  If  so,  the  more 
informed people operate as fashion leaders.  

 
A  simple  study  attempts  to  test  the  question  whether  more  informed 
people actually shatter cascades.136 The study was essentially the same as the urn 
experiment  just  described,  except  that  players  had  a  special  option  after  any 
sequence of two identical decisions (for example, two “Urn A” decisions): They 
could  make  not  one  but  two  independent  draws  before  deciding.  The  other 
subjects were informed of every case in which a player was making two draws. 
The simplest finding is that this “shattering mechanism” did indeed reduce the 
number  of  cascades—and  thus  significantly  improved  decisions.137  But  the 
mechanism  did  not  work  perfectly.  In  some  cases,  cascades  were  nonetheless 
found.  And  in  some  cases,  people  who  were  permitted  to  draw  twice,  and  saw 
two different balls (say, one red and one white), concluded, irrationally, that the 
cascade should be broken. The remarkable and somewhat disturbing outcome is 
that  they  initiated  an  inaccurate  cascade.  Consider  this  evidence,  in  a  case  in 
which the actual urn was A: 

 

 
Private Draw 
Decision 

1 
a 
A 

2 
a 
A 

3 
b, a 
B 

4 
b 
B 

5 
a 
B 

6 
b 
B 

 
This  disturbing  pattern  undoubtedly  has  real-world  analogues,  in  which 
people  sometimes  give  excessive  weight  to  their  own  information,  even  if  that 

                                                 
136 Willinger and Ziegelmeyet, supra. 
137 Id. at 305. 

32 

 

information is ambiguous and in which it makes sense to follow the crowd. But 
the larger point is the simple one: More informed people are less influenced by 
the signals of others, and they also carry more influence themselves.  

 
But  what  about  cases  in  which  fashion  leaders  are  not  necessarily  more 
informed,  or  in  which  they  are  seen  by  others  as  having  more  information,  or 
more wisdom, than they actually have? We can imagine self-styled experts—on 
diets,  or  herbal  foods,  or  alternative  medicine,  or  economic  trends—who 
successfully  initiate  cascades.  The  risk  here  is  that  the  views  of  fashion  leaders 
will be wrongly taken as authoritative. The result can be to lead people to errors 
and even to illness and death. How can society protect itself? He answers lie in 
good  institutional  arrangements,  civil  liberties,  free  markets,  and  good  social 
norms, encouraging people to be skeptical of supposed experts. In systems with 
freedom of speech and free markets, it is always possible to debunk supposedly 
authoritative  sources.  And  within  groups, 
to  structure 
decisionmaking so as to reduce the relevant risks. Votes might, for example, be 
taken  in  reverse  order  of  seniority,  so  as  to  ensure  that  less  experienced  people 
will  not  be  unduly  influenced  by  the  judgments  of their predecessors; this  is in 
fact the practice on the United States Supreme Court. 

is  possible 

it 

 
2.  Majority  rule:  rewarding  correct  outcomes  by  groups  rather  than  by 
individuals.  How  would  the  development  of  cascades  be  affected  by  an 
institution that rewards correct answers not by individuals, but by the majority 
of  the  group?  In  an  intriguing  variation  on  the  urn  experiment,  subjects  were 
paid  $2  for  a  correct  group  decision,  and  penalized  $2  for  an  incorrect  group 
decision,  with  the  group  decision  determined  by  majority  rule.138  People  were 
neither rewarded nor punished for a correct individual decision. The result was 
that only 39% of rounds saw cascades. In 92% of cases, people’s announcement 
matched their private draw.139 And because people revealed their private signals, 
the  system  of  majority  rule  produced  a  substantial  increase  in  fully  informed 
decisions—that is, the outcomes that someone would reach if he were somehow 
able to see all private information in the system. A simple way to understand this 
point  is  to  assume  that  a  group  has  a  large  number  of  members  and  that  each 
member makes an announcement that matches his private draw. As a statistical 
matter, it is overwhelmingly likely that the majority’s position will be correct. As 

                                                 
138 Id. at 1511. 
139 Id. at 1517. 

33 

 

 
Private 
Draw 
Decision 

an example, consider this period from the majority rule experiment140 (the actual 
urn was A): 
 

1 
a 

2 
a 

3 
a 

4 
a 

6 
a 

7 
a 

8 
a 

5 
b 

B 

9 
b 

B 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

 
What  is  the  explanation  for  this  significantly  reduced  level  of  cascade 
behavior  in  a  system  of  majority  rule?  The  answer  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 
individual knows that he has nothing to gain from a correct individual decision 
and  everything  to  gain  from  a  correct  group  decision.  As  a  result,  it  is  in  the 
individual’s  interest  to  say  exactly  what  he  sees,  because  it  is  the  accurate 
announcement,  from  each  person,  that  is  most  likely  to  promote  an  accurate 
group decision.141  

 
Note  that  to  explain  the  effect  of  majority  rule  in  producing  better 
outcomes, it is not necessary or even helpful to say that when the group decision 
counts,  people  are  altruistic  or  less  concerned  with  their  self-interest.  On  the 
contrary,  self-interest  provides  a  fully  adequate  explanation  of  the  people’s 
behavior.  In  the  individual  condition,  it  is  sensible  to  care  little  about  the 
accuracy  of  one’s  signal  to  others;  that  is  an  informational  externality142—
affecting others, for better or for worse, but not affecting one’s own likelihood of 
gain. If a subject’s individual signal misleads others, the subject has no reason to 
care. But under the majority rule condition that I have just described, the subject 
should care a great deal about producing an accurate signal, simply because an 
inaccurate signal will reduce the likelihood that the group will get it right. And 
here  the  subject  need  not  care  about  the  accuracy  of  his  individual  decision 
except insofar as that decision provides a helpful signal to the group. Hence it is 
only  to  be  expected  that  cascades  are  reduced,  and  correct  outcomes  are 
increased, when people are rewarded for good group decisions.  

 
There  is  a  general  point  here.  It  is  individually  rational,  under  plausible 
assumptions,  to  participate  in  a  cascade;  participants  benefit  themselves  at  the 
same  time  that  they  fail  to  benefit  others  (by  failing  to  disclose  privately  held 

                                                 
140 Id. at 1515. 
141 Note that it takes quite sophisticated participants to see this point. 
142  See  Andrew  Caplin  &  John  Leahy,  Miracle  on  Sixth  Avenue:  Information  Externalities  and 
Search, 108 Econ. J. 60, 61 (1998). 

34 

 

information)  or  affirmatively  harm  others  (by  giving  them  the  wrong  signal). 
This claim holds even if conformity is not rewarded as such. By contrast, it is not 
rational,  under  plausible  assumptions,  to  disclose  or  act  upon  private 
information,  even  though  the  disclosure  or  action  will  actually  benefit  others. 
The  upshot  is  that  dissenters,  disclosing  their  own  private  information,  need  to 
be encouraged, simply because they confer benefits on those who observe them. 
If  the  point  is  put  together  with  an  emphasis  on  the  risk  of  cascades  on  courts, 
there is fresh reason to appreciate judicial dissents, if only because they increase 
the likelihood that majority decisions will receive critical scrutiny. Note here that 
within the Supreme Court alone, dissenting opinions have frequently become the 
law, indeed have become the law on well over 130 occasions143—a point to which 
I will return. 
 
The  upshot  is  that  dissenters  and  nonconformists,  disclosing  their  own 
private information, should be encouraged, simply because they confer benefits 
on  those  who  observe  them.  Now  let  us  put  this  point  together  with  a 
recognition of the risk of cascades on courts. We can readily see a new reason to 
appreciate  judicial  dissents,  if  only  because  they  increase  the  likelihood  that 
majority  decisions  will  receive  critical  scrutiny.  Note  here  that  within  the 
Supreme  Court  alone,  dissenting  opinions  have  frequently  become  the  law, 
indeed  have  become  the  law  on  well  over  130  occasions144—a  point  to  which  I 
will return. 

 
This  claim  has  an  implication  for  appropriate institutional arrangements: 
Any  system  that  creates  incentives  for  individuals  to  reveal  information  to  the 
group is likely to produce better outcomes. A system of majority rule, in which 
individuals known that their well-being will be promoted (or not) depending on 
the  group’s  decision,  therefore  has  significant  advantages.  Well-functioning 
organizations, public as well as private, are likely to benefit from this insight. In 
this  light,  we  might  even  offer  a  suggestion  about  the  nature  of  civic 
responsibility: In case of doubt, citizens should reveal their private signal, rather 
the  crowd.  Perhaps 
than  disguising 
counterintuitively, this kind of behavior is not optimal from the point of view of 
the individual who seeks to get things right, but it is best from the point of view 
of a group or nation that seeks to use all relevant information.  

that  signal  and  agreeing  with 

                                                 
143 Calculated on the basis of the list of overruled decisions in  
http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/senate/constitution/scourt.html. 
144 Calculated on the basis of the list of overruled decisions in  
http://www.access.gpo.gov/congress/senate/constitution/scourt.html. 

35 

 

 

3.  Disclosers,  dissenters,  and  contrarians.  It  is  important  to  make  some 
distinctions here. The majority-rewarding variation on the urn experiment gives 
people  an  incentive  to  disclose  accurate,  privately-held  information.  This  is  the 
information from which the group benefits, and this is the information that does 
not  emerge  if  people  are  rewarded  for  correct  individual  decisions.  Full 
disclosure of accurate information is a central goal of institutional design.145 But 
the  experiment  does  not  suggest  that  a  group  is  better  off  if  people  always 
disagree, or even if they always say what they think. In the tale of the Emperor’s 
New  Clothes,  the  boy  is  not  a  skeptic  or  a  malcontent.  On  the  contrary,  he  is  a 
particular  kind  of  dissenter;  he  is  a  discloser,  revealing  the  information  that  he 
actually  holds.  The  majority-rewarding  variation  of  the  urn  experiment 
encourages subjects to act like that boy.  

 
By contrast, we can imagine a different kind of person, a contrarian, who 
feels  that  he  will  be  rewarded,  financially  or  otherwise,  simply  for  disagreeing 
with  others.  There  is  no  reason  to  celebrate  the  contrarian.  In  many  cases, 
contrarians  are  most  unlikely  to  give  any  help  to  the  group.  If  the  contrarian  is 
known  as  such,  his  signal  will  be  very  noisy  and  not  very  informative.  If  the 
contrarian  is  not  known  as  such,  he  is  still  failing  to  disclose  accurate 
information,  and  in  that  sense  he  is  not  helping  the  group  to  arrive  at  correct 
decisions.  We  could  imagine  a  variation  on  the  urn  experiment  in  which  a 
contrarian-confederate regularly announced the opposite of what his predecessor 
announced. It is safe to predict that such behavior would reduce cascades, but it 
would  not  reduce  errors  by  individuals  or  groups.  On  the  contrary,  it  would 
increase them. 
 

                                                 
145  I  do  not  explore  the  possibility  that  institutions  might  encourage  or  discourage  people  to 
obtain information, which can then be disclosed to the group. Obviously a group will benefit if 
its members are provided with good incentives to provide valuable information. Such incentives 
are especially important if those who acquire information would otherwise incur all of the costs 
of search but only a fraction of the benefits. And since it can be costly to obtain information, there 
are  tradeoffs  to  be  made,  for  both  individuals  and  groups,  between  the  costs  and  benefits  of 
search. Throughout the discussion I emphasize the simplest situations, in which conformity and 
cascades (along with group polarization) suppress accurate information that individuals already 
hold. So long as that information is valuable to the group, full disclosure is generally the ideal. I 
offer a brief discussion, see pp. infra, of the possibility that disclosure of accurate information will 
harm  the  group,  perhaps  because  it  introduces  tension,  perhaps  because  it  produces 
embarrassment  or  worse.  Much  work  remains  to  be  done  on  the  complex  cases  in  which 
institutions seek to promote either the optimal level of search or the optimal level of disclosure 
when disclosure produces both benefits and harms. 

36 

 

Dissenters  who  are  disclosers,  then,  are  to  be  prized.  This  is  certainly  if 
they  are  disclosing  the  full  truth  about  the  issue  at  hand,  and  also  if  they  are 
revealing accurate information, bearing on that issue, that they actually hold. By 
contrast, dissenters who are contrarians are at best a mixed blessing. And we can 
also  imagine  dissenters  who  do  not  disclose  a  missing  fact,  but  instead  simply 
state  a  point  of  view  that  would  otherwise  be  missing  from  group  discussion. 
Such dissenters might urge, for example, that animals should have rights, or that 
school  prayer  should  be  permitted,  or  that  the  law  should  allow  homosexual 
marriage,  or  that  capital  punishment  should  be  banned.  In  the  domains  of 
politics  and  law,  cascade-type  behavior  typically  leads  people  to  be  silent  not 
about  facts,  but  about  points  of  view.  It  is  obvious  that  a  group  needs  relevant 
facts; does it need to know about privately held opinions as well?  

 
There are two reasons that it does. First, those opinions are of independent 
interest.  If  most  or  many  people  favor  school  prayer,  or  believe  that  capital 
punishment  is  morally  unacceptable,  it  is  valuable  to  know  that  fact.  Other 
things  being  equal,  both  individuals  and  governments  do  better  if  they  know 
what  their  fellow  citizens  really  think.  Second,  people  with  dissenting  opinions 
might well have good arguments. It is important for those who conform, or fall 
into  a  cascade,  or  independently  concur  to  hear  those  arguments.  This  is  a 
standard  Millian  point,146  to  which  I  will  shortly  return.  Judge  Richard  Posner 
suggests that judges often offer a “go along concurrence,”147 joining the majority 
though they privately disagree. Such judges give a false signal about their actual 
opinions and, very possibly, their future votes.  

 
4. Conformity and reputation. Suppose that people are rewarded not only 
or  not  mostly  for  being  correct,  but  also  or  mostly  for  doing  what  other  people 
do.  The  reward  might  be  material,  in  the  form  of  more  cash  or  improved 
prospects,  or  it  might  be  non-material,  in  the  form  of  more  and  better 
relationships.  In  the  real  world,  people  are  often  punished  for  nonconformity 
and rewarded for conformity. Someone who rejects the views of leaders or of the 
majority, might well find himself less likely to be promoted and more likely to be 
disliked.  Organizations,  groups,  and  governments  often  prize  harmony,  and 
nonconformists tend to introduce disharmony. Sometimes it is more important to 
be “on the team” than to be right. “Sometimes cultural groups adopt very high 
levels  of  norm  enforcement  that  severely  suppress  the  individual  variations, 

                                                 
146 See John Stuart Mill, On Liberty, supra note. 
147 See Richard Posner. 

37 

 

innovations, and ‘errors’ that innate cultural transmission mechanisms require to 
generate adaptive evolutionary processes within groups.”148 
 

The likely result should be clear. If rewards come to those who conform, 
cascade-like behavior will increase, simply because the incentive to be correct is 
strengthened or replaced by the incentive to do what others do. The extent of this 
effect  will  depend  on  the  extent  of  the  incentive  to  conform.  But  whenever  the 
incentive  is  positive,  people  will  be  all  the  more  likely  to  ignore  their  private 
information  and  to  follow  others.  The  opposite  result  should  be  expected  if 
people  are  penalized  for  following  others  or  rewarded  for  independence;  if  so, 
cascade-like  behavior  should  be  reduced  or  even  eliminated.  I  am  now 
emphasizing  the  incentive  to  conform,  but  in  some  settings  independence  is 
prized, and I will offer a few remarks on that possibility below. 

 
If conformity is rewarded, the problem is especially severe for the earliest 
disclosers  or  dissenters,  who  “may  bear  especially  high  costs  because  they  are 
conspicuous,  individually  identified,  and  easy  to  isolate  for  reprisals.”149  And  if 
the earliest dissenters are successfully deterred, dissent is likely to be exceedingly 
rare. But once the number of disclosers or dissenters reaches a certain level, there 
may  be  a  tipping  point,  producing  a  massive  change  in  behavior.150  Indeed  a 
single discloser, or a single skeptic, might be able to initiate a chain of events by 
which a myth is shattered. Return to the tale of the Emperor’s New Clothes: “A 
child, however, who had no important job and could only see things as his eyes 
showed them to him, went up to the carriage. ‘The Emperor is naked,’ he said. . . 
. [T]he boy's remark, which had been heard by the bystanders, was repeated over 
and over again until everyone cried: ‘The boy is right! The Emperor is naked! It's 
true!’”151  But  it  might  be  very  difficult  to  initiate this process, especially if early 
disclosers  are  subject  to  social  or  legal  sanctions.  Here  we  can  see  a  potentially 
beneficial  role  of  misfits  and  malcontents,  who  should  perform  a  valuable 
function  in  getting  otherwise  neglected  material  and  perspectives  to  others. 
Consider  the  suggestion  that  extremely  harmful  cultural  effects  result  from  a 
“social structure” that eliminates “valuable innovators, experimenters, and error-

                                                 
148 Joseph Henrich et al., supra note, at 356. 
149 Parson, Zeckhauser, and Coglianese, supra note, at 31. 
150 See Kuran, supra note; Christina Bicchieri and Yoshitaka Fukui, The Great Illusion: Ignorance, 
Informational  Cascades,  and  the  Persistence  of  Unpopular  Norms,  in  Experience,  Reality,  and 
Scientific  Explanation  89,  108-114  (M.C.  Galavotti  and  A.  Pagnini  eds.  1999).  For  an  engaging 
discussion, see Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (1999). 
151 See Hans Christian Anderson, The Emperor’s New Suit, in Hans Christian Anderson, Shorter 
Tales (Jean Hersholt trans. 1948; originally published 1837). 

38 

 

makers from being viewed as people to copy.”152 The qualification, noted above, 
is that regular contrarians might reduce cascades without reducing errors.153 

 
a.  An  experiment.  With  respect  to  conformity,  these  speculations  are 
supported by an ingenious variation on the urn experiment mentioned above.154 
In this experiment, people were paid twenty-five cents for a correct decision, but 
seventy-five cents for a decision that matched the decision of the majority of the 
group.  There  were  punishments  for  incorrect  and  nonconforming  answers  as 
well.  If  people  made  an  incorrect  decision,  they  lost  twenty-five  cents;  if  their 
decision failed to match the group’s decision, they lost seventy-five cents.  

 
In  this  experiment,  cascades  appeared  almost  all  of  the  time.  No  fewer 
than  96.7%  of  rounds  resulted  in  cascades,155  and  35.3%  of  announcements  did 
not  match  the  announcer’s  private  signal,  that  is,  the  signal  given  by  his  own 
draw.156  And  when  the  draw  of  a  subsequent  person  contradicted  the 
the  first 
announcement  of 
announcement.  Consider,  as  a  dramatic 
illustration,  this  period  of  the 
experiment157 (the actual urn for this period was B): 

the  predecessor,  72.2%  of  people  matched 

Conformity Experiment 

1 
a 

2 
b 

3 
b 

4 
b 

5 
a 

6 
b 

7 
b 

8 
b 

9 
a 

10 
b 

 

 

 
Private 
Draw 
Decision 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

A 

 
 
b.  Affective  ties  and  stifled  dissent.  The  lesson  is  that  institutions  that 
reward  conformity,  and  punish  deviance,  are  far  more  likely  to  produce  worse 
decisions and to reveal less in the way of private information. And here there is a 
link  to  the  earlier  suggestion  that  serious  mistakes  are  committed  by  groups 
whose  members  are  connected  by  bonds  of  affection,  friendship,  and 

                                                 
152 See Henrich et al., in Bounded Rationality, supra note, at 357. 
153 See H. Henry Cao and David Hirshleifer, Misfits and Social Progress (unpublished manuscript 
2002). 
154 See Hung and Plott, supra note, at 1515-1517. 
155 Hung and Plott, supra note, at 1517. 
156 Id. at 1518. 
157 Id. at 1516. 

39 

 

solidarity.158 In such groups, members are usually less willing, or even unwilling, 
to  state  objections  and  counterarguments,  for  fear  that  these  will  violate 
generally  held  norms.  Cascades  and  bad  decisions  are  likely;  return  to  the 
investment  clubs  discussed  above.159  We  can  see  here  that  an  organization  that 
depends on affective ties is likely to stifle dissent and to minimize the disclosure 
of private information and belief; some religious and political organizations are 
obvious  illustrations.  A  socially  destructive  norm  of  conformity  aggravates 
people’s  tendency  to  ignore  their  private  information  and  to  say  and  do  what 
others do.  

 
If  an  organization  wants  to  avoid  error,  it  should  make  clear  that  it 
welcomes  the  disclosure  private  signals,  simply  because  that  is  in  the 
organization’s  own  general  interest.  This  point  might  seem  counterintuitive, 
because  in  most  well-functioning  societies,  conformity  to  the  majority’s  view 
seems  to  be  the  civil  thing  to  do.  What  I  am  suggesting  here  is  that  from  the 
social standpoint, it is better to behave in the way that one would if being right 
were all that mattered, and better still to behave as one would if a correct group 
decision were all that mattered. 

 
Of  course  the  normative  issues  are  not  simple.  Bonds  of  affection  and 
solidarity  are  often  important  to  group  members,  and  many  people  do  not 
appreciate  dissent  and  disagreement.  Perhaps  the  real  point  of  the  relevant 
group  or  organization  is  not  to  perform  well,  but  to  foster  good  relationships. 
Conformists avoid creating the difficulties that come from contestation, but at the 
expense, often, of a good outcome; dissenters tend to increase contestation while 
also  improving  performance.160  In  the  abstract,  it  is  hard  to  specify  the  optimal 
tradeoffs between the various goods. If the central goal of group members is to 
maintain  and  improve  social  bonds  and  not  to  carry  out  some  task,  conformity 
might be encouraged, at least if nonconformists introduce tension and hostility. 
Or  consider  the  question  of  dissent  in  wartime.  It  is  important  for  those  who 
wage  war  to  know  what  citizens  really  think and also to have a sense of actual 
and potential errors. But it is also important, especially in wartime, for citizens to 
have  a  degree  of  solidarity  and  to  believe  that  they  are  involved  in  a  common 
endeavor;  this  belief  can  help  solve  collective  action  problems  that  otherwise 
threaten  success.  Some  forms  of  dissent  might  correct  mistakes  while  also 
undermining social bonds. Of course freedom of speech should be the rule, but 

                                                 
158 See Harrington, supra note. 
159 See id. 
160 See id. 

40 

 

there  is  no  simple  solution  to  this  dilemma.  We  might  simply  notice  that  those 
who  are  inclined  to  dissent  must  decide  whether  it  is  worthwhile  to  create  the 
disruption that comes from expressing their views.161 

 
c. When silence is golden. I have been stressing cases in which disclosure 
is in the group’s interest, but the immediately preceding discussion suggests the 
opposite possibility.162 If group members reveal information that is embarrassing 
or worse, they might assist a competitor or an adversary. They might also make 
it harder for the group to have candid discussions in the future, simply because 
everyone  knows  that  whatever  is  said  might  be  made  public.  Strong  norms 
against  “leaking”  are  a  natural  corrective.  And  if  some  members  of  the  group 
have  engaged  in  wrongdoing,  revelation  of  that  fact  might  injure  many  or  all 
group members. Anyone who has ever attended a faculty meeting is aware of the 
possibility  that  speakers  receive  the  full  benefits  of  the  time  they  use,  while 
inflicting costs on others; this unfortunate state of affairs can lead to unduly long 
meetings. The same problem can inflict the deliberations of both legislatures and 
courts.  Conformity  to  a  group  norm,  involving  silence  or  informal  time 
constraints, can be extremely valuable.  

 
It  is  important  to  acknowledge  that  the  problem  I  am  emphasizing—the 
failure  to  disclose  accurate  information  that  will  benefit  the  public—is  closely 
paralleled by the problems raised in many cases in which silence, not revelation, 
is a collective good.163 And if disclosure will spread inaccurate information, it is 

                                                 
161 It is also possible that dissenters will be wrong, especially but not only if they are contrarians -- 
and  if  they  are  wrong,  they  might  spread  errors  through  the  same  processes  discussed  here. 
Nothing in the discussion thus far shows that conformity and cascades are bad as such. The only 
suggestions  have  been  that  the  underlying  mechanisms  increase  the likelihood that people will 
not reveal what they know or believe, and that this failure to disclose can produce social harm. It 
would  not  be  difficult  to  generate  experiments  in  which  informational  and  reputational 
influences  produce  fewer  mistakes  than  independence  –  if,  for  example,  the  task  is  especially 
difficult,  and  if  the  experimenter  introduces  confident  confederates  equipped  with  the  correct 
answer. When specialists have authority, and when people listen carefully to them, it is generally 
because errors are minimized through this route. But reputational influences carry serious risks 
insofar  as  they  lead  people,  including  specialists,  not  to  disclose  what  they  actually  know. 
Indeed, this is the most troublesome implication of the conformity experiment. 
162  See  Edward  Parson,  Richard  Zeckhauser,  and  Cary  Coglianese,  Collective  Silence  and 
Individual  Voice:  The Logic of Information Games, forthcoming in Collective Choice: Essays in 
Honor of Mancur Olson (J. Heckelman and D. Coates eds. 2003). 
163 Id. 

41 

 

unlikely  to  be  beneficial,164  especially  if  it  negates  the  beneficial  effects  of 
previous decisions or produces a cascade of its own. Because my focus is on the 
failure to disclose information, I will not devote attention to situations in which 
silence is golden, except to note that the basic analysis of those situations is not 
so different from the analysis here.165 
 

d.  Variations  and  the  real  world.  The  conformity  experiment  could  itself 
be varied in many ways, with predictable results. If financial rewards were solely 
or  almost  solely  for  conformity,  cascade  behavior  would  be  increased;  if  the 
seventy-five  cent  reward  were  cut  in  half,  cascade  behavior  should  decline.  Of 
course  it  is  possible  to  imagine  many  mixed  systems.  An  obvious  example  is  a 
system  of  majority  rule  in  which  people  are  also  rewarded  for  conformity  or 
punished  for  nonconformity.  Will  cascades  develop  in  such  cases?  The  answer 
will depend on the size of the various incentives. If the accuracy of the group’s 
decision will greatly affect individual well-being—if their lives depend on good 
results—cascades are less likely. But if the ultimate outcome has little effect, and 
if conformity will carry high rewards, cascades are inevitable. A system in which 
individuals  receive  $2  for  a  correct  majority  decision,  and  $.25  for  conforming, 
will  produce  different  (and  better)  results  from  a  system  in  which  individuals 
receive $.25 for a correct majority decision, and $2 for conformity.  

 
The  real  world  of  groups  and  democracy  offers  countless  variations  on 
these  rewards,  and  often  the  rewards  are  highly  indeterminate;  people  do  not 
know  what  they  are  or  have  a  hard  time  in  quantifying  them.  But  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  conformity  pressures  actually  result  in  less  disclosure  of 
information.  Consider  the  suggestion  of  a  medical  researcher  who  questions  a 
number of Lyme disease diagnoses: “Doctors can’t say what they think anymore. 
.  .  .  If  you  quote  me  as  saying  these  things,  I’m  as  good  as  dead.”166  When 
privately  interviewed,  gang  members  express  considerable  discomfort  about 
their  antisocial  behavior,  but  their  own  conduct  suggests  a  full  commitment, 
leading to a widespread belief that most people approve of what is being done.167 
Or consider the remarks of a sociologist who has publicly raised questions about 
the health threats posed by mad-cow disease, suggesting that if you raise those 

                                                 
164 This statement is qualified because inaccurate disclosures might, in fortunate circumstances, be 
corrected, leading to a greater appreciation of what is true. See Mill, supra, for a classic discussion 
of the possibly valuable role of falsehoods. 
165 See Parson et al., supra, for helpful discussion. 
166 David Grann, Stalking Dr. Steere, N.Y. Times, July 17, 2001 (Magazine), at 52. 
167 Bicchieri and Fukui, supra note, at 93. 

42 

 

doubts  publicly,  “You  get  made  to  feel  like  a  pedophile.”168  Tocqueville 
explained  the  decline  of  the  French  church,  in  the  mid-eighteenth  century,  in 
these terms: “Those who retained their beliefs in the doctrines of the Church . . . 
dreading  isolation  more  than  error,  professed  to  share  the  sentiments  of  the 
majority. So what was in reality the opinion of only a part . . . of the nation came 
to  be  regarded  as  the  will  of  all  and  for  this  reason  seemed  irresistible,  even  to 
those  who  had  given  it  this  false  appearance.”169  Or  consider,  as  a  chilling 
example, the suggestion from a killer of Mostar, during the Bosniar war, that his 
actions were not a product of his convictions about the evil character of those he 
was  killing.  On  the  contrary,  many  of  them  were  his  former  friends.  His 
explanation  was  that  he  had  to  do  what  he  did  to  remain  a  part  of  his  Serbian 
community.170  
 
There  is  a  final  wrinkle.  In  the  settings  discussed  thus  far,  dissenters 
proceed at their peril and nonconformity is punished. This will be my emphasis 
throughout.  But  in  some  contexts,  dissenters  might  be  attempting  to  improve 
their  own  prospects,  and  dissenting  might  be  a  sensible  way  of  doing  that.  A 
political  dissenter,  challenging  some  widespread  practice,  sometimes  becomes 
more prominent and more successful as a result. A judge who dissents in a high-
profile  case  might  not  greatly  fear  that  her  reputation  will  be  harmed;  on  the 
contrary, she might think that the dissent will redound to her benefit. The point 
is  strengthened  once  we  consider  the  fact  that  a  society  consists  of  countless 
communities  with  a  wide  range  of  values  and  beliefs.  A  public  dissenter  might 
impair his reputation in one group but simultaneously strengthen it in another. 
Of  course,  some  people  say  and  do  exactly  what  they  think  and  do  not  greatly 
care  about  their  reputations;  for  them,  informational  influences  are  far  more 
important. The only suggestions are that much of the time, people do not want to 
lose  the  good  opinion  of  relevant  others,  and  that  the  result  of  this  desire  is  to 
reduce the information that the public is able to have. 

 
e.  Beyond  information.  Often  people  lack  much  information,  strictly 
speaking, but they do have preferences and values. They might believe that the 
words  “under  God”  should  not  be  included  in  the  pledge  of  allegiance.  They 
might  want  to  discontinue  affirmative  action.  But  in  either  case  they  might  not 
reveal  what  they  want,  simply  because  of  the  pressure  to  conform.  I  have 
                                                 
168 Andrew Higgins, It's a Mad, Mad, Mad-Cow World, Wall St. J., Mar. 12, 2001, at A13 (internal 
quotation marks omitted). 
169 Alexis de Tocqueville, The Old Regime and the French Revolution 155 (1955). 
170  See  Russell  Hardin,  The  Crippled  Epistemology  of  Extremism,  in  Political  Rationality  and 
Extremism 3, 16 (Albert Breton et al. eds. 2002). 

43 

 

suggested  that  from  the  standpoint  of  democratic  practice,  this  is  a  problem  as 
well. Most of the time, it is  valuable for people to disclose what they want and 
what  they  value.  The  basic  findings  as  in  the  urn  experiments  would 
undoubtedly  be  the  same  for  preferences  and  values  as  well  as  facts,  with 
rewards  for  conformity  greatly  increasing  the  apparent  (not  real)  degree  of 
agreement.  
 
This  point  helps  explain  why  “[u]npopular  or  dysfunctional  norms  may 
survive even in the presence of a huge, silent majority of dissenters.”171 Fearing 
the wrath of others, people might not publicly contest practices and values that 
they privately abhor. The practice of sexual harassment long predated the idea of 
sexual harassment, and the innumerable women who were subject to harassment 
did  not  like  it.172  But  much  of  the  time  they  were  silent,  largely  because  they 
feared the consequences of public complaint. It is interesting to speculate about 
the  possibility  that  many  current  practices  fall  in  the  same  general  category: 
those  that  produce  harm,  and  are  known  to  produce  harm,  but  that  persist 
because most of those who are harmed believe that they will suffer if they object 
in public. 
 
C. Reputational Cascades 

 
If  conformity  pressures  are  taken  seriously,  we  can  see  the  possibility  of 
reputational  cascades,  parallel  to  their  informational  sibling.173 In  a reputational 
cascade, people think that they know what is right, or what is likely to be right, 
but  they  nonetheless  go  along  with  the  crowd.  Even  the  most  confident  people 
sometimes  fall  prey  to  this  process,  silencing  themselves  in  the  process.  In  fact 
the conformity-rewarding version of the urn experiment is an elegant example of 
a  reputational  cascade.  It  is  thus  possible  to  exploit  the  influence  of  peer 
pressure,  found  in  the  conformity  experiments,  to  show  how  many  social 
movements become possible.  

 
1.  Mechanics.  Suppose  that  Albert  suggests  that  global  warming  is  a 
serious problem, and that Barbara concurs with Albert, not because she actually 
agrees  with  Albert,  but  because  she  does  not  wish  to  seem,  to  Albert,  to  be 
ignorant  or  indifferent  to  human  suffering  and  environmental  protection.  If 
Albert  and  Barbara  agree  that  global  warming  is  a  serious  problem,  Cynthia 

                                                 
171 Bicchieri and Fukui, supra note, at 114. 
172 See Catharine MacKinnon, Feminism Unmodified (1987). 
173 See Timur Kuran, Public Lies and Private Truths (1997). 

44 

 

might  not  contradict  them  publicly,  and  might  even  seem  to  share  their 
judgment,  not  because  she  believes the judgment to be correct, but because she 
does not want to face the hostility or lose the good opinion of others. It is easy to 
see  how  this  process  might  generate  a  cascade.  Once  Albert,  Barbara,  and 
Cynthia  offer  a  united  front  on  the  issue,  their  friend  David  might  be  most 
reluctant to contradict them even if he thinks that they are wrong. In the actual 
world  of  group  decisions,  people  are  of  course  uncertain  whether  publicly 
expressed  statements  are  a  product  of  independent  knowledge,  participation  in 
an informational cascade, or reputational pressure. It is reasonable to think that 
much  of  the  time,  listeners  and  observers  overstate  the  extent  to  which  the 
actions of others are based on independent information. 

 
Reputational cascades occur within all branches of government. Of course 
legislators are vulnerable to reputational pressures; that is part of their job. When 
elected  representatives  suddenly  support  legislation  to  deal  with  an  apparent 
(sometimes  not  real)  crisis,  they  are  involved  in  a  reputational  cascade.174 
Consider,  for  example,  the  rush,  in  July  2002,  to  enact  measures  to  deal  with 
corporate corruption.175 Undoubtedly many legislators had private qualms about 
legislation  that  they  supported,  and  some  of  them  probably 
the  very 
disapproved  of  measures  for  which  they  nonetheless  voted.  So  too  with  the 
unanimous (!) disapproval, by members of the United States Senate, of the court 
of  appeals  decision  to  strike  down  the  use  of  the  words  “under  God”  in  the 
pledge  of  allegiance.  176  In  both  cases,  some  legislators  were  involved  in  a 
reputational cascade, repressing their private doubts in order to avoid injury to 
reputations.  
their 
 

2. Pluralistic ignorance and self-censorship. I have emphasized that in an 
informational cascade, the most serious problem is that the group fails to receive 
privately  held  information.  Exactly  the  same  problem  arises  in  a  reputational 
cascade,  where  the  public,  for  a  very  different  reason,  is  unable  to  learn  what 
many people know and think. Here people silence themselves not because they 
believe that they are wrong but because they do not want to face the disapproval 
that,  they  think,  would  follow  from  expressing  the  view  that  they  believe  to  be 
correct. The underlying problem here is pluralistic ignorance:  ignorance, on  the 
                                                 
174 See Kuran and Sunstein, supra note. 
175 Citations. 
176 Judge Puts Pledge Of Allegiance Decision On Hold, The Bulletin's Frontrunner June 28, 2002, 
available 
at 
http://www.lexis.com/research/retrieve?_m=df9aaf96788a47ff6292885b470099ed&docnum=3&_f
mtstr=FULL&_startdoc=1&wchp=dGLbVtb-lSllA&_md5=2018b6610c1a11b9487087a8ea477ec4  

45 

 

part of most or all, of what most people actually think.177 In the face of pluralistic 
ignorance, people can assume, wrongly, that others have a certain view, and they 
alter their statements and actions accordingly. 

 
Under  certain  conditions,  this  self-censorship  is  an  extremely  serious 
social  loss.  For  example,  Communism  was  able  to  sustain  itself  in  Eastern 
Europe,  not  only  because  of  force,  but  because  people  believed,  wrongly,  that 
most people supported the existing regime.178 The fall of Communism was made 
possible only by the disclosure of privately held views, which turned pluralistic 
ignorance into something closer to pluralistic knowledge.179 As we shall see, self-
censoring can undermine success during war.180 Reputational pressures also help 
fuel  ethnic  identifications,  sometimes  producing  high  levels  of  hostility  among 
groups  for  which,  merely  a  generation  before,  such  identifications  were 
unimportant  and  hostility  was  barely  imaginable.181  And  if  certain  views  are 
punished,  it  is  possible  that  unpopular  views  will  eventually  be  lost  to  public 
debate, so that what was once “unthinkable” is now “unthought.”182 Views that 
were  originally  taboo,  and  offered  rarely  or  not  at  all,  become  excised  entirely, 
simply because they have not been heard. Here too those who do not care about 
their reputation, and who say what they really think, perform a valuable public 
service, often at their own expense.183  

 
Various  civil  liberties,  including  freedom  of  speech,  can  be  seen  as  an 
effort to insulate people from the pressure to conform, and the reason is not only 
to  protect  private  rights,  but  also  to  protect  the  public  against  the  risk  of  self-
silencing. A striking claim by Joseph Raz clarifies the point: “If I were to choose 
between living in a society which enjoys freedom of expression, but not having 
the right myself, or enjoying the right in a society which does not have it, I would 
have no hesitation  in judging that my own personal interest is better served by 

                                                 
177 For a good discussion, see Kuran, supra note.  
178 See id. 
179  See  id;  see  also  Suzanne  Lohmann,  Dynamics  of  Informational  Cascades:  The  Monday 
Demonstrations in Leipzig, East Germany, 1989-1991, 47 World Politics 42 (1994). 
180 See below. 
181 See Kuran, Ethnification, supra note. 
182 Kuran, supra note. 
183  Of  course  self-censorship  is  not  always  bad.  The  norms  held  by  the  public  can  have  a 
“laundering effect,” one that is quite healthy. See Robert E. Goodin, Laundering Preferences, in 
Foundations of Social Choice Theory 75 (Jon Elster & Aanund Hylland eds., 1986). The basic idea 
here is that there are strong social norms against certain kinds of public statements, such as racist 
statements, and those norms can have a good effect on public discussion. See id. 

46 

 

the first option.”184 The claim makes sense in light of the fact that a system of free 
speech  confers  countless  benefits  on  people  who  do  not  much  care  about 
exercising that right. Consider the fact that in the history of the world, no society 
with  democratic  elections  and  free  speech  has  ever  experienced  a  famine185—a 
demonstration of the extent in which political liberty protects people who do not 
exercise  it.  Freedom  of  association  is  especially  noteworthy  here,  because  it 
allows  people  to  band  together  in  groups  in  which  the  ordinary  incentive  to 
conform  might  be  absent  or  even  reversed.  Society  in  general  might  punish 
certain  political  views,  but  associations  can  be  found  in  which  those  views  are 
tolerated  or  even  encouraged.  The  secret  ballot  can  be  seen  in  related  terms.186 
One  advantage  of  the  secret  ballot  is  that  it  reduces  informational  pressures, 
leading the voter to express his own preference and to be less influenced by the 
views  of  others.  (Recall  the  majority-rewarding  version  of  the  urn  experiment.) 
But the more obvious advantage is that the voter can act anonymously and thus 
cast his ballot without fear of opprobrium. 

 
Just as informational cascades may be limited in their reach, there can be 
local  reputational  cascades—ones  that  reshape  the  public  pronouncements  of 
particular subgroups without affecting those of the broader society. When certain 
subgroups believe that nonexistent risks are actually quite serious, or that some 
hopeless medical treatment produces miracle cures, reputational cascades might 
well  be  involved,  simply  because  skeptics  do  not  speak  out.  Of  course 
informational  influences  interact  with  reputational  ones.  South  Africa,  for 
example,  has  experienced  the  literally  deadly  phenomenon  of  “AIDS  denial,” 
with prominent leaders suggesting that AIDS is not a real disease, but instead a 
conspiracy  to  sell  certain  drugs  to  poor  people.  In  that  case,  a  cascade  did 
develop, but it was based mostly on transmission of alleged facts, not on fear of 
reputational harm.187 But if we emphasize reputational pressures, we can identity 
an important reason for unusual beliefs—about facts and values—among various 
communities  of  like-minded  people.  It  is  often  tempting  to  attribute  such 
differences to deep historical or cultural factors, but the real source, much of the 
time, is reputational pressure.  

 
Of course political leaders often play an important role in building those 
pressures.188  If  leaders  insist  that  something  is  true,  or  that  the  nation  should 
                                                 
184 Joseph Raz, Ethics in the Public Domain 39 (1994). 
185 See Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines (1983). 
186 See Kuran, supra note. 
187 See Edwin Cameron, AIDS Denial in South Africa, 5 The Green Bag 415, 416-19 (2002). 
188 See id. at 416-19. 

47 

 

pursue  a  certain  course  of  action,  some  citizens  might  well  be  reluctant  to 
dissent,  if  only  because  of  a  fear  of  public  disapproval.  Here  as  elsewhere,  the 
result  can  be  a  serious  social  loss.  And  here  again  a  strong  system  of  civil 
liberties, and an insistence on making safe space for enclaves of dissenters, can be 
justified  not  as  an  effort  to  protect  individual  rights,  but  as  a  safeguard  against 
social blunders. A market system aggregates and spreads information better than 
any  planner  could  possibly  do.189  In  the  same  way,  a  system  of  free  expression 
and  dissent  protects  against  the  false  confidence  and  the  inevitable  mistakes  of 
planners, both private and public.  

 
It would make little sense to say that cascades, in general, are good or bad. 
Sometimes  cascade  effects  will  overcome  group  or  public  torpor,  by  generating 
concern about serious though previously ignored problems. Sometimes cascade 
effects  will  make  people  far  more  worried  than  they  would  otherwise  be  and 
produce large-scale distortions in private judgments, public policy, and law. It is 
reasonable  to  speculate  that  the  antislavery  movement  had  distinctive  cascade-
like features, as did the environmental movement in the United States, the fall of 
Communism,190  and  the  anti-apartheid  movement  in  South  Africa;  so  too  with 
Mao’s  Cultural  Revolution  and  the  rise  of  Nazism  in  Germany.  Typically 
cascades are quite fragile, precisely because people’s commitments are based on 
little  private  information.  What  I  have  emphasized  here  is  the  serious  risk  that 
social cascades can lead to widespread errors, factual or otherwise. 

 

D. Boundedly Rational Cascades 
 

Thus far the discussion has assumed that people are largely rational—that 
they take account, rationally, of the information provided by the statements and 
actions of others, and that they care, sensibly enough, about their reputation. The 
principal exception, suggested above, is that people may mistake a cascade for a 
large number of independent decisions. But it is well-known that human beings 
are  “boundedly  rational.”  In  most  domains,  people  use  heuristics,  or  mental 
short-cuts, and they also show identifiable biases.191 Indeed, following others can 
itself be seen as a heuristic, one that usually works well, but that also misfires in 

                                                 
189 See F.A. Hayek, The Use of Knowledge in Society, 35 American Economic Review 519 (1945). 
190 See Kuran, supra note; Suzanne Lohmann, Dynamics of Informational Cascades: The Monday 
Demonstrations in Leipzig, East Germany, 1989-1991, 47 World Politics 42 (1994). 
191  For  an  overview,  see  Heuristics  and  Biases:  The  Psychology  of  Intuitive  Judgment  (Thomas 
Gilovich  et  al.  eds.  2002);  for  a  summary,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Hazardous  Heuristics,  U  Chi  L 
Rev(forthcoming 2003). 

48 

 

some  cases.192  And  for  other  heuristics  and  for  every  bias,  there  is  a 
corresponding possibility of a cascade. 

 
Consider,  for  example,  the  availability  heuristic,  which  has  probably 
become  the  most  well-known  in  law.193  When  people  use  the  availability 
heuristic,  they  answer  a  hard  question  about  probability  by  asking  whether 
examples  come  readily  to  mind.194  How  likely  is  a  flood,  an  earthquake,  an 
airplane  crash,  a  traffic  jam,  a  terrorist  attack,  or  a  disaster  at  a  nuclear  power 
plant?  Lacking  statistical  knowledge,  people  try  to  think  of  illustrations.195  For 
people without statistical knowledge—which is to say most people—it is hardly 
irrational  to  use  the  availability  heuristic.  The  problem  is  that  this  heuristic  can 
lead  to  serious  errors  of  fact,  in  the  form  of  excessive  fear  of  small  risks  and 
neglect  of  large  ones.196  And  indeed  both  surveys  and  actual  behavior  show 
extensive use of the availability heuristic. Whether people will buy insurance for 
natural  disasters  is  greatly  affected  by  recent  experiences.197  If  floods  have  not 
occurred in the immediate past, people who live on flood plains are far less likely 
to  purchase  insurance.198  In  the  aftermath  of  an  earthquake,  insurance  for 
earthquakes  rises  sharply—but  it  declines  steadily  from  that  point,  as  vivid 
memories recede.199  

 
For  present  purposes,  the  key  point  is  that  the  availability  heuristic  does 
not operate in a social vacuum. Whether an incident is “available” is a function 
of  social  interactions.  These  interactions  rapidly  spread  salient  illustrations 
within  relevant  communities,  making  those  illustrations  available  to  many  or 
most.  Should  swimmers  worry  about  shark  attacks?200  Are  young  girls  likely  to 

                                                 
192 See Henrich, supra note, at 356; Goldstein et al., supra note, at 174. 
193  See,  e.g.,  Roger  Noll  and  James  Krier,  Some  Implications  of  Cognitive  Psychology  for  Risk 
Regulation, 19 J. Legal Stud 747 (1991). 
194  See  Amos  Tversky  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Judgment  Under  Uncertainty:  Heuristics  and 
Biases, in Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, supra note 7, at 3, 11-14. 
195 Id. 
196  See  Roger  Noll  and  James  Krier,  Some  Implications  of  Cognitive  Psychology  for  Risk 
Regulation, 19 J. Legal Stud 747 (1991); Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades 
and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan L Rev 683, 703-05 (1999). 
197  For  a  vivid  demonstration  in  the  context  of  catastrophes,  see  Jacob  Gersen,  Strategy  and 
Cognition:  Regulatory  Catastrophic  Risk  (unpublished  manuscript  2001).  See  also  Paul  Slovic, 
The Perception of Risk 40 (2000). 
198 Id. 
199 Id. 
200  See  the  discussion  of  the  shark  attack  cascade  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Risk  and  Reason:  Safety, 
Law, and the Environment (2002). 

49 

 

be  abducted?201  In  both  cases,  the  United  States  has  recently  seen  “availability 
cascades,”202 in which salient examples were rapidly spread from one person to 
the  next.  Note  that  this  process  typically  involves  information.  If  some  people 
use a recent assault to show that there is a serious risk of crime ten blocks north, 
or a recent airplane accident to show that it is unsafe to fly, their statements carry 
a certain authority, leading others to believe that they are true. And in the case of 
shark  attacks  and  abduction  of  young  girls,  the  media  spread  a  few  gripping 
examples,  apparently  providing  information  that  was  rapidly  transmitted  to 
millions of people. But reputational forces play a role as well. Much of the time, 
people are reluctant to say that an example is misleading and hence that others’ 
fears  are  groundless.  Efforts  at  correction  may  suggest  stupidity  or  callousness, 
and a desire to avoid public opprobrium may produce a form of silencing.  

 
Availability  cascades  are  ubiquitous.  Vivid  examples,  alongside  social 
interactions,  help  account  for  decisions  to  purchase  insurance  against  natural 
disasters.203  Cascade  effects  explain  the  existence  of  widespread  public  concern 
about  abandoned  hazardous  waste  dumps  (a  relatively  trivial  environmental 
hazard).204  In  more  recent  years,  availability  cascades  spurred  public  fears  not 
only  of  shark  attacks  and  abductions  of  girls,  but  also  of  the  pesticide  Alar,  of 
plane  crashes,  and  of  shootings  in  schools  in  the  aftermath  of  the  murders  in 
Littleton,  Colorado.205  Such  effects  helped  produce  massive  dislocations  in  beef 
production in Europe in connection with “mad cow disease”206; they help also to 
account for the outpouring of enthusiasm for regulation of accounting practices 
in the aftermath of the 2001 scandal involving Enron and other corporations.207  
My suggestion is not that in all or most of these cases, availability cascades led to 
excessive  or  inappropriate  reactions.  On  the  contrary,  such  cascades  sometimes 
have  the  valuable  effect  of  promoting  public  attention  to  serious  but  neglected 
problems.  The  suggestion  is  only  that  the  intensity  of  public  reactions  is  best 
understood  by  seeing  the  interaction  between  the  availability  heuristic  and  the 
                                                 
201 
at 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A35380-2002Aug2.html: “Could the saturation 
coverage be painting a distorted picture, like the great shark scare last summer?. . . [T]ake these 
much-hyped abductions, add in the half dozen other cases mentioned by the national media since 
the first of the year . . . [it] still doesn't qualify as a new crime wave.” 
202 See Kuran and Sunstein, supra note. 
203  See  Jacob  Gersen,  Strategy  and  Cognition:  Regulating  Catastrophic  Risk  (unpublished 
manuscript 2001). 
204 See Kuran and Sunstein, supra note. 
205 Id. 
206 Andrew Higgins, It's a Mad, Mad, Mad-Cow World, Wall St. J., Mar. 12, 2001, at A13. 
207 See note supra. 

'Crime  Wave'  Against  Girls, 

See  Howard  Kurtz, 

available 

The 

50 

 

cascade effects I have been emphasizing.208 The problem is that those interactions 
make  some  errors  inevitable,  simply  because  a  heuristic,  even  if  generally 
helpful, is bound to misfire in many cases. Here as elsewhere, dissent can be an 
important corrective. For organizations and governments, the question is how to 
make dissent less costly, or even to reward it, especially when dissenters benefit 
not themselves, but others. 

 

IV. Group Polarization 
 

Thus  far  I  have  been  exploring  how  informational  and  reputational 
influences  produce  conformity  and  cascades.  I  have  also  identified  factors  that 
can  increase  or  reduce  the  likelihood  of  both  of  these.  When  people  are  not 
bound  by  affective  ties,  the  magnitude  of  both  influences  diminishes.  When 
people define themselves as opposed to the relevant others, the direction of the 
influence might even shift. Greater information of course reduces the effects, and 
when  people  know  that  certain  people  are  more  informed,  cascades  are 
shattered.  With  these  points  in  view,  let  us  now  turn  to  the  phenomenon  of 
group polarization, a phenomenon that contains large lessons about the behavior 
of  interest  groups,  religious  organizations,  political  parties,  juries,  legislatures, 
judicial panels, and even nations.209 

                                                 
208  There  is  an  interesting  puzzle  for  those  interested  in  the  real-world  uses  of  availability 
heuristic:  In  many  contexts,  multiple  images  are  literally  “available.”  Consider  the  problem  of 
gun violence. It is not hard to find cases in which the presence of guns led to many deaths, and 
also  cases  in  which  the  presence  of  guns  allowed  law-abiding  citizens  to  protect  themselves 
against  criminals.  See  Donald  Braman  and  Dan  M.  Kahan,  More  Statistics,  Less  Persuasion:  A 
Cultural  Theory  of  Gun-Risk  Perceptions  (unpublished  manuscript  2002).  In  the  face  of 
conflicting instances, which cases are especially available, and to whom? The same question can 
be raised in the environmental setting. We can find cases in which serious harm resulted from a 
failure to heed early warnings, suggesting the need for aggressive regulatory protection against 
risks that cannot yet be shown to be serious; but we can also find cases in which the government 
expended a great deal to reduce risks that turned out, on reflection, to be small or illusory. The 
former  cases  are  available  to  some  people  and  the  latter  to  others.  Why  should  one  or  another 
kind  of  case  be  available?  The  behavior  of  the  media,  and  of  relevant  interest  groups,  is 
undoubtedly  important  here,  but  it  does  not  provide  all  of  the  picture.  Beliefs  and  orientations 
are  a  product  of  availability,  to  be  sure;  but  what  is  available  is  also  a  product  of  beliefs  and 
orientations.  In  other  words,  availability  may  be  endogenous  to  individual  predispositions. 
People  are  often  predisposed  to  take  one  or  another  case  as  an  illustration  of  a  general 
phenomenon, and predispositions matter a great deal in determining what is available. A great 
deal of work remains to be done on this topic. 
209  I  have  discussed  group  polarization  in  more  detail  elsewhere,  see  Sunstein,  Deliberative 
Trouble, supra note, and stress here those aspects of group polarization that are most important 
for an understanding of the importance of dissent. 

51 

 

 

A. The Basic Phenomenon 
 

What  happens  within  deliberating  bodies?  Do  groups  compromise?  Do 
they move toward the middle of the tendencies of their individual members? The 
answer  is  now  clear,  and  it  is  perhaps  not  what  intuition  would  suggest: 
Members of a deliberating group end up in a more extreme position in line with 
their tendencies before deliberation began.210 This is the phenomenon known as 
group  polarization.  Group  polarization  is  the  typical  pattern  with  deliberating 
groups,  having  been  found  in  hundreds  of  studies  involving  over  a  dozen 
countries, including the United States, France, and Germany.211 

 
It  follows  that  a  group  of  people  who  think  that  global  warming  is  a 
serious  problem  will,  after  discussion,  think  that  global  warming  is  a  very 
serious  problem;  that  those  who  approve  of  an  ongoing  war  effort  will,  as  a 
result of discussion, become still more enthusiastic about that effort; that people 
who dislike the Rehnquist Court will dislike it quite intensely after talking with 
one another; that people who disapprove of the United States, and are suspicious 
of  its  intentions,  will  increase  their  disapproval  and  suspicion  if  they  exchange 
points  of  view.  Indeed,  there  is  specific  evidence  of  the  latter  phenomenon 
among  citizens  of  France.212  When  like-minded  people  talk  with  one  another, 
they  usually  end  up  thinking  a  more  extreme  version  of  what  they  thought 
before they started to talk. It should be readily apparent that enclaves of people, 
inclined to rebellion or even violence, might move sharply in that direction as a 
                                                 
210 See Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition 203-226 (1985). At first glance, group 
polarization might be seen to be in tension with the Condorcet Jury Theorem, which holds that 
when people are answering a common question with two answers, one false and one true, and 
when the average probability that each voter will answer correctly exceeds 50%, the probability 
of  a  correct  answers,  by  a  majority  of  the  group,  increases  to  certainty  as  the  size  of  the  group 
increases. For a good overview, see Paul H. Edelman, On Legal Interpretations of the Condorcet 
Jury  Theorem,  31  J  Legal  Stud.  327,  329-334  (2002).  The  importance  of  the  theorem  lies  in  the 
demonstration that groups are likely to do better than individuals, and large groups better than 
small ones, if majority rule is used and if each person is more likely than not to be correct. But 
when group polarization is involved, individuals do not make judgments on their own; they are 
influenced  by  the  judgments  of  others.  When  interdependent  judgments  are  being  made,  and 
when some people are wrong, it is not at all clear that groups will do better than individuals. For 
empirical  evidence,  see  Norbert  Kerr  et  al.,  Bias  in  Judgment:  Comparing  Individuals  and 
Groups, 103 Psych. Rev. 687 (1996). On some of the theoretical issues, see David Austen-Smith, 
and  J.S.  Banks,  Information  Aggregation,  Rationality,  and  the  Condorcet  Jury  Theorem,  90 
American Political Science Review 34 (1996).  
211 See id. at 204. 
212 Id. at 224. 

52 

 

consequence  of  internal  deliberations.  Political  extremism  is  often  a  product  of 
group polarization.213 

 
There  is  a  close  relationship  between  group  polarization  and  cascade 
effects. Both of these are a product of informational and reputational influences. 
A key difference is that group polarization refers to the effects of deliberation,214 
and  cascades  typically  do  not  involve  discussion  at  all.  In  addition,  group 
polarization does not necessarily involve a cascade-like process. Polarization can 
result  simply  from  simultaneous  independent  decisions,  by  all  or  most 
individuals, to move toward a more extreme point in line with the tendencies of 
group members. 

 
To see the operation of group polarization in a legal context, let us explore 
in  more  detail  the  study  of  punitive  intentions  and  punitive  damage  awards, 
referred  to  above.215  The  study  involved  about  3000  jury-eligible  citizens;  its 
major purpose was to determine how individuals would be influenced by seeing 
and  discussing  the  punitive  intentions  of  others.  Hence  subjects  were  asked  to 
record, in advance of deliberation, a “punishment judgment” on a scale of 0 to 8, 
where  0  indicated  that  the  defendant  should  not  be  punished  at  all,  and  8 
indicated  that  the  defendant  should  be  punished  extremely  severely.  After  the 
individual  judgments  were  recorded,  jurors  were  sorted  into  six-person  groups 
and  asked  to  deliberate  to  a  unanimous  “punishment  verdict.”  It  would  be 
reasonable  to  predict  that  the  verdicts  of  juries  would  be  the  median  of 
punishment judgments of jurors; but the prediction would be badly wrong.  

 
Instead  the  effect  of  deliberation  was  to  create  both  a  severity  shift  for 
high-punishment jurors and a leniency shift for low-punishment jurors.216 When 
the  median  judgment  of  individual  jurors  was  four  or  more  on  the  eight-point 
scale,  the  jury’s  verdict  was  above  that  median  judgment.217  Consider,  for 
example,  a  case  involving  a  man  who  nearly  drowned  on  a  defectively 
constructed yacht. Jurors tended to be outraged by the idea of a defectively built 
yacht,  and  groups  were  significantly  more  outraged  than  their  median 

                                                 
213 See Albert Breton and Silvana Dalmazzone, Information Control, Loss of Autonomy, and the 
Emergence of Political Extremism 53-55 (Albert Bretton et al. eds. 2002). 
214 Group polarization can occur, however, as a result of mere exposure to the views of others. See 
Robert Baron et al., supra note, at 74. 
215 See Schkade et al., supra note. 
216 Id. at 1152, 1154-55. 
217 Id. 

53 

 

members.218 But when the median judgment of individual jurors was below four, 
the  jury’s  verdict was  typically  below that median judgment.219 Consider a case 
involving  a  shopper  who  was  injured  in  a  fall  when  an  escalator  suddenly 
stopped.220 Individual jurors were not greatly bothered by the incident, seeing it 
as a genuine accident rather than a case of serious wrongdoing; and jurors were 
more  lenient  than  individual  jurors.221  Here,  then,  is  a  clear  example  of  group 
polarization  in  action.  Groups  whose  members  were  antecedently  inclined  to 
impose  large  punishments  become  inclined  toward  larger  punishments.  The 
opposite  effect  was  found  with  groups  whose  members  were  inclined  toward 
small punishments. 

 
B. Outrage 
 
When we consider the ingredients of punishment judgments, this finding 
has  a  large  implication  for  people’s  behavior  both  inside  and  outside  the 
courtroom.  Punishment  judgments  are  rooted  in  outrage,222  and  a  group’s 
outrage,  on  a  bounded  scale,  is  an  excellent  predictor  of  the  same  group’s 
punishment judgments, on the same scale.223 Apparently people who begin with 
a  high  level  of  outrage  become  still  more  outraged  as  a  result  of  group 
discussion. Moreover, the degree of the shift depends on the antecedent level of 
outrage; the higher the original level, the greater the shift as a result of internal 
deliberations.224 There is a point here about the well-springs of not only of severe 
punishment  by  jurors,  mobs,  and  governments,  but  also  of  rebellion  and 
violence.225  If  like-minded  people,  predisposed  to  be  outraged,  are  put  together 
with one another, significant changes are to be expected.  

 
It  should  be  easy  to  see  that  group  polarization  is  inevitably  at  work  in 
feuds, ethnic and international strife, and war. One of the characteristic features 

                                                 
218 Id. at 1151, 1152. 
219 Id.  
220 Id. 
221 Id. 
222 See Cass R. Sunstein et al., Punitive Damages: How Juries Decide 32-33 (2002). 
223 Id. at 36. 
224 See Schkade et al., supra, at 1152, showing that in the top five outrage cases, the mean shift was 
11%, higher than in any other class of cases. The effect is more dramatic still for dollars, see id., 
where  high  dollar  awards  shifted  upwards  by  a  significant  margin  This  finding  is  closely 
connected to another one: Extremists are most likely to shift, and likely to shift most, as a result of 
discussions  with  one  another.  See  John  Turner  et  al.,  Rediscovering  the  Social  Group  154-59 
(1987). 
225 See Hardin, supra note; Breton, supra note, at 53-55. 

54 

 

 

of  feuds  is  that  members  of  feuding  groups  tend  to  talk  only  to  one  another, 
fueling  and  amplifying  their  outrage,  and  solidifying  their  impression  of  the 
relevant  events.  Group  polarization  occurs  every  day  within  Israel  and  among 
the Palestinian Authority. Many social movements, both good and bad, become 
possible through the heightened effects of outrage226; consider the movement for 
rights for deaf people, which was greatly enhanced by the fact that the deaf have 
a degree of geographical isolation.227  

C. Hidden Profiles and Self-Silencing in Groups 

 
The tendency toward extreme movement is the most noteworthy finding 
in the literature on group polarization.228 But there is a neglected point, of special 
importance for my argument here: In a deliberating group, those with a minority 
position  often  silence  themselves  or  otherwise  have  disproportionately  little 
weight.  The  result  can  be  “hidden  profiles”—important  information  that  is  not 
shared  within  the  group.229  Group  members  often  have  information  but  do  not 
discuss it, and the result is to produce inferior decisions.  

 
Consider  a  study  of  serious  errors  within  working  groups,  both  face-to-
face  and  online.230  The  purpose  of  the  study  was  to  see  how  groups  might 
collaborate to make personnel decisions. Resumes for three candidates, applying 
for a marketing manager position, were placed before the groups. The attributes 
of  the  candidates  were  rigged  by  the  experimenters  so  that  one  applicant  was 
clearly  the  best  for  the  job  described.  Packets  of  information  were  given  to 
subjects, each containing a subset of information from the resumes, so that each 
group member had only part of the relevant information. The groups consisted 
of three people, some operating face-to-face, some operating on-line. Two results 
were especially striking. First, group polarization was common, as groups ended 
up  in  a  more  extreme  position  in  accordance  with the original  thinking  of their 
members.  Second,  almost  none  of  the  deliberating  groups  made  what  was 
conspicuously the right choice, because they failed to share information in a way 

                                                 
226  See  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Inequality  and  Indignation,  Phil  &  Pub. 
Affairs (forthcoming 2002). 
227  See  Sharon  Groch,  Free  Spaces:  Creating  Oppositional  Spaces  in  the  Disability  Rights 
Movement,  in  Oppositional  Consciousness  65,  67-72  (Jane  Mansbridge  and  Aldon  Morris  eds. 
2001). 
228 See id. 
229 See Robert Baron et al., Group Process, Group Decision, Group Action 77 (2d ed. 1999). 
230 See R. Hightower and L. Sayeed, The Impact of Computer-Mediated Communication Systems 
on Biased Group Discussion, 11 Computers in Human Behavior 33 (1995). 

55 

 

information  about 

that would permit the group to make an objective decision. Members tended to 
share  positive 
the  winning  candidate  and  negative 
information about the losers, while also suppressing negative information about 
the winner and positive information about the losers. Their statements served to 
“reinforce the march toward group consensus rather than add complications and 
fuel debate.”231  
 
This finding is in line with the more general suggestion that groups tend 
to  dwell  on  shared  information  and  to  neglect  information  that  is  held  by  few 
members. It should be unnecessary to emphasize that this tendency can lead to 
large errors.232 To understand this particular point, it is necessary to explore the 
mechanisms that produce group polarization. 

 

D. Why Polarization? Some Explanations 

 
Why do like-minded people go to extremes? There are several reasons.233 
 
1. Information. The most important, involving informational influences, is 
similar to what we have found in connection with conformity and cascades. The 
simple  idea  here  is  that  people  respond  to  the  arguments  made  by  other 
people—and the “argument pool,” in any group with some initial disposition in 
one  direction,  will  inevitably  be  skewed  toward  that  disposition.234  A  group 
whose  members  tend  to  think  that  Israel  is  the  real  aggressor  in  the  Mideast 
conflict  will  tend  to  hear  many  arguments  to  that  effect,  and  relatively  few 
opposing views. It is inevitable that the group’s members will have heard some, 
but not all, of the arguments that emerge from the discussion. Having heard all 
of what is said, there is likely to be further movement in the anti-Israel direction. 
So  too  with  a  group  whose  members  tend  to  oppose  affirmative  action:  Group 
members will hear a large number of arguments against affirmative action and a 
fewer number of arguments on its behalf. If people are listening, they will have a 
stronger conviction, in the same direction from which they began, as a result of 
deliberation.  An  emphasis  on  limited  argument  pools  also  helps  to  explain  the 
problem  of  “hidden  profiles”  and  the  greater  discussion  of  shared  information 
during  group  discussion.  It  is  simply  a  statistical  fact  that  when  more  people 
have  a  piece  of  information,  there  is  a  greater  probability  that  it  will  be 

                                                 
231 Wallace, supra note, at 82. 
232 See Baron et al., supra note, at 77. 
233 See Brown, supra note, at 200-45; Sunstein, supra note. 
234 Brown, supra note, at 217-22. 

56 

 

mentioned.235  Hidden  profiles  are  a  predictable  result,  to  the  detriment  of  the 
ultimate decision. 

 
2. Confidence and corroboration. The second explanation begins by noting 
that people with extreme views tend to have more confidence that they are right, 
and that as people gain confidence, they become more extreme in their beliefs. 236 
The  intuition  here  is  simple:  People  who  lack  confidence,  and  who  are  unsure 
what  they  should  think,  tend  to  moderate  their  views.  It  is  for  this  reason  that 
cautious  people,  not  knowing  what  to  do,  are  likely  to  choose  the  midpoint 
between  relevant  extremes.237  But  if  other  people  seem  to  share  your  view,  you 
are likely to become more confident that you are correct—and hence to move in a 
more  extreme  direction.  In  a  wide  variety  of  experimental  contexts,  people’s 
opinions  have  been  shown  to  become  more  extreme  simply  because  their  view 
has been corroborated, and because they have been more confident after learning 
of the shared views of others.238 Note that there is an obvious connection between 
this explanation and the finding, mentioned above, that a panel of three judges of 
the  same  party  is  likely  to  behave  quite  differently  from  a  panel  with  only  two 
such  judges.  The  existence  of  unanimous  confirmation,  from  two  others,  will 
strengthen confidence and hence strengthen extremity.239 

 
3.  Social  comparison.  A  third  explanation,  involving  social  comparison, 
begins with the claim that people want to be perceived favorably by other group 
members,  and  also  to  perceive  themselves  favorably.240  Their  views  may,  to  a 
greater  or  lesser  extent,  be  a  function  of  how  they  want  to  present  themselves. 
Once people hear what others believe, they adjust their positions in the direction 
of  the  dominant  position,  to  hold  onto  their  preserved  self-presentation.  They 
may  want  to  signal,  for  example,  that  they  are  not  cowardly  or  cautious, 
especially in an entrepreneurial group that disparages these characteristics, and 
hence  they  will  frame  their  position  so  that  they  do  not  appear  as  such  by 

                                                 
235 See Caryn Christensen and Ann Abbott, Team Medical Decision Making, in Decision Making 
in Health Care 271 (Gretchen Chapman and Frank A. Sonnenberg eds. 2000). 
236  See  Robert  Baron  et  al.,  Social  Corroboration  and  Opinion  Extremity,  32  J  Experimental  Soc. 
Psych. 537 (1996). 
237 See Mark Kelman et al., Context-Dependence in Legal Decision Making, 25 J. Legal Stud. 287, 
287-88 (1996). 
238 Baron et al., supra note. 
239 See Chip Heath and Richard Gonzales, Interaction With Others Increases Decision Confidence 
But Not Decision Quality: Evidence Against Information Collection Views Of Interactive Decision 
Making, 61 Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 305-326 (1997).  
240 See Brown, supra note, at 213-217. 

57 

 

comparison to other group members.241 And when they hear what other people 
think, they might find that they occupy a somewhat different position, in relation 
to the group, from what they hoped; and they shift accordingly.242  

 
For  example,  if  people  believe  that  they  are  somewhat  more  opposed  to 
capital  punishment  than  most  people,  they  might  shift  a  bit  after  finding 
themselves  in  a  group  of  people  who  are  strongly  opposed  to  capital 
punishment,  to  maintain  their  preferred  self-presentation.  The  phenomenon 
appears to occur in many contexts.243 People may wish, for example, not to seem 
too  enthusiastic,  or  too  restrained  in  their  enthusiasm  for,  affirmative  action, 
feminism,  or  an  increase  in  national  defense;  hence  their  views  may  shift  when 
they  see  what  other  group  members  think.  The  result  is  to  press  the  group’s 
position  toward  one  or  another  extreme,  and  also  to  induce  shifts  in  individual 
members.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  support  for  this  account  of  group 
polarization.244 
 
Note  that  an  emphasis  on  social  comparison  gives  a  new  and  perhaps 
better  explanation  for  the  existence  of  hidden  profiles  and  the  failure  to  share 
certain  information  within  a  group.  People  might  emphasize  shared  views  and 
information,  and  downplay  unusual  perspectives  and  new  evidence,  simply 
from a fear of group rejection and a desire for general approval.245 In political and 
legal institutions, there is an unfortunate implication: Group members who care 
about one another’s approval, or who depend upon one another for material or 
nonmaterial  benefits,  might  well  suppress  highly  relevant  information.  Hence 
this  account  of  group  polarization  is  connected  with  the  idea  of  reputational 
cascades, where blunders are highly probable.  

E. Skewed Debates 

 

 

                                                 
241 Id. at 213-14. 
242 Id. It has similarly been suggested that majorities are especially potent because people do not 
want to incur the wrath, or lose the favor, of large numbers of people, and that when minorities 
have influence, it is because they produce genuine attitudinal change. See Baron et al., supra note, 
at  82.  The  demonstrated  fact  that  minorities  influence  privately  held  views,  on  such  contested 
issues  as  gay  rights  and  abortion,  see  id.  at  80,  attests  to  the  value  of  creating  institutions  that 
allow room for diverse voices. See pp. infra. 
243

  See  id.;  see  also  John  Turner,  Rediscovering  the  Social  Group:  A  Self-Categorization  Theory 

(1987). 
244 See Baron, supra note, at 74. 
245 Id. at 77. 

58 

 

In  the  context  of  punitive  damage  awards  by  juries,  a  particular  finding 
deserves  emphasis.246 Thus far my discussion of the relevant study has stressed 
how deliberation affected punitive intentions, measured on a bounded numerical 
scale. But jurors were also asked to record their dollar judgments, in advance of 
deliberation,  and  then  to  deliberate  to  dollar  verdicts.  Did  high  awards  go  up 
and low awards go down, as the idea of group polarization might predict? Not 
quite. The principal effect was make all awards go up, in the sense that the jury’s 
dollar  award  typically  exceeded  the  median  award  of  individual  jurors.247 
Indeed, the effect was so pronounced that in 27% of cases, the jury’s verdict was 
as  high  as,  or  higher  than,  the  highest  predeliberation  judgment  of  jurors!248 
There  is  a  further  point.  The  effect  of  deliberation,  in  increasing  dollar  awards, 
was  most  pronounced  in  the  case  of  high  awards.  For  example,  the  median 
individual  judgment,  in  the  case  involving  the  defective  yacht,  was  $450,000, 
whereas  the  median  jury  judgment,  in  that  same  case,  was  $1,000,000.249  But 
awards shifted upwards for low awards as well.250  

 
Why  did  this  happen?  A  possible  explanation,  consistent  with  group 
polarization,  is  that  any  positive  median  award  suggests  a  predeliberation 
tendency  to  punish,  and  deliberation  aggravates  that  tendency  by  increasing 
awards. But even if it is right, this explanation seems insufficiently specific. The 
striking fact is that those  arguing for higher awards seem to have an automatic 
rhetorical advantage over those arguing for lower awards. A subsequent study of 
law  students  supports  this  finding,  suggesting  that  given  existing  social  norms, 
people  find  it  easy,  in  the  abstract,  to  defend  higher  punitive  awards  against 
corporations,  and  harder  to  defend  lower  awards.251  Findings  of  rhetorical 
advantage have been made in seemingly distant areas. Suppose that doctors are 
deciding what steps to take to resuscitate patients. Are individuals less likely to 
support  heroic  efforts  than  groups?  Evidence  suggests  that  as  individuals, 
doctors are less likely to do so than groups, apparently because those who favor 
such efforts have a rhetorical advantage over those who do not.252  

 
Or  consider  the  difference  between  individual  behavior  and  team 
behavior in the Dictator Game, used by social scientists to study selfishness and 

                                                 
246 See note supra. 
247 See Schkade et al., supra note, at 1152, 1155-56. 
248 Id. at 1140. 
249 Schkade et al., supra note, at 1152. 
250 Id. 
251 Id. at 1161-62. 
252 See Christenen and Abbott, supra note, at 269. 

59 

 

altruism.253 In this game, a subject is told that she can allocate a sum of money, 
say $10, between herself and some stranger. The standard economic prediction is 
that  most  subjects  will  keep  all  or  almost  all  of  the  money  for  themselves;  why 
should  we  share  money  with  strangers?  But  the  standard  prediction  is  wrong. 
Most  people  choose  to  keep  somewhere  between  $6  and  $8  and  to  share  the 
rest.254 The question here, however, is how is individual behavior is affected once 
people are placed in teams. The answer is that team members choose still more 
equal  divisions.255  This  result  seems  best  explained  by  reference  to  a  rhetorical 
advantage, disfavoring selfishness, even within a group that stands to benefit.256 
Apparently people do not want to appear to be greedy. Of course this outcome, 
and the effect of group influence, would change if the team in the Dictator Game 
had  some  reason  to  be  hostile  to  the  beneficiaries  of  their  generosity.  We  can 
easily imagine a variation of the dictator game in which, for example, people of a 
relatively  poor  religious  group  were  deciding  how  much  to  allocate  to  another 
religious  group  that  was  thought  to  be  both  hostile  and  far  wealthier.  In  this 
variation, the rhetorical advantage might favor greater selfishness. 

 
But what produces a rhetorical advantage? The simplest answer points to 
prevailing  social  norms,  which  of  course  vary  across  time  and  place.  Among 
most  Americans,  current  norms  make  it  easier  to  argue,  other  things  equal,  for 
higher penalties against corporations for egregious misconduct, But it is possible 
to  imagine  subcommunities  (corporate  headquarters?)  in  which  the  rhetorical 
advantage  runs  the  other  way.  In  any  case  it  is  easy  to  envisage  many  other 
contexts  in  which  one  or  another  side  has  an  automatic  rhetorical  advantage. 
Consider,  as  possible  examples,  debates  over  whether  there  should  be  higher 
penalties  for  those  convicted  of  drug  offenses,  or  whether  tax  rates  should  be 
reduced; in modern political debates, those favoring higher penalties and lower 
taxes  have  the  upper  hand.  Of  course  there  are  limits  on  the  feasible  level  of 
change.  But  when  a  rhetorical  advantage  is  involved,  group  deliberation  will 
produce  significant  shifts  in  individual  judgments.  Undoubtedly  legislative 
behavior  is  affected  by  mechanisms  of  this  sort,  and  it  is  likely  that  many 
movements within judicial panels can be explained in similar terms.  

 

                                                 
253  Timothy  Cason  &  Vai-Lam  Mui,  A  Laboratory  Study  of  Group  Polarisation  in  the  Team 
Dictator Game, 107 Econ. J. 1465 (1997) 
254 See id.  
255 Id. at 1468-72. 
256 Cason and Mui themselves explain the outcome in terms of social comparison, a closely related 
account. See id. 

60 

 

Are rhetorical  advantages unhelpful or damaging? In the abstract, this is 
an  impossible  question  to  answer,  because  shifts  have  to  be  evaluated  on  their 
merits.257 Perhaps the higher punitive awards that follow deliberation are simply 
better.  So  too,  perhaps,  for  the  movements  by  doctors,  taking  more  heroic 
measures, and by groups deciding how equally to spread funds. The only point 
is  that  such  advantages  exist;  and  it  would  be  most  surprising  if  they  were 
always benign. 
 

F. More Extremism, Less Extremism 
 

Group  polarization  is  not  a  social  constant.  It  can  be  increased  or 
decreased,  and  even  eliminated,  by  certain  features  of  group  members  or  their 
situation.  
 

1. Antecedent extremism. Extremists are especially prone to polarization. 
It is more probable that they will shift and it is probable that they will shift more. 
When they start out an extreme point and are placed in a group of like-minded 
people,  they  are  likely  to  go  especially  far  in  the  direction  with  which  they 
started.258  There  is  a  lesson  here  about  the  sources  of  terrorism  and  political 
violence  in  general.259  And  because  there  is  a  link  between  confidence  and 
extremism,  the  confidence  of  particular  members  also  plays  an  important  role; 
confident people are more prone to polarization.260  

 
2.  Solidarity  and  affective  ties.  If  members  of  the  group  think  that  they 
have a shared identity, and a high degree of solidarity, there will be heightened 
polarization.261  One  reason  is  that  if  people  feel  united  by  some  factor  (for 
example,  politics  or  religious  convictions),  dissent  will  be  dampened.  If 
individual members tend to perceive one another as friendly, likable, and similar 
to  them,  the  size  and  likelihood  of  the  shift  will  increase.262  The  existence  of 

                                                 
257 I offer some qualifications to this claim below. 
258 This is a lesson of the study of punitive damage awards, where groups with extreme medians 
showed the largest shifts, see Schkade et al., supra note, at 1152. For other evidence, see Turner et 
al., supra note, at 158. 
259 See Breton et al., supra note; Sunstein, supra note. 
260 See Maryla Zaleska, The Stability of Extreme and Moderate Responses in Different Situations, 
in Group Decision Making, supra, at 163, 164.  
261 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What To Think By Knowing Who You Are, 29 British J Soc. 
Psych. 97, 112 (1990) 
262 See Hans Brandstatter, Social Emotions in Discussion Groups, in Dynamics of Group Decisions 
(Hans  Brandstatter  et  al.  ed.  1978).  John  Turner  et  al.,  Rediscovering  the  Social  Group  154-59 

61 

 

affective ties reduces the number of diverse arguments and also intensifies social 
influences on choice.263 One implication, noted above, is that mistakes are likely 
to  be  increased  when  group  members  are  united  mostly  through  bonds  of 
affection  and  not  through  concentration  on  a  particular  task;  it  is  in  the  former 
case  that  alternative  views  will  less  likely  find  expression.264  Hence  people  are 
less likely to shift if the direction advocated is being pushed by unfriendly group 
the  extent  of 
members.265  A  sense  of  “group  belongingness”  affects 
polarization.266 In the same vein, physical spacing tends to reduce polarization; a 
sense  of  common  fate  and  intragroup  similarity  tend  to  increase  it,  as  does  the 
introduction of a rival “outgroup.”267 

instructions 

 
An  interesting  experiment  attempted  to  investigate  the  effects  of  group 
in  which  group 
identification.268  Some  subjects  were  given 
membership  was  made  salient  (the  “group  immersion”  condition),  whereas 
others were not (the “individual” condition). For example, subjects in the group 
immersion  condition  were  told  that  their  group  consisted  solely  of  first-year 
psychology students,  and that they  were being tested as group members rather 
than as individuals. The relevant issues involved affirmative action, government 
subsidies  for  the  theatre,  privatization  of  nationalized  industries,  and  phasing 
out  nuclear  power  plants  .The  results  were  quite  striking.269  Polarization 
generally  occurred.  But  there  was  the  least  polarization  in  the  individual 
condition;  polarization  was  greater  in  the  group  immersion  condition,  when 
group  identity  was  emphasized.  This  experiment  strongly  suggests  that 
polarization  is  highly  likely  to  occur,  and  to  be  most  extreme,  when  group 
membership is made salient.  

 
3. Exit. Over time, group polarization can be fortified because of “exit,” as 
members  leave  the  group  because  they  reject  the  direction  in  which  things  are 

                                                                                                                                                 
(1987),  attempt  to  use  this  evidence  as  a  basis  for  a  new  synthesis,  one  that  they  call  “a  self-
categorization theory of group polarization,” id. at 154. 
263  See  Brooke  Harrington,  The  Pervasive  Effects  of  Embeddedness  in  Organizations  24 
(unpublished manuscript 2000). 
264 See Harrington, supra note, at 220-26. 
265 See Hans Brandstatter, Social Emotions in Discussion Groups, in Dynamics of Group Decisions 
(Hans  Brandstatter  et  al.  ed.  1978).  See,  Turner  et  al.,  supra  note,  at  154-59,  for  the  especially 
interesting implication that a group of comparative extremists will show a comparatively greater 
shift toward extremism. See id. at 158. 
266 Id. at 151. 
267 Id.  
268 Spears, supra, at 123-4. 
269 id. 

62 

 

heading.270  If  exit  is  pervasive,  the  tendency  to  extremism  will  be  greatly 
aggravated.  The  group  will  end  up  smaller,  but  its  members  will  be  both  more 
like-minded and more willing to take extreme measures; and that very fact will 
mean that internal discussions will produce more extremism still. If only loyalists 
stay,  the  group’s  median  member  will  be  more  extreme,  and  deliberation  will 
produce increasingly extreme movements.  
 

4.  Informed  members  and  facts.  When  one  or  more  people  in  a  group 
know  the  right  answer  to  a  factual  question,  the  group  is  likely  to  shift  in  the 
direction of accuracy.271 If the question is how many people were on the earth in 
1940,  or  the  number  of  home  runs  hit  by  Hank  Aaron,  or  the  distance  between 
Chicago  and  New York, and if one  or a few people know the right answer, the 
group  is  likely  not  to  polarize,  but  to  converge  on  that  answer.  The  reason  is 
simple:  The  person  who  knows  the  answer  will  speak  with  confidence  and 
authority, and is likely to be convincing for that very reason. Of course this is not 
inevitable; Asch’s conformity experiments show that social pressures can lead to 
errors  even  with  respect  to  simple  factual  claims.  But  in  many  cases,  group 
members  who  are  ignorant  will  be  tentative,  and  members  who  are  informed 
will speak confidently. This is enough to ensure convergence on truth rather than 
polarization.  Here  there  is  a  link  between  what  prevents  polarization  and  what 
shatters cascades: A person who knows, and is known to know, the truth. 
 

In this light it becomes easier to understand the outcomes of experiments 
that  show  a  potential  advantage  of  groups  over  individuals.272  One  set  of 
experiments involved two analytic tasks. The first involved a statistical problem, 
requiring  subjects  to  guess  the  composition of an urn  containing blue  balls and 
red balls. (This experiment involved team decision-making and was not a test for 
cascade  effects.)  The  other  involved  a  problem  in  monetary  policy,  asking 
participants  to  manipulate  the  interest  rate  to  steer  the  economy.  People  were 
asked  to  perform  as  individuals  and  in  groups.  The  basic  results  for  the  two 
experiments  were  similar.  Groups  significantly  outperformed  individuals  (and 
they  did  not,  on  balance,  take  longer  to  make  decision).  Perhaps  most 
surprisingly,  there  were  no  differences  between  group  decisions  made  with  a 
unanimity  requirement  and  group  decisions  made  by  majority  rule.  How  can 
these  results  be  explained?  The  experimenters  do  not  have  a  complete  account. 
                                                 
270 See Hardin, supra note. 
271  See  James  Fishkin  and  Robert  Luskin,  Bringing  Deliberation  to  the  Democratic  Dialogue,  in 
The Poll With A Human Face 3, 29-31 (Maxwell McCombs and Amy Reynolds eds. 1999). 
272 Alan Blinder and John Morgan, Are Two Heads Better Than One? An Experimental Analysis 
of Group Vs. Individual Decisionmaking, NBER Working Paper 7909 (2000). 

63 

 

An obvious possibility is that each group contained one or more strong analysts, 
who are able to move the group in the right direction. But a series of regressions, 
comparing  the  performance  of  the  best  individual  players  offers  only  mixed 
support  for  this  hypothesis.273  It  seems  that  in  these  experiments,  group  results 
were  driven  by  the  best  points  and  arguments,  which  would  be  spread  among 
the  various  individual  players.  Here  we  find  a  tribute  to  Aristotle’s  suggestion 
that groups can do much better than individuals.274  

 
5.  Equally  opposed  subgroups.  Depolarization,  rather  than  polarization, 
will  be  found  when  the  relevant  group  consists  of  individuals  drawn  equally 
from two extremes.275 Thus if people who initially favor caution are put together 
with  people  who  initially  favor  risk-taking,  the  group  judgment  will  move 
toward  the  middle.  Consider  a  study276  consisting  of  six-member  groups 
specifically  designed  to  contain  two  subgroups  (of  three  persons  each)  initially 
committed  to  opposed  extremes;  the  effect  of  discussion  was  to  produce 
movement  toward  the  center.  One  reason  may  be  the  existence  of  partially 
shared  persuasive  arguments  in  both  directions.277  Interestingly,  this  study  of 
equally  opposed  subgroups  found  the  greatest  depolarization  with  obscure 
matters  of  fact  (e.g.,  the  population  of  the  United  States  in  1900)—and  the  least 
depolarization  with  highly  visible  public  questions  (e.g.,  whether  capital 
punishment  is  justified).  Matters  of  personal  taste  depolarized  a  moderate 
amount  (e.g.,  preference  for  basketball  or  football,  or  for  colors  for  painting  a 
room).278  Hence  “familiar  and  long-debated  issues  do  not  depolarize  easily.”279 
With  respect  to  such  issues,  people  are  simply  less  likely  to  shift  at  all,  in  part 
“because  the  total  pool  of  arguments  has  long  been  familiar  to  all,”280  and 
nothing new will emerge from discussion.  
 

                                                 
273 Id. at 44-46. 
274 See note supra. As I have suggested, the overall evidence on this point is mixed. See Kerr et al., 
supra note. 
275  See  H.  Burnstein,  Persuasion  As  Argument  Processing,  in  Group  Decision  Making  (H. 
Brandstetter, J.H. Davis, and G. Stocker-Kreichgauer eds., 1982). 
276 Brown, supra, at 225. 
277 Amiram Vinokur and Eugene Burnstein, The Effects of Partially Shared Persuasive Arguments 
on Group-Induced Shifts, 29 J Personality & Social Psych. 305 (1974). 
278 Amiram Vinokur and Eugene Burnstein, supra, at 884. 
279 Brown, supra, at 226. 
280 Id. 

64 

 

Compare  in  this  regard  an  experiment  designed  to  see  how  group 
polarization  might  be  dampened.281  The  experiment  involved  the  creation  of 
four-person  groups,  which,  on  the  basis  of  pretesting,  were  known  to  include 
equal  numbers  of  persons  on  two  sides  of  political  issues  (whether  smoking 
should  be  banned  in  public  places,  whether  sex  discrimination  is  a  thing  of  the 
past,  whether  censorship  of  material  for  adults  infringes  on  human  liberties). 
Judgments  were  registered  on  a  scale  running  from  +4  (strong  agreement)  to  0 
(neutral)  to  –4  (strong  disagreement).  In  half  of  the  cases  (the  “uncategorized 
condition”),  subjects  were  not  made  aware  that  the  group  consisted  of  equally 
divided  subgroups  in  pretests.  In  the  other  half  (the  “categorized  condition”), 
subjects  were  told  that  they  would  find  a  sharp  division  in  their  group,  which 
consisted  of  equally  divided  subgroups.  They  were  also  informed  who  was  in 
which group and told that they should sit around the table so that one subgroup 
was  on  one  side  facing  the  other  group.  In  the  uncategorized  condition, 
discussion  generally  led  to  a  dramatic  reduction  in  the  mean  gap  between  the 
two  sides,  thus  producing  a  convergence  of  opinion  toward  the  middle  of  the 
two opposing positions (a mean of 3.40 scale points, on the scale of +4 to –4). But 
things were very different in the categorized condition. Here the shift toward the 
median was much less pronounced, and frequently there was barely any shift at 
all (a mean of 1.68 scale points). In short, calling attention to group membership 
made people far less likely to shift in directions urged by people from different 
groups. 
 

**         **        **         **         **        **     ** 

 
My  discussion  of  group 

influences—of  conformity,  cascades,  and 
polarization—is  now  complete.  I  have  emphasized  many  findings  from  social 
science, but I have tried at the same  time to give a sense of how those findings 
bear  on  issues  in  law  and  politics.  It  should  be  clear  that  there  is  a  long  list  of 
potential  applications,  and  any  set  of  selections,  from  that  list,  is  inevitably 
arbitrary.  In  the  discussion  that  follows,  I  emphasize  four  areas  in  which  an 
understanding  of  group  influences  helps  to  illuminate  legal  problems.  The  first 
involves  law’s  expressive  function—the  circumstances  in  which  a  mere 
statement,  made  by  the  law,  is  likely  to  affect  people’s  behavior.  I  draw  a  link 
among  legal  pronouncements,  Milgram’s  experimenter,  and  Asch’s  unanimous 
confederates. The second involves the institutions of the American Constitution, 
based  on  the  founding  enthusiasm  for  the  expression  of  diverse  and  dissenting 

                                                 
281 Dominic Abrams et al., Knowing What To Think By Knowing Who You Are, 29 British J Soc. 
Psych. 97, 112 (1990) 

65 

 

views. I suggest that the American Constitution creates a deliberative democracy 
of  a  distinctive  kind—a  deliberative  democracy  that  prizes  heterogeneity.  The 
third area involves the value of dissent in a place not always thought to benefit 
from  it:  the  federal  judiciary.  Because  judges  are  subject  to  conformity  and 
cascade  effects  as  well  as  group  polarization,  it  is  exceedingly  important  to 
promote ideological diversity within the federal courts. The fourth and final area 
involves  affirmative  action  in  higher  education.  Here  I  offer  an  ambivalent 
lesson, suggesting that racial diversity is, in some domains, unimportant for the 
exchange  of  (relevant)  ideas,  but  that  it  is  important  in  other  domains,  usually 
involved in both undergraduate and law school education.  

 

V. The Expressive Function of Law 
 

In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  discussion  of  law’s 
expressive  function—of  the  role  of  law  in  “making  statements,”  as  opposed  to 
regulating  conduct  directly  through  actual punishments for  violations.282 In this 
Part,  I  make  three  suggestions.  First,  we  can  better  understand  the  expressive 
function of law if we see certain legal enactments as offering signals about what 
it is right to do and about what other people think it is right to do. Second, a legal 
expression is most likely to be effective if violations are highly visible; visibility 
matters because people do not want to incur the wrath of others . Third, a legal 
expression  is  most  likely  to  be  ineffective  if  violators  are  part  of  a  deviant 
subcommunity  which  rewards,  or  at  least  does  not  punish,  noncompliance.  In 
such cases, behavior within the subcommunity can counteract the effects of law. 
Each  of  these  points  can  be  closely  connected  with  an  understanding  of 
conformity,  cascades,  and  group  polarization.  We  can 
that 
understanding  to  see  when  government  might  bring  about  compliance  without 
relying  on  public  enforcement—and  also  when  enforcement  is  likely  to  be 
indispensable. 
  
A. Law As Signal 
 
 
Sometimes  law  is  infrequently  enforced,  but  there  is  automatic  or  near-
automatic compliance.283 It is in this sense that law seems to have an expressive 
function,  making  statements  and  having  effects  merely  by  virtue  of  those 
statements.  When  effects  occur,  it  is  because  the  law  offers  signals  on  both  the 

thus  use 

                                                 
282 See Adler, supra note. 
283  See  Robert  Kagan  and  Jerome  Skolnick,  in  Banning  Smoking:  Compliance  Without 
Enforcement, in Smoking Policy: Law, Politics, and Culture (Robert Radin ed. 1999). 

66 

 

 

informational  and  reputational  sides.  If  law  is  made  by  sensible  people,  and  if 
law  bans  certain  conduct,  there  is  a  good  reason  to  presume  that  the  conduct 
should be banned. And when law bans certain conduct, there is good reason to 
presume  that  other  people  think  that  the  conduct  should  be  banned.  In  either 
case,  sensible  people  have  fresh  reason  to do what  the law  asks them to do. Of 
course the presumptions can be rebutted. Informed people might know that the 
law is asking people to do something senseless, or not to do something sensible. 
They might also know that most people, or most relevant people, actually reject 
the law. But if these cases are the exception rather than the rule, we can have a 
better  understanding  of  why  law  will  produce  movement  even  if  no  one  is 
enforcing it. 
 
 

Consider,  for  example,  an  empirical  study  of  bans  on  smoking  in  public 

places.284 The simplest lesson is that people comply with those bans even though 

they are hardly ever enforced. The study finds that in three cities in California—

Berkeley,  Richmond,  and  Oakland—there  were  very  few  complaints  about 

violations.  In  Berkeley,  the  responsible  health  department  officials  found  it 

unnecessary to issue even a single formal citation, and no cases were referred for 

prosecution.285  In  restaurants  in  Richmond,  compliance  was  nearly  100%,  with 

workplace  compliance  hovering  between  75%–85%.286  The  level  of  compliance 

was also extremely high in Oakland, with the exception of “certain restaurants in 

the Asian community where nearly all the patrons are smokers.”287 High levels of 

compliance  were  also  found  in  workplaces,  high  schools,  and  fast-food 

restaurants.288  Other  studies,  involving  as  Cambridge  and  Winnipeg,  Manitoba, 

similarly find that bans on public smoking are almost entirely self-enforcing.289 

                                                 
284 Id. 
285 Id. at 71. 
286 Id. 
287 Id. at 72. 
288 Id. at 73-75. 
289 Id. at 72-73. 

67 

 

This  evidence  suggests  that  a  legal  pronouncement  can  have  the  same 
effect  as  Asch’s  unanimous  confederates.  When  a  law  bans  smoking  in  public 
places,  the  pronouncement  carries  information  to  the  effect  that  it  is  wrong,  all 
things considered, to smoke in public places. Equally important, the law suggests 
that most people believe that it is wrong to smoke in public places. And if most 
people  think  that  it  is  wrong  to  smoke  in  public  places,  would-be  smokers  are 
less  likely  to  smoke,  in  part  because  they  do  not  want  to  be  criticized  or 
reprimanded.  It  follows  that  when  law  is  effective  when  unenforced,  an 
important  reason  is  the  possibility  of  private  enforcement.  If  violations  have  a 
high  degree  of  visibility,  and  risk  the  wrath  of  private  enforcers,  compliance 
might well become widespread. “In contrast to violations of laws against driving 
and  drinking,  narcotics  use,  and  tax  evasion, infractions of  no-smoking rules in 
public  places  are  relatively  visible  .  .  .  to  an  almost  omnipresent  army  of  self-
interested,  highly  motivated  private  enforcement  agents—nonsmokers  who 
resist  exposure  to  tobacco  smoke.”290  In  some  cases,  the  law  might  even  be 
equivalent  to  Milgram’s  experimenter,  with  a  significant  degree  of  authority 
even  if  no  sanctions  will  be  imposed.  To  the  extent  that  the  experimenter’s 
authority comes from a perception of expertise, the law is closely analogous.  

 
We  might 

think  of 

laws  as  exercises 

in  norm 
the  underlying 
management—and  extremely  inexpensive  ones  at  that.  They  are  inexpensive  in 
the sense that taxpayer resources are unnecessary to produce compliance. And in 
the  best  cases,  expressive  law  might  even  start,  shatter,  or  fuel  a  cascade.  Once 
compliance  begins,  and  is  widely  seen  as  such  (especially  from  “fashion 
there  might  well  be  compliance  cascades,  spurred  by  both 
leaders”), 
informational  and  reputational  influences.  In  the  context  of  sexual  harassment 
and  smoking,  law  does  seem  to  have  caught  a  wave—and  to  have  enlarged  it 
significantly.291 A key point here is that the law was ahead, but not too far ahead, 
of  the  public  at  large.  If  the  law  were  not  ahead  of  the  public,  it  would  add 
nothing,  and  in  that  sense  have  no  effect  at  all.  But  if  the  law  moved  too  far 
ahead  of  the  public,  it  could  not  be  effective  without  aggressive  enforcement 
activity.292 And a law that is too far ahead of the public is unlikely, for that very 
reason, to be aggressively enforced: Prosecutors and jurors are unlikely to punish 
people  when  the  public  does  not  support  punishment.293  Law  is  most  effective 
when it goes somewhat, but not too far, beyond people’s existing values. 

                                                 
290 Id. at 78. 
291 See Kahan, supra note. 
292 See id. 
293 Id. 

68 

 

 
Thus  far  I  have  emphasized  the  situation  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
would-be  violator.  But  a  law  has  effects  on  private  enforcers  as  well.  In  the 
absence of a legal ban, people who object to smoking in public places might well 
be timid about complaining, even if they find cigarette smoke irritating or worse. 
The  same  people  are  likely  to  be  energized  by  a  supportive  enactment,  which 
suggests both that they are right and that their beliefs are generally shared. With 
law  on  their  side,  they  are  less  likely  to  appear  to  be  noisy  intermeddlers 
invoking  a  parochial  norm.  Someone  who  complains  about  speeding,  or  drunk 
driving,  or  smoking  in  public  is  far  more  likely  to  feel,  or  to  be  perceived  as, 
having a legitimate complaint if the law requires the behavior they seek. Now of 
course  this  is  not  all  of  the  picture.  Among  some  people,  the  law  has  a  high 
degree  of  moral  authority,  greatly  exceeding  the  shared  but  unenacted  view  of 
many  people.294  If  this  is  the  case,  the  law’s  authority  will  extend  well  beyond 
that of Asch’s unanimous confederates, and probably beyond that of Milgram’s 
experimenter  as  well.  But  we  cannot  fully  appreciate  law’s  moral  authority 
without seeing it as intertwined with the informational and reputational factors 
that I have been emphasizing.  
 
B. The Preconditions of Norm Management 
 
When  will  norm  management  work  without  significant  enforcement 
 
activity?  When  will  it  fail?  Begin  with  the  case  of  a  rational  person  who  is 
considering whether to comply with the law. Among the relevant considerations 
are a) the likelihood of enforcement, b) the magnitude of the punishment in the 
event  of  enforcement,  c)  the  reputational  costs  of  violation,  d)  the  reputational 
benefits of violation, e) the intrinsic benefits of compliance (perhaps a refusal to 
smoke will have health benefits), and f) the intrinsic costs of compliance (perhaps 
it  is  extremely  pleasant  to  smoke,  and  extremely  unpleasant  not  to  smoke).  By 
varying  any  of  these  variables,  government  might  be  able  to  achieve  greater 
compliance. For present purposes, my emphasis is on c) and d). 

To  know  whether  a  legal  pronouncement  will  be  effective,  a  key  point 
involves  the  nature  and  extent  of  private  enforcement.  Recall  that  in  the  Asch 
experiments, the level of error is significantly decreased when people’s answers 
are given anonymously, and also when people are given a financial incentive to 
answer correctly. These findings suggest that seemingly modest changes in social 

                                                 
294  Law  might  well  lack  moral  authority  too,  in  which  case  the  informational  and  reputational 
signals  will  be  diminished.  See  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Inequality  and 
Indignation, Phil & Pub Aff (forthcoming 2002). I discuss this point below. 

69 

 

context  can  counteract  the  pressure  to  conform.  Consider  in  this  light  the  close 
empirical  association  between  visibility  and  compliance  without  enforcement. 
Parking in places reserved for the handicapped, and smoking in public, are easy 
to  see  and  in  both  cases  private  enforcement  is  likely.295  By  contrast,  tax 
violations  and  sex  offenses  tend  to  be  invisible,  and  hence  violators  need  not 
worry so much, at the time of violation, about the risk of public opprobrium.  
 
 
 
At  the  same  time,  law’s  expressive  function  can  be  reduced  or  even 
counteracted  if  there  is  private  support  for  violations.  “People  will  defy 
dominant  norms  or  laws,  despite  considerable  risks  of  punishment,  when  they 
enjoy  the  social  support  of  a  ‘deviant  subculture’  that  continues  to  endorse  the 
validity  of  condemned  behavior.”296  In  such  cases,  prospective  violators  are 
roughly in the position of peer-supported subjects in the Milgram experiment—
at  least  if  they  have  strong  reason,  based  on  principle  or  self-interest,  not  to 
comply.  And  if  the  law  is  perceived  as  senseless,  private  support  for  violations 
can operate in the same way as a voice of reason in the Asch experiments. Hence 
it  is  possible  to  find  “deviant  subcultures”  in  which  violations  of  law  are 
effectively rewarded, through admiration and even a general increase in statute. 
It  is  also  possible  to  find  subcultures  in  which  those  who  comply  with  the  law 
can be heavily “taxed,” through ridicule, ostracism, or even violence. Drug use in 
the most obvious example; gang violence sometimes occurs simply because it is 
expected  and  rewarded  by  peers.  Laws  that  are  infrequently  enforced  will,  in 
such communities, be highly ineffective, because private enforcement is lacking, 
and  indeed  private  forces  push  hard  against  compliance.  It  is  even  possible  to 
imagine  noncompliance  cascades;  such  cascades  can  involve  information,  as 
people  see  the  violations  of  others,  perhaps  including  dissident  “fashion 
leaders.”  They  can  also  involve  reputation,  as  people  learn  that  in  the  relevant 

                                                 
295  To  know  whether  there  will  be  compliance,  it  is  important  to  specify  the  signal  sent  by 
compliance and noncompliance. The mere enactment of law can alter that signal. For example, an 
infrequently enforced law might make an actor’s conduct ambiguous where it formerly provided 
a socially damaging signal. Consider, for example, a teenager who wants to buckle his seatbelt, 
but  who  fails  to  do  so  because  he  does  not  want  to  signal  his  cowardice.  A  law  that  requires 
people  to  buckle  their  belt  can  make  a  decision  to  buckle  a  reflection  of  compliance  with  law, 
rather  than  a  generalized  fear.  Thus  the  existence  of  the  law  can  alter  the  “meaning”  of 
compliance,  to  suggest  that  those  who  comply  are  simply  law-abiders.  Similarly,  those  who 
violate the law, under the new circumstances, are not merely courageous, but also (technically) 
criminals.  We  can  imagine  circumstances  in  which  this  shift  actually  increases  the  level  of 
violations. But in most communities most of the time, the change will tend to bring behavior in 
line. 
296 Kagan and Skolnick, supra note, at 78. 

70 

 

community,  there  will  be  no  loss  in  the  good  opinion  of  others,  and  possibly 
some gain, for violations. 
 

In this light it is easy to see why there is a great deal of compliance with 
legal  bans  on  parking  in  handicapped  spaces  and  on  smoking  in  public  places, 
whereas  there  is  far  less  compliance  with  legal  bans  on  certain  sexual  behavior 
and (in certain domains) the Internal Revenue Code.297 And it is also possible to 
understand the phenomenon of civil disobedience. When those engaged in civil 
disobedience are able to reach a critical mass, the law loses its authority, both as 
evidence  of  what  should  be  done  and  as  evidence  of  what  (reasonable)  people 
think should be done.  The  authority of  the law is overcome by the authority of 
those engaged in disobeying the law. Here conformity pressures, cascade effects, 
and group polarization strongly favor disobedience. 
 

How  might  government  handle  the  troublesome  situations  in  which 
violations are both invisible and widespread? One possible remedy would be to 
let people know (if it is true) of the high current levels of voluntary compliance. 
Because people like to do what others do, large effects can come from reminders 
that most people obey the law or avoid harmful conduct. In fact there is evidence 
that taxpayers are far more likely to comply with the tax law if they believe that 
most people pay their taxes voluntarily, and far less likely to do so if they believe 
that  noncompliance  is  widespread.298  A  similar  example  may  be  drawn  from 
college campuses. Students with a penchant for “binge drinking” tend to believe 
that the number of binge drinkers is higher than it is in fact. When informed of 
the  actual  numbers,  they  are  less  likely  to  persist  in  their  behavior.299  These 
examples  suggest  that  an  understanding  of  group  influences,  and  of  the 
information conveyed by the acts of others, might be enlisted in efforts to reduce 
conduct that is unlawful or otherwise dangerous to self and others.  

VI.   Institutions and Diversity 

 

 
 

I now turn to issues of institutional design. As we have seen, the likelihood 
and  consequences  of  conformity,  cascades,  and  group  polarization  very  much 
                                                 
297 See id. 
298  Stephen  Coleman,  Minn.  Dep't  of  Revenue,  The  Minnesota  Income  Tax  Compliance 
Experiment 
(1996), 
http://www.state.mn.us/ebranch/mdor/reports/compliance/pdf. 
299  See  H.  Wesley  Perkins,  College  Student  Misperceptions  of  Alcohol  and  Other  Drug  Norms 
Among Peers, in Designing Alcohol and Other Drug Prevention Programs in Higher Education 
177-206 (1997). 

Results 

18-19 

State 

Tax 

5-6, 

1, 

71 

 

depend  on  institutional  choices.  Recall  in  particular  that  people  are  far  more 
likely  to  reveal  their  own  information  if  they  are  rewarded  for  a  correct  group 
decision rather than for a correct individual decision. In this Part, I begin with a 
brief note on the relationship between dissent and war, with the suggestion that 
conformity, and suppression of dissent, can undermine military preparedness. I 
also  explore  some  of  the  institutions  of  the  American  Constitution,  suggesting 
that  the  founders’  largest  theoretical  contribution  consisted  in  their  enthusiasm 
for  diversity  and  the  “jarring”  of  diverse  views  in  government.  Turning  to 
contemporary issues, I discuss the role of group influences on federal judges and 
the  dispute  over  “diversity”  as  a  justification  for  affirmative  action  in  higher 
education. 

 

A. Dissent and War 

 
I  have  suggested  that  an  understanding  of  social  influences  increases 
appreciation of the social role of whistleblowers and dissenters, many of whom 
sacrifice  their  own  self-interest  and  simultaneously  benefit  the  public.  Perhaps 
the  most  general  point  here  involves  the  role  of  diversity  and  dissent  within 
democratic  institutions.  Consider  the  account  of  Luther  Gulick,  a  high-level 
official  in  the  Roosevelt  Administration  during  World  War  II.  In  1948,  shortly 
after  the  Allied  victory,  Gulick  delivered  a  series  of  lectures,  unimaginatively 
titled  Administrative  Reflections  from  World  War  II,  which  offered,  in  some 
detail,  a  set  of  observations  about  bureaucratic  structure  and  administrative 
reform.300 In a brief epilogue, Gulick set out to compare the warmaking capacities 
of democracies with those of their Fascist adversaries. 

 
Gulick  began  by  noting  that  the  initial  evaluation  of  the  United  States, 
among  the  leaders  of  Germany  and  Japan,  was  “not  flattering.”301  We  were,  in 
their  view,  “incapable  of  quick  or  effective  national  action  even  in  our  own 
defense because under democracy we were divided by our polyglot society and 
under  capitalism  deadlocked  by  our  conflicting  private  interests.”302  Our 
adversaries said that we could not fight, and they believed what they said. And 
dictatorships did seem to have real advantages. They were free of delays, inertia, 
and sharp internal divisions. They did not have to reckon with the opinions of a 
mass  of  citizens,  some  with  little  education  and  little  intelligence.  Dictatorships 
could also rely on a single leader and an integrated hierarchy, making it easier to 

                                                 
300 Gulick, supra note, at 120-125. 
301 Id. at 120. 
302 Id. at 121. 

72 

 

develop national unity and enthusiasm, to master surprise, and to act vigorously 
and with dispatch. But these claims, about the advantages of totalitarian regimes, 
turned out to be “bogus.”303  

 
The United States and its allies performed far better than Germany, Italy, 
and  Japan.  Gulick  linked  their  superiority  directly  to  democracy  itself,  and  in 
particular  “to  the  kind  of  review  and  criticism  which  democracy  alone 
affords.”304 In a totalitarian regime, plans “are hatched in secret by a small group 
of  partially  informed  men  and  then  enforced  through  dictatorial  authority.”305 
Such  plans  are  likely  to  contain  fatal  weaknesses.  By  contrast,  a  democracy 
allows  wide  criticism  and  debate,  thus  avoiding  “many  a  disaster.”  In  a 
totalitarian  system,  criticisms  and  suggestions  are  neither  wanted  nor  heeded. 
“Even  the  leaders  tend  to  believe  their  own  propaganda.  All  of  the  stream  of 
authority and information is from the top down,” so that when change is needed, 
the high command never learns of that need. But in a democracy, “the public and 
the  press  have  no  hesitation  in  observing  and  criticizing  the  first  evidence  of 
failure  once  a  program  has  been  put  into  operation.”306  In  a  democracy, 
information  flows  within  the  government—between  the  lowest  and  highest 
ranks—and via public opinion. Of course dissent can be muted in wartime, and 
for reasons I have discussed, this muting is a mixed blessing. If everyone seems 
to  be  on  the  same  page,  morale  may  be  strengthened;  but  if  disagreement  is 
reduced,  beneficial  ideas—involving  the  nature,  scope,  justice,  and  wisdom  of 
war—may be absent. 

 
With  a  combination  of  melancholy  and  surprise,  Gulick  noted  that  the 
United States and its allies did not show more unity than Germany, Japan, and 
Italy.  “The  gregarious  social  impulses  of  men  around  the  world  are  apparently 
much the same, giving rise to the same reactions of group loyalty when men are 
subjected to the same true or imagined group threats.”307 Top-down management 
of  mass  morale,  by  the  German  and  Japanese  leaders,  actually  worked. 
Dictatorships  were  less  successful  in  war,  not  because  of  less  loyalty  or  more 
distrust  from  the  public,  but  because  leaders  did  not  receive  the  checks  and 
corrections that come from democratic processes. 

 

                                                 
303 Id. 
304 Id. at 125. 
305 Id. 
306  Id.  See  also  Janis,  Groupthink,  for  a  set  of  examples  of  errors  within  democracies,  when 
relevant institutions do not encourage dissent. 
307 Id. 

73 

 

Gulick is offering a claim here about how institutions perform better when 
challenges  are  frequent,  when  people  do  not  stifle  themselves,  and  when 
information flows freely.308 Of course Gulick is providing his personal account of 
a  particular  set  of  events,  and  we  do  not  really  know  if  success  in  war  is  a 
product  of  democratic  institutions.309  The  Soviet  Union,  for  example,  fought 
valiantly and well, even under the tyranny of Stalin. But Gulick’s general theme 
contains  a  great  deal  of  truth.  Institutions  are  far  more  likely  to  succeed  if  they 
contain  mechanisms  that  subject  leaders  to  critical  scrutiny  and  if  they  ensure 
that courses of action will be subject to continuing monitoring and review from 
outsiders310—if,  in  short,  they  use  diversity  and  dissent  to  reduce  the  risks  of 
error that come from social influences. 

 

B. Constitutional Design 

 
These points very much bears on the design of the American Constitution, 
which  attempts  to  create  a  deliberative  democracy,  that  is,  a  system  that 
combines  accountability  to  the  people  with  a  measure  of  reflection  and  reason-
giving.  311  In  recent  years,  many  people  have  discussed  the  aspiration  to 
deliberative  democracy.  Their  goal  has  been  to  show  that  a  well-functioning 
system  attempts  to  ensure  not  merely  electoral  responsiveness,  but  also  an 

                                                 
308  In  a  less  impressionistic  vein  but  to  the  same effect,  see  Harrington,  supra note; Janis, supra 
note. 
309  Compare  one  of  the  most  striking  findings  in  the  last  half-century  of  social  science:  In  the 
history of the world, no society with democratic elections and a free press has ever experienced a 
famine. See Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines (1983). Famines are a product not merely of food 
scarcity, but of social responses to food scarcity. A democratic government, checked by the press, 
is likely to take all reasonable measures to prevent mass starvation, if only because it needs to do 
so to stay in office. At the same time, a free society, facing the risk of famine, is likely to have a 
great  deal  of  information,  at  every  stage,  about  the  level  of  the  emerging  problem  and  the 
effectiveness of current or possible responses. If famine relief efforts plans “are hatched in secret 
by  a  small  group  of  partially  informed  men  and  then  enforced  through  dictatorial  authority,” 
failure  is  far  more  likely.  Or  consider  the  problem  of  “witch-hunts”  –  mass  movements,  led  by 
political  leaders,  against  internal  conspiracies.  As  the  McCarthy  period  demonstrates,  witch-
hunts are hardly impossible in democracies. But they are far more likely in a system in which the 
public is able to check the leaders’ claims about internal disloyalty. If civil liberties are protected, 
and  if  information  is  permitted  to  flow,  witch-hunts  should  be  both  less  frequent  and  less 
damaging.  See  Vai-Lam  Mui,  Information,  Civil  Liberties,  and  the  Political  Economy  of  Witch-
hunts, 15 J Law, Economics, and Org. 503 (1999). 
310  See  Bradley  C.  Karkkkainen,  Toward  A  Smarter  NEPA:  Monitoring  and  Managing 
Government’s  Environmental  Performance,  102  Colum  L  Rev  903,  948-62  (2002)  (emphasizing 
need for and value of continuing monitoring of environmental performance). 
311 The best treatment is William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (1998). 

74 

 

exchange  of  reasons  in  the  public  sphere.312  In  a  deliberative  democracy,  the 
exercise of public power must be justified by reasons, not merely by the will of 
some segment of society, and indeed not merely by the will of the majority. Both 
the  opponents  and  the  advocates  of  the  Constitution  were  firmly  committed  to 
political deliberation. They also considered themselves “republicans,” committed 
to a high degree of self-government.313 But deliberative democracies can come in 
many  different  forms,  The  framers’  greatest  innovation  consisted  not  in  their 
belief  in  deliberation,  which  uncontested  at  the  time,  but  in  their  fear  of 
homogeneity,  their  enthusiasm  for  diversity,  and  their  effort  to  accommodate 
and to structure that diversity. In the founding period, a large part of the nation’s 
discussion  turned  on  the  possibility  of  having  that  form  of  government  in  a 
nation with its heterogeneous citizenry.  

 
The antifederalists, opponents of the proposed Constitution, thought that 
this  was  impossible.  Thus  Brutus,  an  especially  articulate  advocate  of  the 
antifederalist  view,  spoke  for  the  classical  tradition  when  he  urged:  “In  a 
republic, the manners, sentiments, and interests of the people should be similar. 
If  this  be  not  the  case,  there  will  be  constant  clashing  of  opinions;  and  the 
representatives  of  one  part  will  be  continually  striving  against  those  of  the 
other.”314  The  advocates  of  the  Constitution  believed  that  Brutus  had  it  exactly 
backwards.  They  welcomed  the  diversity  and  the  “constantly  clashing  of 
opinions”  and  affirmatively  sought  a  situation  in  which  “the  representatives  of 
one  part  will  be  continually  striving  against  those  of  the  other.”  Alexander 
Hamilton  spoke  most  clearly  on  the  point,  urging  that  the”  differences  of 
opinion,  and  the  jarring  of  parties  in  [the  legislative]  department  of  the 
government  .  .  .  often  promote  deliberation  and  circumspection;  and  serve  to 
check  the  excesses  of  the  majority.”315  From  the  standpoint  of  political 

                                                 
312 See, e.g, Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement (1999). 
313 See Bessette, supra note. 
314 2 The Complete Antifederalist 269 (H. Storing ed. 1980). 
315  The  Federalist  No.  70,  at  426-37  (Alexander  Hamilton)  (Clinton  Rossiter  ed.  1961).  Compare 
Asch’s claim: “The clash of views generates events of far-reaching importance. I am induced to 
take up a particular standpoint, to view my own action as another views it . . . Now I have within 
me two standpoints, my own and that of the other; both are now part of my way of thinking. In 
this way the limitations of my individual thinking are transcended by including the thoughts of 
others. I am now open to more alternatives than my own unaided comprehension would make 
possible. Disagreements, when their causes are intelligible, can enrich and strengthen, rather than 
injure,  our  sense  of  objectivity.”  Solomon  Asch,  Social  Psychology  131-32  (1952).  From  a  quite 
different discipline, John Rawls writes in similar terms: “In everyday life the exchange of opinion 
with others checks our partiality and widens our perspective; we are made to see things form the 
standpoint of others and the limits of our vision are brought home to us. . . . The benefits from 

75 

 

the  central  problem 

that  widespread  error  and  social 
is 
deliberation, 
fragmentation  are  likely  to  result  when  like-minded  people,  insulated  from 
others,  move  in  extreme  directions  simply  because  of  limited  argument  pools 
and parochial influences. A Constitution that ensures the “jarring of parties” and 
“differences of opinion” will provide safeguards against unjustified movements 
of view. 

 
A similar point emerges from one of the most illuminating early debates, 
raising the question whether the bill of rights should include a “right to instruct” 
representatives.  That  right  was  defended  with  the  claim  that  citizens  of  a 
particular region ought to have the authority to bind their representatives about 
how  to  vote.  This  defense  might  seem  plausible  as  a  way  of  improving  the 
political accountability of representatives—and so it seemed to many at the time. 
But  there  is  a  problem  with  this  view,  especially  in  an  era  in  which  political 
interest  was  closely  aligned  with  geography.  In  such  an  era,  it  is  likely  that  the 
citizens of a particular region, influenced by one another’s views, might end up 
with  indefensible  positions,  very  possibly  as  a  result  of  its  own  insularity, 
leading  to  cascade  effects  and  group  polarization.  In  rejecting  the  right  to 
instruct, Roger Sherman gave the decisive argument:  

 
“[T]he words  are calculated to mislead the people, by conveying an idea 
that  they  have  a  right  to  control  the  debates  of  the  Legislature.  This  cannot  be 
admitted to be just, because it would destroy the object of their meeting. I think, 
when the people have chosen a representative, it is his duty to meet others from 
the different parts of the Union, and consult, and agree with them on such acts as 
are for the general benefit of the whole community. If they were to be guided by 
instructions, there would be no use in deliberation.”316 

 

                                                                                                                                                 
discussion  lie  in  the  fact  that  even  representative  legislators  are  limited  in  knowledge  and  the 
ability to reason. No one of them knows everything the others know, or can make all the same 
inferences  that  they  can  draw  in  concert.  Discussion  is  a  way  of  combining  information  and 
enlarging the range of arguments.” John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 358-59 (1971). The idea can be 
traced to Aristotle, suggesting that when diverse groups “all come together . . . they may surpass 
–  collectively  and  as  a  body,  although  not  individually  –  the  quality  of the few best. . . . When 
there  are  many  who  contribute  to  the  process  of  deliberation,  each  can  bring  his  share  of 
goodness  and  moral  prudence;  .  .  .  some  appreciate  one  part,  some  another,  and  all  together 
appreciate  all.”  Aristotle,  Politics  123  (E.  Barker  trans.  1972).  Much  of  my  discussion  here  has 
been  devoted  to  showing  why  and  under  what  circumstances  this  view  might  or  might  not  be 
true. 
316 1 Annals of Cong. 733-45 (Joseph Gale ed. 1789). 

76 

 

Sherman’s  words  reflect  the  founders’  general  receptivity  to  deliberation 
among people who are quite diverse and who disagree on issues both large and 
small. Indeed, it was through deliberation among such persons that “such acts as 
are for the general benefit of the whole community” would emerge. 

 
Most important, the institutions of the Constitution reflect a fear of group 
influences,  cascade  effects,  and  polarization,  creating  a  range  of  checks  on  ill-
considered  judgments  that  emerge  from  those  processes.  The  most  obvious 
example  is  bicameralism,  designed  as  a  safeguard  against  a  situation  in  which 
one  house—in  the  framers’  view,  most  likely  the  House  of  Representatives—
would  be  overcome  by  short-term  passions  and  even  group  polarization.  This 
was  the  point  made  by  Hamilton  in  endorsing  a  “jarring  of  parties”  within  the 
legislature.  James  Wilson's  great  lectures  on  law  spoke  of  bicameralism  very 
much  in  these  terms,  referring  to  "instances,  in  which  the  people  have  become 
the  miserable  victims  of  passions,  operating  on  their  government  without 
restraint," and seeing a "single legislature" as prone to "sudden and violent fits of 
despotism,  injustice,  and  cruelty."317  To  be  sure,  a  cascade  can  cross  the 
boundaries that separate the Senate from the House; such crossings do occur. But 
their different compositions and cultures provide a significant safeguard against 
warrantless  cascades.  Here  the  Senate  was  thought  to  be  especially  important. 
Consider  the  widely  reported  story  that  on  his  return  from  France,  Jefferson 
called Washington to account at the breakfast-table for having agreed to a second 
chamber. "Why, asked Washington, "did you pour that coffee into your saucer?" 
"To  cool  it,"  quoth  Jefferson.  "Even  so,"  said  Washington,  "we  pour  legislation 
into the senatorial saucer to cool it."318 

 
We can understand many aspects of the system of checks and balances in 
the same general terms. The duty to present legislation to the President protects 
against  cascade  effects  within  the  legislative  branch.319  Because  law  cannot 
operate against citizens without the concurrence of the legislative and executive 

                                                 
317 James Wilson, Lectures on Law, in 1 The Works of James Wilson 291 (Robert Green McCloskey 
ed., 1967). 
318 3 The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, at 21 (Max Farrand ed., rev. ed. 1966) 359. 
319 See The Pocket Veto Case, 279 U.S. 655, 678 (1929) (contending that it is an "essential... part of 
the  constitutional  provisions,  guarding  against  ill-considered  and  unwise  legislation,  that  the 
President... should have the full time allowed him for determining whether he should approve or 
disapprove  a  bill,  and  if  disapproved,  for  adequately  formulating  the  objections  that  should  be 
considered by Congress"); 1 The Works of James Wilson, supra note 290, at 432 (urging that the 
President's  qualified  veto  will  "secure  an  additional  degree  of  accuracy  and  circumspection  in 
thee manner of passing the laws"). 

77 

 

branches,  enacting  and  then  enforcing  the  law,  there  is  a  further  safeguard 
against  oppression.  Federalism  itself  was,  and  remains,  an  engine  of  diversity, 
creating  “circuit  breakers”  in  the  form  of  a  variety  of  sovereigns  with  separate 
cultures.  In  the  federal  system,  social  influences  may  produce  error  in  some 
states, and states can certainly fall into cascades.320 But the existence of separate 
systems creates some check on the diffusion of error.321  

 
Judicial power itself was understood in related terms, quite outside of the 

context of constitutional review; consider Hamilton’s account322: 

 
“But  it  is  not  with  a  view  to  infractions  of  the  Constitution  only  that  the 
independence  of  judges  may  be  an  essential  safeguard  against  the  effects  of 
occasional ill humours in the society. These sometimes extend no farther than to 
the  injury  of  the  private  rights  of  particular  classes  of  citizens,  by  unjust  and 
partial laws. Here also the firmness of the judicial magistry is of vast importance 
in  mitigating  the  severity  and  confining  the  operation  of  such  laws.  It  not  only 
serves  the  moderate  the  immediate  mischiefs  of  those  which  may  have  been 
passed,  but  it  operates  as  a  check  upon  the  legislative  body  in  passing  them; 
who, perceiving that obstacles to the success of an iniquitous intention are to be 
expected from the scruples of the courts, are in a manner compelled by the very 
motives of the injustice they mediate, to qualify their attempts.” 

 
Of course the Constitution’s explicit protection of freedom of speech, and 
its  implicit  protection  of  freedom  of  association,323  help  to  ensure  spaces  for 
diversity  and  dissent.  In  that  way,  they  counteract  some  of  the  risks  of  mistake 
that  stem  from  group  influences.  For  present  purposes,  the  analysis  of  free 
speech is straightforward, but it is worth emphasizing that freedom of expression 
diminishes  the  gap  between  a  nation’s  leaders  and  its  citizens,  and  for  that 
reason  promotes  monitoring  of  the  former  by  the  latter.324  James  Madison,  the 
author  of  the  first  amendment,  used  this  point  to  object  to  the  whole  idea  of  a 
“Sedition  Act,”  criminalizing  certain  forms  of  criticism  of  public  officials. 
Madison  urged  that  “the  right  of  electing  the  members  of  the  Government 
constitutes  .  .  .  the  essence  of  a  free  and  responsible  government,”  and  that  the 
“value  and  efficacy  of  this  right  depends  on  the  knowledge  of  the  comparative 
                                                 
320 See Kuran and Sunstein, supra note. 
321  See  Michael  McConnell,  Evaluating  the  Founders’  Design,  U.  Chi.  L.  Rev.;  Lynn  Baker  and 
Ernest Young, Federalism and the Double Standard of Judicial Review, 51 Duke LJ 75 (1999). 
322 The Federalist No. 78, at 528 (J. Cooke ed. 1961). 
323 See NAACP v. Alabama, 357 US 449 (1958). 
324 For a technical discussion, see Mui, supra note. 

78 

 

merits and demerits of the candidates for the public trust.”325 If group influences 
are kept in mind, one implication is that government might in some settings have 
a  legitimate  interest  in  introducing  diversity  of  opinion  into  domains  that  that 
otherwise  consist  of  like-minded  people.  The  reason  is  simply  to  diminish  the 
risks  of  error.  If  modern  technologies  allow  people  to  sort  themselves  into 
congenial  communities,  there  is  a  risk  that  people  will  be  insulated  from 
competing  views.326  Perhaps  government  should  be  entitled  to  respond.  Of 
course  any  such  efforts,  on  government’s  part,  will  introduce  first  amendment 
problems of its own.327  

 
Freedom  of  association  presents  some 

important  wrinkles.  An 
understanding  of  group  polarization  suggests  that  associational  freedom  can 
produce  significant  risks,  above  all  because  like-minded  people  might,  by  the 
laws  of  social  interactions,  end  up  in  unjustifiably  extreme  directions.  Society 
might  well  become  fragmented  as  a  result  of  “iterated  polarization  games,”  in 
which  groups  of  like-minded  people—initially  different,  but  not  terribly 
different,  from  one  another—drive  their  members  toward  increasingly  diverse 
positions.  Small  differences  in  initial  views  might  well  be  magnified,  through 
social  interactions,  into  very  large  ones.328  An  advantage  of  this  process  is  that 
serves  to  increase  society’s  stock  of  “argument  pools”;  but  it  also  increases  the 
likelihood of mutual suspicion, misunderstanding, and even hatred. At the same 
time,  freedom  of  association  helps  to  counteract  the  informational  and 
reputational  influences  that  might  well  lead  people  to  fail  to  disclose 
information,  preferences,  and  values.  By  allowing  a  wide  diversity  of 
communities, imposing pressures of quite different kinds, freedom of association 
increases  the  likelihood  that  at  some  point,  important  information  will  be 
disclosed and eventually spread.329  

 
Nothing  in  this  brief  account  means  that  the  American  Constitution,  as 
originally  ratified  or  as  now  understood,  contains  the  ideal  institutions  and 
rights for balancing diversity with other goals, including stability. Some people, 

                                                 
325 James Madison, Report of 1800, January 7, 1800, in 17 Papers of JamesMaison (David Mattern 
et al. eds., 1991), at 346, 344. 
326 See Cass R. Sunstein, Republic.com (2002), for general discussion. 
327 See Miami Herald Publishing Co. v. Tornillo, 418 US 241 (1974) (striking down a right-of-reply 
law). 
328  See  Henrich  et  al.,  supra  note,  at  353,  for  some  entertaining  examples  in  the  context  of  food 
choice. 
329  This  is  one  reading  of  Holmes’  great  dissenting  opinion  in  Abrams  v.  United  States,  250  US 
616, 624 (1919) (Holmes, J., dissenting). 

79 

 

for  example,  argue  on  behalf  of  proportional  representation,330  either  of 
demographic  groups  or  of  a  large  number  of  parties,  and  it  is  possible  to 
understand  those  arguments  as  responsive  to  the  goal  of  guaranteeing  a  wide 
range  of  ideas  in  government.  Efforts  to  ensure  that  disadvantaged  groups  are 
represented  as  such  might  be  urged  on  this  ground.331  In  some  nations,  there 
have  been  serious  attempts  to  ensure  equal  representation  for  women,  in  large 
part  on  the  ground  that  without  such  representation,  important  points  of  view 
will be absent. There is much to be said about this large topic.332 But to anchor the 
discussion,  I  now  turn  to  two  more  particular  issues,  both  of  considerable 
contemporary  concern:  diversity  on  the  federal  judiciary  and  affirmative  action 
in higher education. 

C. Judges 
 

1.  Data.  Are  judges  subject  to  conformity  effects?  Are  they  likely  to 
cascade?  Do  like-minded  judges  move  to  extremes?  What  is  the  effect  of 
anticipated and actual dissents? For obvious reasons this is not an easy topic to 
investigate. But consider judicial behavior on the D.C. Circuit.333 A panel of three 
Republican judges is far more likely to strike down agency action, at the behest 
of  industry,  than  a  panel  of  two  Republicans  and  one  Democrat.  At  the 
individual level, group influences are at least equally striking: When sitting with 
two  Republicans,  a  Democratic  judge  is  more  likely  to  vote  to  strike  down 
agency action than is a Republican when sitting with two Democrats. It does not 
much matter whether the judge of a single party is actually persuaded or instead 
decides  that  it  is  simply  not  worthwhile  to  dissent  publicly.  In  either  case,  the 
vote reflects social influences, in a process that is not entirely different from what 
is observed in the Asch experiments.334 

 

 

                                                 
330  See  Anne  Phillips,  The  Politics  of  Presence  (1995);  Iris  Young,  Justice  and  the  Politics  of 
Difference 183-91 (1994). 
331 See id; Sunstein, Deliberative Trouble, supra note. 
332 See note supra. 
333 See Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Ideology, and the DC Circuit, 83 Va L Rev 
1717  (1997);  Frank  Cross  and  Emerson  Tiller,  Judicial  Partisanship  and  Obedience  to  Legal 
Doctrine, 107 Yale LJ 2155 (1998). 
334 It is not identical, of course. A public dissent takes considerable time and effort, and it might 
also  strain  collegial  relations.  Neither  of  these  is  involved  in  the  same  way  in  the  Asch 
experiments. 

80 

 

Several studies find a strong tendency toward more extreme results when 
a panel consists of judges from a single political party.335 The background fact is 
that  when  industry  challenges  an  environmental  regulation,  there  is  an 
extraordinary difference between the behavior of a Republican majority and that 
of a Democratic majority. Republican majorities reverse agencies over 50% of the 
time;  Democratic  majorities  do  so  less  than  15%  of  the  time.336  There  are  also 
significant  findings  of  group  influence.  Judges’  votes  are  greatly  affected  by 
whether there is another judge, on that panel, appointed by a president from the 
same  political  party.  A  Republican  judge  is  much  more  likely  to  accept  an 
industry challenge if she has a Republican colleague on the panel. A Democratic 
judge  is  far  less  likely  to  accept  such  a  challenge  if  she  has  a  Democratic 
colleague on the panel.337 Hence a single Democratic judge, accompanied by two 
Republicans,  votes  in  favor  of  industry  challenges  over  40%  of  the  time;  but 
when joined by one or more Democrats, the Democratic judge votes in favor of 
such challenges less than 30% of the time.338  

 
By contrast, a single Republican votes in favor of industry challenges less 
than  20%  of  the  time.339  Remarkably,  a  single  Republican,  accompanied  by  two 
Democrats, is less likely to accept an industry challenge than a single Democrat, 
accompanied  by  two  Republicans.  This  is  a  real  testimony  to  the  strength  of 
group influences (and also judicial reluctance to dissent publicly, either because 
it can be difficult and time-consuming to produce a dissent or because dissenting 
can  seem  an  antisocial  act).  It  might  seem  reasonable  to  say  that  a  Democrat, 
sitting  with  two  Republicans,  votes  like  a  Republican,  whereas  a  Republican, 
sitting  with  two  Democrats,  votes  like  a  Democrat.  This  view  is  not  entirely 
wrong, but it is misleading. The problem is that how a Democrat votes, and how 
a Republican votes, is very much a function of whether they are accompanied by 
one or two people from their own party, or none at all.340 For this reason, there is 
no  single  way,  independent  of  group  influences,  that  either  a  Republican  or 
Democrat tends to vote—at least in the context of industry challenges to agency 
regulations. 
 

                                                 
335 See my own data, described below, and Richard L. Revesz, Ideology, Collegiality, and the DC 
Circuit, 85 Va L Rev 805, 808 (1999). 
336 Richard L. Revesz, Ideology, Collegiality, and the DC Circuit, 85 Va L Rev 805, 808 (1999). 
337 See id. at 808 (1999). 
338 Calculated from Revesz, supra note, at 1752.  
339 Id. at 1754. 
340 Id. 

81 

 

In a testimonial to group polarization, a panel of three Republican judges 
is far more likely than a panel of two Republicans and one Democrat to reverse 
an  environmental  decision  when  industry  challenges  that  decision.341  In  one 
period  (1995  to  2002),  71%  of  Republican  votes,  on  all-Republican  panels, 
accepted industry challenges.342 By contrast, 45% of Republican votes, on two-to-
one  Republican  panels,  accepted  such  challenges—and  37.5%  of  such  votes  did 
so  on  two-to-one  Republican  panels.343  In  a  earlier  period  (1986-1994),  the 
corresponding numbers were 80%, 48%, and 14%.344 In a still earlier period (1970-
1982),  100%  of  Republicans  votes,  on  all-Republican  panels,  were  in  favor  of 
industry  challenges.  By  contrast,  only  45%  of  Republican  votes,  on  two-to-one 
Republican  panels,  were  in  favor  of  industry  challenges—and  only  26%  of 
Republican  votes,  on  Democratic-dominated  panels,  were  in  favor  of  such 
challenges.345  
 
Aggregating  this  data,  we  can  produce  a  broadly  representative  and 
nearly complete account of votes, within the D.C. Circuit, in environmental cases 
between 1979 and 2002. A simple calculation shows that in all-Republican panels, 
Republicans voted to accept industry challenges 80% of the time; that in two-to-
one Republican  panels,  Republicans  voted to accept such challenges 48% of the 
time;  and  that  in  two-to-one  Democratic  panels,  Republicans  voted  to  accept 
industry  challenges  only  27.5  of  the  time.  And  group  polarization  is  hardly 
limited to Republican judges; it occurs among Democratic judges as well. When 
an environmental group is challenging agency action, a panel of three Democrats 
is  more  likely  to  accept  the  challenge  than  a  panel  of  two  Democrats  and  one 
Republican.346  The  likelihood  that  a  Democrat  will  vote  in  favor  of  an 

                                                 
341 See my own unpublished data (on file); Revesz, supra note, at 1754. 
342 Unpublished data (on file). 
343 Id.  
344 Revesz, supra, at 1754. Two findings that I have emphasized might seem in tension with one 
another. Democratic judges, sitting without fellow Democrats, are highly likely to be influenced 
by  two  Republican  colleagues;  but  Democratic  judges,  in  such  cases,  also  have  a  powerful 
restraining  effect  on  their  colleagues.  The  explanation  appears  to  be  that  in  such  cases,  the 
influence  of  the  two  Republicans  on  the  single  Democrat  produces  a  substantial  number  of 
unanimous  panel  decisions  in  favor  of  reversal,  while  at  the  same  time,  the  prospect  of  a 
Democratic  dissent,  also  in  a  significant  percentage  of  cases,  dramatically  cuts  the  total 
percentage of Republican votes in favor of industry. A reasonable speculation is that if the single 
Democrat  does  not  feel  strongly,  he  will  yield  to  group  pressure,  and  the  panel  is  likely  to 
reverse; but if the Democrat feels strongly, and the Republicans do not, the Republicans will shift, 
and the agency will be upheld. 
345 Id. at 1754. 
346 Id. at 1753. 

82 

 

environmentalist  challenge  is highest when three Democrats are on the panel—
and lowest when the panel has two Republicans.347  

 
A third study is more complicated.348 Under the Supreme Court’s decision 
in Chevron v. NRDC,349 courts are supposed to uphold agency interpretations of 
law so long as the interpretations are “reasonable.” But when do courts actually 
uphold  such  interpretations?  The  doctrine  allows  judges  considerable  room  to 
maneuver, so that courts that are inclined to invalidate agency action usually can 
find a plausible basis for doing so. The real question is when they will claim to 
have found that plausible basis. The second study strongly suggests that group 
influences  play  a  role  and  that  the  potential  for  a  dissent,  from  a  Democratic 
judge, is a strong deterrent to Republican judges who are inclined to invalidate 
agency  action.  As  a  background  fact,  note  that  the  study  finds  an  exceedingly 
strong  influence,  within  the  influential  court  of  appeals  for  the  District  of 
Columbia  Circuit,  of  party  affiliation  on  outcomes.  If  observers  were  to  code 
cases  very  crudely,  by  taking  account  of  whether  industry  or  a  public  interest 
group is bringing the challenge, they would find that a majority of Republicans 
reach a conservative judgment 54% of the time, whereas a majority of Democrats 
reach such a judgment merely 32% of the time.350  

 
For  present  purposes,  the  most  important  finding  is  that  there  is  a 
dramatic difference between politically diverse panels, with judges appointed by 
Presidents  of  more  than  one  party,  and  politically  unified  panels,  with  judges 
appointed  by  Presidents  of  only  one  party.  On  divided  panels  in  which  a 
Republican  majority  of  the  court  might  be  expected,  on  broadly  speaking 
political  grounds,  to  be  hostile  to  the  agency,  the  court  nonetheless  deferred  to 
the  agency  62%  of  the  time.  But  on  unified  panels  in  which  an  all-Republican 
panel  might  be  expected  to  be  hostile  to  the  agency,  the  court  upheld  the 
agency’s  interpretation  only  33%  of  the  time.  Note  that  this  was  the  only  such 
finding  in  the  data.  When  Democratic  majority  courts  were  expected  to  uphold 
the  agency’s  decision  on  political  grounds,  they  did  so  over  70%  of  the  time, 
whether  unified  (71%  of  the  time)  or  divided  (86%  of  the  time).  Consider  the 
results in tabular form351: 

 

                                                 
347 Id. 
348  Frank  Cross  and  Emerson  Tiller,  Judicial  Partisanship  and  Obedience  to  Legal  Doctrine,  107 
Yale LJ 2155 (1998). 
349 See 467 US 837 (1984). 
350 Cross and Tiller, supra note, at 2169. 
351 Constructed on the basis of data in Cross and Tiller, supra note, at 2172-2173. 

83 

 

 

3–0  
Republican 
Panel 

2–1  
Republican 
Panel 

3–0  
Democratic 
Panel 

2–1  
Democratic 
Panel 

14% 

38% 

86% 

62% 

29% 

33% 

67% 

71% 

Uphold 
Agency 
Action 
Invalidate 
Agency 
Action 
 
It seems reasonable to speculate that the seemingly bizarre result—a 67% 
invalidation rate when Republican judges are unified—reflects group influences 
and  in  particular  group  polarization.  A  group  of  all-Republican  judges  might 
well  take  the  relatively  unusual  step  of  rejecting  an  agency’s  interpretation, 
whereas  a  divided  panel,  with  a  built-in  check  on  any  tendency  toward  the 
unusual  or  extreme  outcome,  is  more  likely  to  take  the  conventional  route.  A 
likely  reason  is  that  the  single  Democratic  judge  acts  as  a  “whistleblower,” 
discouraging the other judges from making a decision that is in tension with the 
Supreme  Court’s  command  to  uphold  agency  interpretations  of  ambiguous 
statutes.352  And  other  factors  are  involved.  When  a  court  consists  of  a  panel  of 
judges  with  the  same  basic  orientation,  the  median  view,  before  deliberation 
begins,  will  be  significantly  different  from  what  it  would  be  with  a  panel  of 
diverse judges. The argument pool will be very different as well. For example, a 
panel of three Republican judges, tentatively inclined to invalidate the action of 
the Environmental  Protection  Agency (EPA), will offer a range of arguments in 
support of invalidation and relatively few in the other direction—even if the law, 
properly  interpreted,  favors  validation.  If  the  panel  contains  a  judge  who  is 
inclined  to  uphold  the  EPA,  the  arguments  that  favor  validation  are  far  more 
likely  to  emerge  and  to  be  pressed.  Indeed,  the  very  fact  that  the  judge  is  a 
Democrat increases the likelihood that this will occur, since that judge might not 
think of himself as being part of the same “group” as the other panel members. 
(Recall that when people are connected by ties of solidarity, disagreement is all 
the less likely.) And because corroboration of opinion leads to greater confidence 
and hence extremity, it is not surprising that a panel of three like-minded judges 
would lead to unusual and extreme results. 

 
In this context, the effect is fortified by the possibility that the sole judge, 
finding himself outnumbered, might produce a dissenting opinion in public. To 
                                                 
352 See id. at 2174-76. 

84 

 

be  sure,  Supreme  Court  review  is  rare  and  in  the  general  run  of  cases,  the 
prospect  of  such  review  probably  does  not  have  much  of  a  deterrent  effect  on 
courts  of  appeals.  But  judges  who  write  majority  opinions  are  usually  not 
enthusiastic  about  having  to  see  and  to  respond  to  dissenting  opinions.  And  if 
the law actually favors the dissenting view, two judges, even if they would like 
to  reverse  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  might  be  influenced  to  adopt 
the easier course of validation. The evidence so suggests.353  

 
A glance at the table immediately above offers some countervailing data: 
A panel of three Democrats is not more likely than a panel with two Democrats 
to uphold agency action in cases in which Democrats might be expected to want 
to uphold the agency. And in the context of a challenge from an environmental 
group, a Republican judge is not likely to vote differently if he is accompanied by 
two  Democrats,  one  Republican,  or  two  Republicans.354  But  in  some  important 
domains,  at  least,  a  panel  of  three  like-minded  judges  will  indeed  behave 
differently  from  a  panel  with  two.  It  would  be  most  interesting  to  learn  what 
pattern would be observed in other contexts. What does the evidence show if, in 
criminal  cases,  we  compare  panels  of  three  Democratic  judges  with  panels 
containing  two  Democrats  and  one  Republican?  Are  the  three  Democrats  far 
more inclined to reverse a criminal conviction than a panel with one Republican? 
In any case the basic claim here can generate hypotheses about a wide range of 
areas. We might hypothesize, for example, that all-Republican panels would not 
be  enthusiastic  about  sex  discrimination  claims,  and  that  all-Democratic  panels 
show far more sympathy for such claims. Perhaps all-Democratic panels would 
be particularly skeptical about claims that government regulation amounts to an 
unconstitutional  taking  of  private  property  without  just  compensation.  Perhaps 
all-Republican panels would show unusual enthusiasm for such claims. 

  
At  this  point  a  skeptic  might  note  that  lawyers  make  adversarial 
presentations  before  judges.  Such  a  skeptic  might  insist  that  the  size  of  the 
“argument  pool”  is  determined  by  those  presentations,  not  only  and  not  even 
mostly  by  what  members  of  the  panel  are  inclined  to  say  and  to  do.  And 
undoubtedly  the  inclinations  of  judges  are  shaped,  some  of  the  time,  by  the 
contributions  of  advocates.  But  even  if  this  is  so,  what  matters,  for  purposes  of 
the outcomes, is the inclinations of judges, whatever they are based on; and it is 
here  that  the  existence  of  a  single  dissenter  can  make  all  the  difference.  In  the 
punitive  damage  study  discussed  above,  mock  juries  were  presented  with 

                                                 
353 See id. 
354 See Revesz, supra note, at 1755. 

85 

 

arguments from both sides, and polarization followed this presentation, as it has 
elsewhere.355  Notice  in  this  regard  that  for  polarization  hypothesis  to  hold,  it  is 
not  necessary  to  know  whether  judges  spend  a  great  deal  of  time  offering 
reasons to one another. Mere exposure to a conclusion is enough.356 A system of 
simple  votes,  unaccompanied  by  reasons,  should  incline  judges  to  polarize.  Of 
course  reasons,  if  they  are  good  ones,  are  likely  to  make  those  votes  especially 
persuasive. 
 
2.  The  normative  issue.  It  remains  to  investigate  the  normative  issues.  If 
like-minded judges go to extremes, should we be troubled? Is it good if a large 
effect  is  found  from  a  single  judge  from  a  different  party?  More  generally:  Is 
there reason  to  attempt to  ensure diversity on the federal courts? To promote a 
degree of diversity on panels? There is a widespread view that judges appointed 
by  presidents  of  different  political  parties  are  not  fundamentally  different  and 
that once on the bench, judges frequently surprise those who nominated them.357 
The  view  is  not  entirely  baseless,  but  it  is  misleading.  Some  appointees  do 
disappoint  the  Presidents  who  nominated  them,  but  the  availability  heuristic 
should  not  fool  us  into  thinking  that  these  examples  are  typical.  Judges 
appointed by Republican presidents are quite different from judges appointed by 
Democratic presidents. “Partisanship clearly affects how appellate courts review 
agency discretion.”358  

 
But  it  seems  difficult  to  evaluate  the  underlying  issues  without  taking  a 
stand on the merits—without knowing what we want judges to do. Suppose that 
three Republican judges are especially likely to uphold criminal convictions, and 
that three Democratic judges are especially likely to reverse those convictions. At 
first glance, one or the other is troubling only if we know whether we approve of 
one or another set of results. In the punitive damage study discussed above, the 
movement  toward  increased  awards  might  be  something  to  celebrate,  not  to 
deplore, if we conclude that the median of predeliberation awards is too low and 
that the increase, produced by group discussion, ensures more sensible awards. 
And  if  a  view  about  what  judges  should  do  is  the  only  possible  basis  for 
evaluation, we might conclude that those who prefer judges of a particular party 
should seek judges of that party, and that group influences are essentially beside 
the point. 

                                                 
355 Schkade, supra note, at 1150 and 1150 n. 44. 
356 See Robert Baron et al., supra note, at 74. 
357 See, e.g., Jeffrey Rosen, New York Times Magazine; others. 
358 See Revesz, supra note, at 2175. 

86 

 

 
But  the  conclusion  is  too  strong.  In  some  cases,  the  law,  properly 
interpreted, really does argue strongly for one or another view. The existence of 
diversity on a panel is likely to bring that fact to light and perhaps to move the 
panel’s  decision  in  the  direction  of  what  the  law  requires.  The  existence  of 
politically  diverse  judges,  and  of  a  potential  dissent,  increases  the  probability 
that  the  law  will  be  followed.  The  Chevron  study,  referred  to  above,  strongly 
supports  this  point.359  The  presence  of  a  potential  dissenter—in  the  form  of  a 
judge  appointed  by  a  president  from  another political party—creates a possible 
whistleblower  who  can  reduce  the  likelihood  of  an  incorrect  or  lawless 
decision.360  Through  an  appreciation  of  the  nature  of  group  influences,  we  can 
see  the  wisdom  in  an  old  idea:  A  decision  is  more  likely  to  be  right,  and  less 
likely  to  be  political  in  a  pejorative  sense,  if  it  is  supported  by  judges  with 
different predilections.  

 
There  is  a  further  point.  Suppose  that  in  many  areas,  it  is  not  clear,  in 
advance,  whether  the  appointees  of  Democratic  or  Republican  presidents  are 
correct. Suppose that we are genuinely uncertain. If so, there is reason to favor a 
situation in which the legal system has both, simply on the ground that through 
that  route,  more  (reasonable)  opinions  are  likely  to  be  heard.  And  if  we  are 
genuinely uncertain, there is reason to favor a mix of views merely by virtue of 
its moderating effect. In the face of uncertainty, sensible people choose between 
the poles.361  
 
3. An analogy. Consider an analogy. Modern law and policy is often made 
by independent regulatory commissions, such as the Federal Trade Commission, 
the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  the  National  Labor  Relations  Board, 
and the Federal Communications Commission. Much of the time, such agencies 
act  through  adjudication.  They  function  in  the  same  fashion  as  federal  courts. 
And under federal statutes, Congress has attempted to ensure that these agencies 
are not monopolized by either Democrats or Republicans. The law requires that 
no more than a bare majority of agency members may be from a single party.362 
An  understanding  of  group  influences  helps  explain  this  requirement.  An 
independent  agency  that  is  all-Democratic,  or  all-Republican,  might  move 
toward an extreme position, indeed a position that is more extreme than that of 
                                                 
359 See Cross and Tiller, supra note. 
360 This is the explanation in Cross and Tiller, supra note, at 2173. 
361  For  evidence,  see  Mark  Kelman  et  al.,  Context-Independence  in  Legal  Decisionmaking,  in 
Behavioral Law and Economics (Cass R. Sunstein ed. 2000). 
362 See, e.g., 15 U.S.C. § 78d (1994). 

87 

 

the median Democrat or Republican, and possibly more extreme than that of any 
agency  official  standing  alone.  A  requirement  of  bipartisan  membership  can 
operate  as  a  check  against  movements  of  this  kind.  Congress  was  apparently 
aware of this general point. Closely attuned to the policymaking functions of the 
relevant  institutions,  it  was  careful  to  provide  a  safeguard  against  extreme 
movements.  
 
Why do we fail to create similar safeguards for courts? Part of the answer 
must  lie  in  a  belief  that  unlike  heads  of  independent  regulatory  commissions, 
judges are not policymakers. Their duty is to follow the law, not to make policy. 
An  attempt  to  ensure  bipartisan  composition  would  seem  inconsistent  with  the 
commitment  to  this  belief.  But  the  evidence  I  have  discussed  shows  judges  are 
policymakers  of  an  important  kind,  and  that  their  political  commitments  very 
much influence their votes. In principle, there is good reason to attempt to ensure 
a mix of perspectives within courts of appeals. 

 
Of course the idea of diversity, or of a mix of perspectives, is hardly self-
defining.  It  would  not  be  appropriate  to  say  that  the  federal  judges  should 
include people who refuse to obey the Constitution, or who refuse to exercise the 
power of judicial review, or who think that the Constitution allows suppression 
of  political  dissent  and  racial  segregation.  Here  as  elsewhere,  the  domain  of 
appropriate  diversity  is  limited.  What  is  necessary  is  reasonable  diversity,  or 
diversity  of  reasonable  views,  and  not  diversity  as  such.  People  can  certainly 
disagree  about  what  reasonable  diversity  entails  in  this  context.  All  that  I  am 
suggesting here is that there is such a thing as reasonable diversity, and that it is 
important to ensure that judges, no less than anyone else, are exposed to it, and 
not merely through the arguments of advocates. 

 
4.  The  Senate’s  role.  These  points  cast  fresh  light  on  a  much  disputed 
issue:  the  legitimate  role  of  the  Senate  in  giving  “advice  and  consent”  to 
presidential  appointments  to  the  federal  judiciary.  Above  all,  an  understanding 
of  social  influences  suggests  that  the  Senate  has  a  responsibility  to  exercise  its 
constitutional  authority  in  order  to  ensure  a  reasonable  diversity  of  view.  The 
Constitution’s  history  fully  contemplates  an  independent  role  for  the  Senate  in 
the  selection  of  Supreme  Court  Justices.363  That  independent  role  certainly 
authorizes  the  Senate  to  consider  the  general  approach,  and  likely  pattern  of 
votes, of potential judges. There can be no doubt that the President considers the 

                                                 
363 See David A. Strauss and Cass R. Sunstein, The Senate, the Constitution, and the Confirmation 
Process, 101 Yale L.J. 1491 (1992). 

88 

 

general approach of his nominees; the Senate is entitled to do so as well. Under 
good  conditions,  these  simultaneous  powers  would  bring  about  a  healthy  form 
of checks and balances, permitting each branch to counter the other. Indeed, that 
system is part and parcel of social deliberation about the direction of the federal 
judiciary.  
 

Why might this view be rejected? It could be urged that there is only one 
legitimate  approach  to  constitutional  or  statutory  interpretation—that,  for 
example,  some  version  of  originalism  or  textualism  is  the  only  such  approach, 
and  that  anyone  who  rejects  that  view  is  unreasonable.  For  true  believers,  it  is 
pointless  to  argue  for  diverse  views.364  Diversity  is  not  necessary,  or  even 
valuable,  if  we  already  know  what  should  be  done,  and  if  competing  views 
would simply cloud the issue. (In a scientific dispute, it is not helpful to include 
those  who  believe  that  the  earth  is  flat.)  Or  it  might  be  urged  that  a  deferential 
role for the Senate, combined with natural political competition and cycles, will 
produce  a  sensible  mix  over  time.  I  do  not  deny  this  possibility.  My  only 
suggestions  are  that  a  high  degree  of  diversity  on  the  federal  judiciary  is 
desirable,  that  the  Senate  is  entitled  to  pursue  diversity,  and  that  without  such 
diversity, judicial panels are will inevitably go in unjustified directions. 

 

D. Affirmative Action in Higher Education 

 
Countless  educational  institutions  pursue  the  goal  of  diversity.  Most  of 
America’s  large  private  and  public  institutions  seek  a  wide  range  of  views, 
faculty,  and  students.  There  are  some  prominent  exceptions;  some  institutions 
pride themselves on a high degree of homogeneity.365 And here as elsewhere, the 
idea  of  diversity  needs  to  be  clarified.  Colleges  and  universities  do  not  make 
special efforts to  include students who collect Britney Spears memorabilia, hate 
America,  smell  bad,  or  have  low  SAT’s.  Such  institutions  are  committed  to 
diversity, but only to a certain degree and of a certain kind. It remains possible to 
urge,  as  many  do,  that  they  give  excessive  attention  to  diversity  of  some  kinds 
and insufficient attention to diversity of other kinds. The only point I am making 
here is that they tend to be committed to diversity of a recognizable sort.  

                                                 
364 Note, however, that even if it would be appropriate for all judges to share a certain approach, 
it is also desirable to have diversity with respect to the application of that approach. Textualists 
do not all agree with one another; there is internal diversity in the world of originalism. Diversity 
is appropriate here to ensure an airing of reasonable views. 
365 See the discussion of Brigham Young University in Martha Nussbaum, Cultivating Humanity 
(1999). 

89 

 

 
There are many reasons for this commitment. One involves simple market 
pressures; a school that has different sorts of students is more likely to be able to 
attract  good  faculty  and  good  students.366  Of  course  people’s  preferences  and 
values  vary,  and  some  people  want  to  go  to  places  that  are  relatively 
homogeneous.  But  this  seems  to  be  the  exception  rather  than  the  rule.367  And 
there  is  another  justification  for  diversity,  one  that  has  received  considerable 
attention within courts368 and that is closely related to my topic here. The idea is 
that education is simply likely to be better if the school has people with different 
views,  perspectives,  and  experiences.  In  the  context  of  affirmative  action,  this 
justification  was  approved  in  Justice  Powell’s  decisive  opinion  in  the  Bakke 
case,369 an opinion that has the unusual distinction of having settled, for a period 
of decades, the constitutionality of affirmative action in higher education without 
having been embraced by any other justice on the Supreme Court. My goal here 
is  to  offer  a  qualified  defense  of  Justice  Powell’s  view.  I  urge  that  in  some 
educational  settings,  racial  diversity  is  important  for  ensuring  a  broad  array  of 
experiences  and  ideas,  and  that  in  those  settings,  narrowly  tailored  affirmative 
action programs should be constitutionally permissible. 

 
Justice  Powell  insisted  that  a  diverse  student  body  is  a  constitutionally 
acceptable  goal  for  higher  education.370  The  central  reason  is  that  universities 
should be allowed to ensure a “robust exchange of ideas,” an interest connected 
with the first amendment itself.371 Justice Powell acknowledged that this interest 
seemed  strongest  in  the  context  of  undergraduate  education,  where  views  are 
formed  on  a  large  number  of  topics.  But  even  in  a  medical  school,  “the 
contribution of diversity is substantial.”372 A medical student having a particular 
background,  including  a  particular  ethnic  background,  “may  bring  to  a 

                                                 
366 Note that this justification is most unlikely to be legitimate as a constitutional matter. A public 
institution is not permitted to justify discrimination by claiming, or even showing, that many of 
its  constituents  call  for  it.  Brown  v.  Bd.  of  Education  itself  requires  that  conclusion;  see  also 
Palmore  v.  Sadoti,  466  US  429,  441  (1984),  suggesting  that  private  “biases  may  be  outside  the 
reach of the law, but the law cannot, directly or indirectly, give them effect.” 
367  Recall  the  prior  qualifications  about  the  definition  of  diversity.  Even  apparently  diverse 
institutions  are  homogenous  in  certain  ways  and  along  certain  dimensions,  and  this  is  what 
students and faculty seem to prefer. 
368 See Hopwood v. Texas, 78 F.3d 932, 944 (5th Cir. 1996); Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th 
Cir. 2002). 
369 See 438 US 265 (1978 (opinion of Powell, J.). 
370 438 US at 311-12. 
371 Id. at 313. 
372 Id. 

90 

 

professional school of medicine experiences, outlooks, and ideas that enrich the 
training  of  its  student  body  and  better  equip  its  graduates  to  render  with 
understanding their vital service to humanity.”373 Justice Powell also emphasized 
that  doctors  “serve  a  heterogeneous  population,”  and  suggested  that  graduate 
admissions  decisions  are  concerned  with  contributions  that  follow  formal 
education.374  
 
Thus  Justice  Powell  concluded  that  the  crucial  question  was  whether  a 
race-conscious  admission  program,  giving  benefits  to  people  because  they  are 
members  of  racial  minority  groups,  was  a  necessary  means  of  promoting  the 
legitimate goal of diversity. Here he reached his famous conclusion that racial or 
ethnic background could be a “plus” in the admissions decision, though quotas 
would  not  be  allowed.375  For  Justice  Powell,  a  legitimate  admissions  program 
should be “flexible enough to consider all pertinent elements of diversity in light 
of  the  particular  qualifications  of  the  applicant,  and  to  place  them  on  the  same 
footing  for  consideration,  although  not  necessarily  according  to  them  the  same 
weight.”376  Thus  it  would  be  acceptable  to  promote  “beneficial  educational 
pluralism”  by  considering  a  range  of  factors, 
including  “demonstrated 
compassion, a history of overcoming disadvantage, ability to communicate with 
the poor, or other qualifications deemed important.”377 

 

  My  central  concern  here  is  the  principal378  basis  for  Justice  Powell’s 
 
conclusion: the value of ensuring a “robust exchange of ideas” in the classroom, 
and  the  legitimacy  of  promoting  racial  diversity  in  order  to  ensure  that 
exchange. To understand the contemporary relevance of Justice Powell’s opinion, 
it is necessary to outline the recent developments in the constitutional principles 
governing  affirmative  action  programs.  The  Court  has  now  settled  on  the  view 
that  affirmative  action  programs,  like  all  other  programs  embodying  racial 
discrimination, should be subject to “strict scrutiny” from courts, and invalidated 
unless  they  are  the  least  restrictive  means  of  achieving  a  compelling  state 

                                                 
373 Id. at 314.  
374 Id. 
375 Id. at 316-320. 
376 Id. at 317.  
377 Id. 
378 This is not the exclusive basis for Justice Powell’s opinion; he was also concerned with what 
will happen after graduation – with the possibility that members of minority groups will serve 
their  communities,  in  a  way  that  confers  significant  social  benefits  on  populations  that  might 
otherwise  be  underserved.  Id.  For  evidence  that  this  does  happen,  see  John  Bowen  and  Derek 
Bok, The Shape of the River (1998). 

91 

 

is  also  clear  that  past  “societal  discrimination,”  meaning 
interest.379  It 
discrimination  in  the  nation’s  past,  is  not  a  legitimate  basis  for  discrimination 
against  whites.380  It  is  equally  clear  that  narrow,  remedial  affirmative  action 
programs  are  acceptable  if  they  are  specifically  designed  to  correct  for  proven 
past discrimination by the institution that is acting affirmatively.381  

 
  What remains unclear is when, if ever, a public institution is permitted to 
justify  affirmative  action  by  reference  to  “forward-looking”  justifications,  not 
involving a remedy for past discrimination.382 A state might, for example, try to 
defend  affirmative  action  in  hiring  police  by  urging  that  a  police  force  will 
simply  be  more  effective  if  it  contains  African-Americans  among  others—
especially in a community that contains people of multiple races.383 Justice Powell 
was  really  offering  a  similar  claim  about  higher  education:  Whether  or  not  a 
college  or  university  has  itself  discriminated  against  African-Americans  or 
others, it should permitted to discriminate in favor of them if it is doing so as a 
means of ensuring a “robust exchange of ideas.” But current justices have given 
conflicting  signals  about  the  legitimacy  and  strength  of  forward-looking 
justifications.384  
                                                 
379 See, e.g., City of Richmond v. Croson, 488 US 469 (1989); Adarand Constructors v. Pena, 515 
US 200 (1995). 
380 City of Richmond v. Croson, 488 US 469, 477 (1989). 
381  United  States  v.  Paradise,  480  US  149  (1987);  Local  No.  93,  International  Association  of 
Firefighters v. Cleveland, 478 US 616 (1987). 
382  For  general  discussion,  see  Kathleen  M.  Sullivan,  Sins  of  Discrimination:  Last  Term's 
Affirmative Action Cases, 100 Harv. L. Rev. 78, 96 (1986): "Public and private employers might 
choose to implement affirmative action for many reasons other than to purge their own past sins 
of discrimination. The Jackson school board, for example, said it had done so in part to improve 
the  quality  of  education  in  Jackson  -- whether by improving black students' performance or by 
dispelling for black and white students alike any idea that white supremacy governs our social 
institutions.  Other  employers  might  advance  different  forward-looking  reasons  for  affirmative 
action: improving their services to black constituencies, averting racial tension over the allocation 
of jobs in a community, or increasing the diversity of a work force, to name but a few examples. 
Or  they  might  adopt  affirmative  action  simply  to  eliminate  from  their  operations  all  de  facto 
embodiment of a system of racial caste. All of these reasons aspire to a racially integrated future, 
but none reduces to 'racial balancing for its own sake.'" 
383 Id. 
384  For  one  view,  see  Johnson  v.  Transportation  Agency,  480  U.S.  616,  647  (1987)  (Stevens, 
concurring):  “Instead  of  retroactively  scrutinizing  his  own  or  society's  possible  exclusions  of 
minorities  in  the  past  to  determine  the  outer  limits  of  a  valid  affirmative-action  program  --  or 
indeed, any particular affirmative-action decision -- in many cases the employer will find it more 
appropriate  to  consider  other 
legitimate  reasons  to  give  preferences  to  members  of 
underrepresented  groups.  Statutes  enacted  for  the  benefit  of  minority  groups  should  not  block 
these  forward-looking  considerations.”  For  a  contrasting  view,  see  Justice  O'Connor,  in  Metro 

92 

 

 
 

 

There can be no doubt that universities are permitted to promote diversity 
and  dissent  by  seeking  a  mix  of  faculty  and  students.  Efforts  of  this  kind  are 
pervasive;  this  is  what  most  admissions  offices  try  to  do.  To  be  sure,  some 
serious free speech issues might be raised if an admissions office discriminates in 
favor of, or against, particular points of view.385 But even if public institutions are 
barred from pursuing diversity of ideas by discriminating directly against some 
points of view, such institutions are surely permitted, without offending the first 
amendment, to seek a variety of backgrounds and experiences, in the hope that 
better  discussions  will  result.  If  Justice  Powell  is  right,  affirmative  action 
programs  can  be  similarly  justified.  The  simple  idea  here  is  that  diverse 
populations are likely to increase the range of thoughts and perspectives, and to 
reduce the risks of conformity, cascades, and polarization associated with group 
influences.386 We have seen that on the judiciary, judges with diverse views can 
act  as  “whistleblowers,”  correcting 
law.  In 
educational  institutions,  a  high  degree  of  diversity,  including  racial  diversity, 
often has the same effect. A racially uniform class is all too likely to polarize to an 
unjustified position, simply because students’ antecedent views are not subject to 
critical scrutiny. 

ill-considered  views  of  the 

 
For  example,  we  can  easily  imagine  all-white  classrooms,  discussing  the 
issue  of  racial  profiling,  in  which  the  absence  of  racial  diversity  is  a  serious 
problem. Those who have not had bad experiences, as a result of such profiling, 
will  lack  crucial  information.  Return  here  to  Justice  O’Connor’s  comments  on 
Justice Marshall: “Justice Marshall brought a special perspective. . . . His was the 
mouth of a man who knew the anguish of the silenced and gave them a voice. . . . 

                                                                                                                                                 
Broadcasting v. FCC, 497 US 547, 612 (1990), joined by Justices Rehnquist, Scalia, and Kennedy: 
“Modern  equal  protection  has  recognized  only  one  [compelling  state]  interest:  remedying  the 
effects of racial discrimination. The interest in increasing the diversity of broadcast viewpoints is 
clearly not a compelling interest. It is simply too amorphous, too insubstantial, and too unrelated 
to any legitimate basis for employing racial classifications.” 
385 I am unaware of any first amendment challenge to a university’s efforts to promote diversity 
by  promoting  a  range  of  views,  even  though  such  efforts  would  necessarily  involve 
discrimination  against  some  views  and  in  favor  of  others.  But  there  are  some  hard  questions 
lurking  here.  One  set  of  questions  involve  the  sheer  difficulty  of  proof:  In  a  case  in  which  a 
student is or is not denied admission, the applicant’s political view will undoubtedly be one of a 
range of factors, and it will be hard to isolate, in a challenge, point of view as the decisive factor. 
In  a  case  of  discharge  or  suspension  as  a  result  of  political  view,  there  would  indeed  be  a 
constitutional problem. See Pickering v. Bd. of Educ., 391 US 563, 568 (1968). 
386 For supportive evidence, see Patricia Gurin, Reports Submitted on Behalf of the University of 
Michigan:  the  Compelling  Need  for  Diversity  in  Higher  Education,  5  Mich  J  Race  &  Law  363 
(1999). 

93 

 

 

I have been perhaps most personally affected by Justice Marshall as a raconteur . 
. . . Occasionally, at Conference meetings, I still catch myself looking expectantly 
for his raised brow and his twinkling eye, hoping to hear, just once more, another 
story  that  would,  by  and  by,  perhaps change  the way I see the world.”387 What 
was  true  for  Justice  O’Connor  is  true  for  white  students  in  many  educational 
settings. In the context of racial profiling, and in many other imaginable cases, a 
degree  of  racial  diversity  is  likely  to  bring  to  bear  valuable  information  and 
perspectives. These may change how the group sees the world, whether or not it 
leads to a different conclusion on the merits. 
 
 
To say this is of course not to make the absurd claim that white people all 
agree with one another about racial profiling, or that African-Americans have the 
same experiences and opinions about that complex issue. And in light of the fact 
that  members  of  all  races  contain  people  with  a  range  of  both  favorable  and 
unfavorable  views  about  racial  profiling,  it  would  be  possible  to  respond  that 
any problem, if it exists, is not because the group is all-white, but if and because 
its members begin with a uniform view of racial profiling. And if this is so, what, 
if  anything,  is  added  by  promoting  diversity  not  of  views  but  of  racial 
background?  The  answer  must  be  that  African-Americans,  by  virtue  of  their 
experience, are able to add something to the discussion as such. And this seems 
far from implausible. If students need to know something about the magnitude 
and  the  experience  of  racial  profiling,  those  who  have  been  subject  to  such 
profiling  will  be  able  to  offer  novel  insights.  And  if  African-Americans  do,  in 
fact, have an unusually high degree of hostility to racial profiling, that is by itself 
a point worthwhile to know and to try to understand. So too if they do not show 
such hostility. Of course supplemental readings could be used to expose people 
to  diverse  views.  The  value  of  diversity  lies  not  simply  in  learning  about  facts, 
but  also  in  seeing  a  range  of  perspectives,  including  the  emotions  attached  to 
them—and  in  being  in  the  actual  physical  presence  of  those  who  have  those 
perspectives, and perhaps cannot be easily dismissed. 

 
 

These points might be used by a purportedly nondiscriminatory institution 
to  defend  a  set  of  policies  designed  to  ensure  a  reasonable  diversity  of  view  in 
classroom discussions. Because of the importance of a wide range of ideas to the 
educational  enterprise,  the  goal  seems  both  legitimate  and  compelling.  Are 
affirmative  action  programs  the  least  restrictive  means  of  promoting  that  goal? 
The  answer  depends  on  the  nature  of  those  programs.  It  is  easy  to  imagine 

                                                 
387 See Sandra Day O’Connor, Thurgood Marshall: The Influence of a Reconteur, 44 Stan. L. Rev. 
1217, 1217, 1220 (1992). 

94 

 

 
 

 
 

cautious efforts, using race as a factor, in which the “least restrictive means” test 
is indeed satisfied.388 And that point is sufficient to suggest that Justice Powell’s 
approach is essentially correct. 

To  be  sure,  the  same  arguments  about  the  importance  of  diverse  views 
might  be  enlisted  very  broadly,  and  in  circumstances  that  might  seem 
unattractive.  Imagine,  for  example,  an  effort,  by  a  mostly  African-American 
university,  to  point  to  the  need  for  diversity  as  a  way  of  defending 
discrimination  against  African-Americans  and  in  favor  of  whites.  Such  a 
university might claim that it wants significant representation by whites in order 
to  reduce  the  risks  from  group  influences  and  to  improve  the  quality  of 
discussion.  It  does  indeed  follow,  from  what  I  have  said  thus  far,  that  this 
argument is legitimate. A classroom that is entirely African-American might well 
suffer  from  conformity  effects  and  polarization;  and  a  educational  institution 
might  want  to  correct  the  situation.  If  courts  should  be  suspicious  of  the 
argument in this context, it is because they do not trust the sincerity of those who 
make it. Courts might believe that the reference to diversity is actually a pretext 
for  an  illicit  discriminatory  motive.  But  it  is  easy  to  imagine  cases  in  which 
diversity is the real concern and no pretext is involved.  

There  is  a  further  complexity.  Suppose  that  a  university  claims  that  it  is 
pursuing  the  goal  of  high-quality  education.  Suppose  that  it  insists  that  its 
admissions  policies,  which  place  a  premium  on  many  forms  of  diversity,  are  a 
legitimate means of pursuing that goal. Such a university might well be willing 
to  discriminate  in  favor  of  members  of  racial  minorities—and  might  well  claim 
that  this  form  of  discrimination  is  part  of  the  neutral  pursuit  of  high-quality 
education.  Is  this  illegitimate?  Outside  the  context  of  affirmative  action,  the 
Court has come very close to holding that it is.389 In making decisions about child 
custody, courts are prohibited from taking account of the possible prejudice to be 
faced by children of racially mixed couples. The prohibition applies even if it is 
defended  as  part  of  a  neutral  mechanism  for  promoting  the  welfare  of  the 
child.390  A  racially-based  system  of  child  custody  cannot  be  justified  on  the 
ground that in light of existing social values, children do better in a family that is 
all-white or all-African-American. This decision suggests that an institution is not 
permitted to defend otherwise illegitimate discrimination by suggesting that it is 

                                                 
388 This was the conclusion of the court of appeals about the program used by the University of 
Michigan Law School. See Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th Cir. 2002). 
389 See Palmore v. Sadoti, 466 US 429 (1984). 
390 See id. 

95 

 

 
 

neutrally  pursuing  a  more  abstract  goal.391  But  I  am  not  claiming  here  that 
affirmative  action  fails  to  count  as  discrimination.  I  am  urging  instead  that 
affirmative  action  can  be  adequately  justified,  in  some  contexts,  as  a  way  of 
ensuring that educational institutions do what they are supposed to do. 

It is important to emphasize the narrowness of the argument I am making. 
In some cases, racial diversity is important for improving the educational process 
within  the  relevant  school.  But  in  some  cases, the claim  seems extremely weak. 
Would a mathematics class, or a course in physics, be improved if it contained a 
degree of racial diversity? This seems unlikely. In principle, I do not believe that 
courts should use the Constitution to scrutinize affirmative action programs with 
great  care.392  But  the  law  is  otherwise,  and  if  courts  are  going  to  do  so,  they 
should  not  offer  a  blanket  ruling  for  or  against  a  diversity  rationale  in  higher 
education.  They  should  accept  that  rationale  in  the  context  of  undergraduate 
education,  but  not  for  programs  for  which  racial  diversity  is  not  necessary  to 
promote a “robust exchange of ideas.” In the context of law school, the centrality 
of racial issues to important aspects of legal education should be enough to allow 
narrowly 
tailored  affirmative  action  programs  to  survive  constitutional 
scrutiny.393 
 
Conclusion 
 
Human  beings  pay  close  attention  to  the  informational  and  reputational 
signals sent by others. These signals produce conformity, even in cases in which 
many  people  have  reason  to  believe,  on  the  basis  of  their  private  information, 
that others are mistaken or worse. Informational and reputational influences also 
produce  cascades,  in  which  people  do  not  rely  on,  and  fail  to  disclose,  the 
information that they themselves have. Cascades and errors occur spontaneously 
when  people  rationally  take  account  of  the  decisions  and  statements  of  their 
predecessors. Errors are magnified when people are rewarded for conformity—
and minimized when people are rewarded, not for correct individual decisions, 
but for correct decisions at the group level.  

 
Cascades,  like  conformity,  are  not  a  problem  in  themselves.  Sometimes 
cascades  produce  good  outcomes,  at  least  compared  to  a  situation  in  which 

                                                 
391  On  some  of  the  complexities  here,  see  David  A.  Strauss,  The  Myth  of  Colorblindness,  1986 
Supreme Court Review 99. 
392 See Cass R. Sunstein, Designing Democracy: What Constitutions Do (2002). 
393 See Grutter v. Bollinger, 288 F.3d 732 (6th Cir. 2002). 

96 

 

people  rely  solely  on  their  own  information.  The  real  problem  is  that  when 
cascades  are  occurring,  people  do  not  disclose  information  from  which  others 
would  benefit.  The  result  is  that  both  individuals  and  groups  can  blunder, 
sometimes  catastrophically.  Institutions  involved  in  making,  enforcing,  and 
interpreting the law are subject to conformity and cascade effects. The executive 
branch has been shown to blunder as a result.394 We have seen that within courts, 
precedential cascades are highly likely, especially in complex areas; and in such 
areas, cascades tend to be both self-perpetuating and self-insulating. 

 
The general lesson is clear. It is extremely important to devise institutions 
that  attempt  to  promote  disclosure  of  private  views  and  private  information. 
Institutions that reward conformity are prone to failure to the extent that they do 
not  do  that;  institutions  are  far  more  likely  to  prosper  if  they  create  a  norm  of 
openness  and  dissent.  The  point  very  much  bears  on  the  risks  of  group 
polarization. Groups of  like-minded people are likely to go to extremes, simply 
because of limited argument pools and reputational considerations. The danger 
is  that  the  resulting  movements  in  opinion  will  be  unjustified.  It  is  extremely 
important to create “circuit breakers”395 and to devise institutional arrangements 
that  will  serve  to  counteract  movements  that  could  not  be  supported  if  people 
had a wider range of information. 

 
These  points  have  implications  for  numerous  issues  in  law  and  policy.  I 
have  focused  on  a  small  subset  of  those  issues  here.  We  have  seen  that  an 
appreciation  of  social  influences  casts  new  light  on  the  expressive  function  of 
law.  Simply  by  virtue  of  what  it  says,  and  even  if  it  is  rarely  enforced,  law  can 
affect  the  behavior  of  those  who  are  unsure  whether  to  engage  in  certain 
conduct—and  also  the  behavior  of  those  who  are  unsure  whether  to  challenge 
those  who  engage  in  that  conduct.  Bans  on  smoking  in  public  and  on  sexual 
harassment are cases in point. Law’s effectiveness, in this regard, lies in its power 
to  give  a  signal  about  what  it  is  right  to  do,  and  also  to  dissipate  pluralistic 
ignorance,  by  providing  information  about  what  other  people  think  that  it  is 
right  to  do.  A  legal  enactment  can  operate  in  the  same  fashion  as  Asch’s 
confederates  and  Milgram’s  experimenter.  Because  people  care  about  the 
reactions  of  others,  law’s  expressive  function  will  be  heightened  if  the  relevant 
conduct is visible; bans on smoking in public places are an obvious example. For 
the same reason, that function will be weakened if prospective law-breakers live 
in  a  supportive  subcommunity;  consider  bans  on  the  use  of  narcotics.  With  an 

                                                 
394 See Janis, Groupthink, supra note, for a collection of examples. 
395 See Eric Posner, supra note. 

97 

 

understanding  of  social  influences,  we  can  therefore  make  some  predictions 
about  when  law  is  likely  to  be  effective  merely  by  virtue  of  what  it  says—and 
about  when  law  will  be  ineffective  unless  it  is  accompanied  by  vigorous 
enforcement activity.  

 
I  have  suggested  that  many  of  the  Constitution’s  institutions  serve  to 
reduce the likelihood of bad consequences from conformity, cascades, and group 
polarization. Such institutions increase the likelihood that important information, 
and  alternative  points  of  view,  will  receive  a  public  airing.  The  system  of 
bicameralism  is  the  most  obvious  example,  producing  a  system  in  which 
lawmaking  is  done  by  two  institutions  with  different  cultures,  thus  creating  a 
potential  check  on  unjustified  movements.  I  have  also  urged  that  the  framers’ 
most  distinctive  contribution  consisted  not  in  their  endorsement  of  deliberative 
democracy,  which  was  uncontroversial,  but 
to 
heterogeneity  in  government,  seeing  (in  Hamilton’s  words)  the  “jarring  of 
parties” as a method for “promoting deliberation.”  

their  commitment 

in 

 
More  controversially,  I  have  suggested  that  an  understanding  of  social 
influences suggests the importance of ensuring a high degree of diversity on the 
federal  bench.  It  is  foolish  to  pretend  that  Republican  appointees  do  not,  as  a 
class,  differ  from  Democratic  appointees;  and  we  have  reason  to  appreciate  the 
value,  on  any  panel,  of  having  a  potential  “whistleblower,”  in  the  form  of  one 
judge of a different party from the other two. Of course judges are rarely lawless, 
but a group of like-minded judges is prone to go to extremes. An appreciation of 
social influences on belief and behavior also supports the legitimacy of efforts to 
promote  racial  diversity  in  higher  education,  at  least  where  such  diversity  is 
likely to improve learning. 

 
Even if occasionally alarming, much of the behavior discussed here attests 
to the reasonableness and good sense of ordinary people. In the face of doubt, we 
do  well  to  pay  attention  to  the  views  of  others.396  After  all,  they  might  know 
better  than  we  do.  It  is  prudent  to  be  cautious  about  challenging  other  people, 
not only because they might be right, but also because people do not always like 
to  be  challenged.  Even  in  the  most  freedom-loving  societies,  people  dissent  at 
their  peril.  A  reluctance  to  disagree  is  not  merely  prudent;  it  is  often  courteous 
too.  But  conformity  creates  serious  dangers.  Behavior  that  is  sensible,  prudent, 

                                                 
396  Note  the  suggestion,  in  Goldstein  et  al.,  supra  note,  at  174,  that  conformity  operates  as  a 
sensible heuristic, one that often works well but that sometimes misfires, see Henrich et al., supra 
note, at 356–57. 

98 

 

and  courteous  is  likely  to  lead  individuals  and  societies  to  blunder,  simply 
because  people  fail  to  learn  about  facts  or  opinions  from  which  they  would 
benefit.  

 
It is usual to think that those who conform are serving the general interest 
and  that  dissenters  are  antisocial,  even  selfish.  In  a  way  this  is  true.  In  some 
settings,  conformists  strengthen  social  bonds,  whereas  dissenters  imperil  them, 
or at least introduce tension. But in an important respect, the usual thought has 
things backwards. Much of the time, it is in the individual’s interest to follow the 
crowd, but in the social interest for the individual to say and do what he thinks 
best.  Well-functioning  systems  of  law  and  politics  take  steps  to  discourage 
conformity and to promote dissent, partly to protect the rights of dissenters, but 
mostly to protect interests of their own. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 

99 

 

Chicago, IL  60637 
 
 

csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 

100 

 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 

6. 
7. 
8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other 
Unpublished Works:  An Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of 
Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 
1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 
1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A 
Quantitative Study (August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical 
Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning 
Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing 
Everyone Else Does) (April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial 
Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the 
Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) 

18.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory 

Adjudication (September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23.  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
24. 

J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan 
(August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property 
Protection of Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 

25. 
26. 

27. 

101 

 

28. 

29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 

36. 
37. 

38. 

46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 
1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime 
Consumption (January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) 
Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations 
from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for 
Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business 
Enterprise (April 1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology 
(November 1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 
J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law 
Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences 
Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) 

41. 

39. 
40.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes 
Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry 
Concealed Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and 
Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 

44. 
45.  William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay 

42. 
43. 

(March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: 
Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to 
the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through 
the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive 
Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  

51.  William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: 
A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are 
Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  

52. 

102 

 

53.  

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 
71. 

73. 

Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic 
Analysis of Law (March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are 
Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to 
Law and Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, 
Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 
1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, 
Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional 
Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and 
Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 
1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law 
(November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law 
(November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 
1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A 
AThird Way@ (January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 
1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods 
(February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with 
Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental 
Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 

72.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 

1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, 
Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private 
and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  

103 

 

74. 

75. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 

81. 

82. 
83. 

84. 
85. 
86. 

87. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation 
Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again 
(May 1999) 

76.  William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz 

Collection (May 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want 
Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a 
Function of Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial 
Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic 
than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special 
Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) 
Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal 
Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal 
Characteristics (November 1999) 

Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and 
Satire (November 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on 
Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and 
Complexity in Contracts (January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s 
Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: 
The Severity Shift (February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with 
Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 

88.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When 

104 

 

97. 

98. 

99. 

Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 
2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 
2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 
2000, revised May 2002)  

100.  Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
101.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
102.  Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative 

Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
103. 
104.  Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  
105. 

Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the 
Internet (November 2000) 

106.  Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
107.  Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent 

108. 

System (November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International 
Relations:  A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 

109.  William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
110. 
111. 

Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 
2000) 

112.  Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
113.  William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An 

Economic Approach (December 2000) 

114.  Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
115.  George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital 

(January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 

116. 
117.  Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer 

Finance (February 2001) 

118.  Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) 

119. 

(March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost-Benefit Analysis:  A Positive 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 

120.  Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital 

Age (April 2001) 

121.  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and 
the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 

122.  David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 

105 

 

123.  William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? 

124.  Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 

125.  Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The 

Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)   

126.  Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 

(May 2001) 

2001) 

2001) 

127.  Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
128.    Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
129.  Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property 

Transfer (July 2001) 

130.  Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for 

Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 

131.  Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably 

132. 
133. 

Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa  Bernstein,  Private  Commercial  Law  in  the  Cotton  Industry:    Creating 
Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 

134.  Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the 

Commons (August 2001) 

135.  Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
136. 

Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of 
Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an 
Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) 

137. 

138.  Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law 

(November 2001) 

139.  Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? 
Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
140.  Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha 

141. 

ASolution@ (February 2002) 
Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation 
(February 2002) 

142.  Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in 

Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 
2002) 

143.  Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation 

and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, forthcoming 
Journal of Legal Studies 2002) 

144.  Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended 

Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 

106 

 

145.  David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, forthcoming 

146. 

Texas Law Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success 
or Failure (March 2002) 

147.  Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution 

(April 2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) 

148.  David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, 

Coase Lecture February 2002) 

149.  Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) 
150.  Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving 

Federal Regulation?  Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 

151.  Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002) 
152.  Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 

153. 

2002) 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture:  
What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 

154.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright 

(July 2002) 

155.  Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the 

Government as Insurer? (July 2002) 

156.  Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
157.   Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
158.  Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with 

Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) 

159.  Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent 

160. 
161 

and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for 
Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of 
Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) 
163.  David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
164.  Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 

162. 

 

107 

