The Equal Chance to Have One's Vote Count
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein
Source: Law and Philosophy, Vol. 21, No. 2, In the Wake of Bush v. Gore: Law, Legitimacy and
Judicial Ethics (Mar., 2002), pp. 121-135
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3505127 .
Accessed: 10/06/2014 22:40

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Law and Philosophy.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

CASS R. SUNSTEIN* 

THE EQUAL CHANCE TO HAVE ONE'S VOTE COUNT 

Does the Constitution create a right to have an equal chance to have 
one's vote count? Is there an equal protection problem if, for no 
apparent reason, Linda's vote is more likely to count than Jane's? 
I believe that the answer to both questions is  "Yes." With this 
answer, I hope to put the 2000 election entirely to one side, and to 
mount a qualified defense of  the basic holding in Bush v. Gore.1 
I  suggest that the case  is  best understood as  an initial and prop- 
erly tentative step toward recognizing a new, but highly appealing, 
constitutional right. Because of  some unusual features in Bush v. 
Gore itself, I will not argue that the case was correctly decided. Nor 
do I mean to defend the justices who joined the majority opinion, 
or to  suggest that their votes were motivated by  the argument I 
will offer; it is hardly unfair to be suspicious about those justices' 
surprising enthusiasm for a new and quite aggressive use  of  the 
equal protection clause. But I will suggest that the Court's decision 
is rooted in a principle with both considerable appeal and genuine 
constitutional status. 

In brief, the Court's decision should be taken to suggest a consti- 
tutional right to  the  equal  chance  to  have  one's  vote  counted. 
Indeed, I  will  suggest that the Court's decision might suggest a 
still broader constitutionally right, involving an equal chance in 
the context of many constitutionally protected interests. I will also 
attempt to support the minimalist character of the opinion in Bush 
v. Gore, suggesting that the Court's narrow opinion can be defended 
as a sensible response to the Court's lack of information about the 
*  Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Depart- 
ment of Political Science, University of Chicago. For some sections of this paper, I 
have drawn on Cass R. Sunstein, Order Without Law, 68 U Chi L Rev 757 (2001), 
which approaches Bush v. Gore from a very different angle. I am grateful to Colin 
Macleod for valuable comments on a previous draft. 

1  121 S Ct 525 (2000). 

^  Law and Philosophy 21:  121-135,2002. 

?  2002 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands. 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

122 

CASS R. SUNSTEIN 

appropriate reach of the principle that it announced. In the process, 
I hope to cast some new light both on equality in voting and on 
minimalism as an approach to opinion-writing. 

I.  THE APPEAL  OF BUSH V GORE 

A.  Preliminaries: Of Voting and Chances 
Constitutional doctrine provides a range of protections for the right 
to vote. For example, the poll tax is  unconstitutional,2 and states 
must obey a principle of  "one person, one vote."3 In the last two 
decades, courts have moved very little beyond these basic rights. 
However, it should be clear that there remain numerous disparities 
in the treatment of both voters and ballots -  and hence that existing 
doctrine fails to exhaust the possible content of an equality principle 
in the context of voting. 

Consider a few illustrations. Some people live in areas that use 
state-of-the-art technology, making it highly likely that almost all 
votes in those areas will count. Other people live in areas with far 
more primitive technology, making it highly likely that some votes 
in those areas will not count.4 Some people must use ballots that 
are confusing, and that will  predictably ensure that a number of 
votes will fail to register; other people, in the same election in the 
same states, will use ballots that are not confusing, and that will 
baffle hardly anyone. Presidential elections are national, but voters 
in Alabama will have very different ballots and very different tech- 
nologies from voters in New York, and the result will be that some 
votes will be much more equal than others. 

In addressing one  or more of  these inequalities, courts could 
easily have built, long ago, on existing cases so as to create a consti- 
tutional principle giving each citizen an equal probability of having 
her vote actually counted in the ultimate tabulation. In fact, it is 
not easy to see why, before Bush v. Gore, some such right was not 
recognized or even urged. The likely answer is  that lawyers and 

Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections, 383 US 663 (1966). 

2 
3  Reynolds v. Simms, 377 US 533 (1964). 
4  Pamela Karlan, The Newest Equal Protection, in The Vote 77, 90 (Cass R. 

Sunstein and Richard A. Epstein eds. 2001). 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

THE EQUAL CHANCE TO HAVE ONE'S VOTE COUNT 

123 

judges usually think of  rights as involving outcomes, rather than 
probabilities, so that a state would not violate the equal protection 
clause so long as it offered each citizen the ability to cast a ballot, 
subject to existing technology and the one person-one vote rule. 
But in the context of  a challenge to an affirmative action scheme, 
the Court has emphasized that the Constitution creates a right not 
to  an outcome, but to an equal chance.5 It would not be a huge 
stretch from this idea to an equal right to the chance to have one's 
vote actually count. This equal right might well be accompanied by 
something like a "good chance" to have one's vote actually count, 
though in most real-world circumstances, the probability would be 
sufficiently high, and inequality is the serious problem. 

Of course it is not entirely clear what this principle would ulti- 
mately be taken to mean. Perhaps the relevant right should be only 
presumptive, allowing government to show legitimate reasons for 
any inequalities in the probability of  votes actually counting. But 
if voting qualifies as a fundamental right, as everyone agrees, there 
does seem to be a constitutional difficulty in any situation in which 
some people's ballots are more likely to count than others, if  no 
strong reason justifies the difference. 

B.  The Principle in Bush v. Gore 
It is possible to understand Bush v. Gore as embodying, in an initial 
and sensibly limited way, the principle just sketched. Announcing 
its fundamental motivation, the Court wrote, "The right to vote is 
protected in more than the initial allocation of the franchise. Equal 
protection applies as  well  to  the manner of  its exercise. Having 
once granted the right to vote on equal terms, the State may not, 
by later arbitrary and disparate treatment, value one person's vote 
over that of  another." Recall that the Florida Supreme Court had 
asked for a manual recount in four disputed counties, but without 
specifying how it would be decided whether ballots would count. 
The Court's concern was that no official in Florida had generated 
standards by which to discipline the relatively open-ended inquiry 
into "the intent of the voter." In the Court's view, "Florida's basic 
command ...  to consider the 'intent of the voter'" was "standard- 
less" and constitutionally unacceptable without "specific standards 

5  Northeastern  Florida  Chapter v. Jacksonville,  508  US  656  (1993). 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

124 

CASS R. SUNSTEIN 

to  ensure its  equal application ....  The formulation of  uniform 
rules based on these recurring circumstances is practicable and, we 
conclude, necessary."6 Without such rules, similarly situated ballots, 
and hence similarly situated voters, would be treated differently, and 
for no evident reason. 

The Court offered some details on the resulting equality problem. 
"A monitor in Miami-Dade County testified at trial that he observed 
that three members of the county canvassing board applied different 
standards in  defining a  legal  vote."7 Standards even  appeared 
to  have been changed "during the counting process," with Palm 
Beach County beginning "the process with a 1990 guideline which 
precluded counting completely attached chads," then switching "to 
a rule that considered a vote to be legal if any light could be seen 
through a chad," then changing "back to the 1990 rule," and then 
abandoning "any pretense of  a per se  rule."8 A  serious problem 
was that "the standards for accepting or rejecting contested ballots 
might vary not only from county to county but indeed within a single 
county from one recount team to another."9 This too was not merely 
speculation. "Broward County used a more forgiving standard than 
Palm Beach County, and uncovered almost three times as  many 
new votes, a result markedly disproportionate to the difference in 
population between the counties."10 

The Court also found a constitutional violation in the unequal 
treatment of  "overvotes" (meaning ballots that machines rejected 
because  more  than one  vote  had  been  cast)  and  "undervotes" 
(meaning ballots on which machines failed to  detect a vote, and 
which had been ordered to be re-examined). The Court objected 
that "the citizen whose ballot was not read by a machine because 
he failed to vote for a candidate in a way readable by a machine 
may still have his vote counted in a manual recount; on the other 
hand, the citizen who marks two candidates in a way discerable 
by the machine will not have the same opportunity to have his vote 
count, even if a manual examination of the ballot would reveal the 

6  121  S Ct. at 529-530. 
7  Id. at 529. 
8  Id. 
9  Id. at 531. 
10 Id. 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

THE EQUAL CHANCE TO HAVE ONE'S VOTE COUNT 

125 

requisite indicia of intent. Furthermore, the citizen who marks two 
candidates only one of  which is  discernable by the machine, will 
have his vote counted even though it should have been read as an 
invalid ballot."1l Here we seem to have an explicit recognition of a 
constitutional right to have an equal opportunity to ensure that one's 
vote is actually counted. 

To this, the Court added "further concerns."12 These included an 
absence of specification of "who would recount the ballots," leading 
to a situation in which untrained members of "ad hoc teams" would 
be involved in the process.13 And "while others were permitted to 
observe, they were prohibited from objecting during the recount."14 
Thus, the Court concluded that the recount process "is inconsistent 
with the minimum procedures necessary to protect the fundamental 
right of  each voter in the special instance of  a statewide recount 
under the authority of a single state judicial officer."15 

C.  Minimalism in Action: Shallow and Narrow 

This then, is the basic holding of Bush v. Gore. If the presidential 
controversy is bracketed, the holding appears to be quite plausible. 
To be sure, the Court did break new ground. While previous cases 
suggested that people could not be  deprived of  the right to vote, 
and even that each vote must count as one, no prior decision had 
suggested that the Constitution required an equal probability that 
a vote would count. Recognizing the novelty of  its approach, the 
Court seemed well aware that its suggestion, if taken as broadly as 
possible, could have explosive implications for the future, throwing 
much of state election law into constitutional doubt. Hence the Court 
went to great efforts to limit the reach of its holding: "The question 
before the Court is not whether local entities, in the exercise of their 
expertise, may develop different systems for implementing elec- 
tions. Instead, we are presented with a situation where a state court 
with the power to assure uniformity has ordered a statewide recount 

Id. 
2  Idat531. 
13 Id. 
14 Id. 
15 Id. 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

126 

CASS R. SUNSTEIN 

with minimal procedural safeguards."16 Thus, the Court attempted 
to limit its ruling to the particular problem before it: (a) a statewide 
recount (b) before a single judge. 

In  this  way,  the  Court ensured that its  decision  was  narrow 
rather than wide -  narrow in the sense that it covered the problem 
at hand without also covering other, apparently similar problems. 
The  narrow ruling ensures that Bush v.  Gore is  an  illustration 
of  the kind of judicial minimalism that characterizes the current 
Court.17 If narrowness is  a plausible response to ignorance about 
the consequences of a wider ruling, the Court's effort to settle the 
case, without ruling on much more, is  not so hard to understand. 
Of course skeptics might urge that the narrowness of the judgment 
shows that the Court did not take its own principle very seriously. 
This may be true; the future will tell. All I mean to suggest is that a 
narrow ruling makes a certain sense. I will return to this point below. 
At the same time, the Court's opinion was shallow rather than 
deep, in  the sense that it  lacked much in  the way of  theoretical 
ambition. The Court simply asserted that a manual recount, without 
a clear standard for determining the intent of the voter, was constitu- 
tionally unacceptable. It said little about what the equality principle 
should be taken to mean, in the context of voting or elsewhere, and 
relied instead on what it apparently took to be ordinary intuitions. 
The Court was therefore able to produce an "incompletely theorized 
agreement" on its equal protection ruling, attracting support from 
seven justices; the broad support for that ruling seems attributable, at 
least in part, to the fact that the Court did not offer a deep or conten- 
tious argument on its behalf. If incompletely theorized agreements 
have their virtues,18 then the minimalism of the Court's approach is 
not hard to defend. 

D.  A Thought Experiment: The Problem Without the Context 
To see the appeal of the Court's approach, on the issue of principle 
and scope, let us put aside the context of a hotly contested presiden- 
tial election, and imagine that in a relatively obscure and colorless 
election  -  involving,  say,  Iowa's  Attorney  General  -  a  state  court 

16 Id. 
17 See Cass R. Sunstein, One Case AtA Time (1999). 
18 As urged in Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996). 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

THE EQUAL CHANCE TO HAVE ONE'S VOTE COUNT 

127 

required a manual recount. Suppose that the state court also failed to 
provide standards to determine what would be counted as enough to 
show the "intent of the voter," and that in the recount, it was alleged 
that similar ballots were being treated altogether differently. In a 
case of this kind, it is easy to imagine that a federal court might be 
convinced to rule that the absence of standards was constitutionally 
defective. 

If the equal protection ruling has some appeal in the context of 
the election of  the Attorney General of  Iowa, it  is  also possible 
to  see  why a court might want to  limit the reach of  its holding, 
even to make the underlying judgment as narrow as possible. In any 
state, similarly situated voters are, much of the time, being treated 
differently. As  the Florida controversy shows, voters in  different 
counties will often use different ballots. The difference may mean 
that some voters will be confused, and their intended vote will fail 
to count, simply because of  the particular ballot selected by their 
county. Recall too that because of the different quality of different 
technologies, some ballots are less likely to count than others. Are 
these inequalities unconstitutional? To say the least, an affirmative 
answer would place courts in a difficult managerial position. In some 
situations, there might be special reasons to allow the inequalities 
to continue. For example, a judicial requirement of equality might 
require poor areas to purchase and use expensive technology, and 
this requirement might divert limited resources from other domains, 
involving food and shelter. Because the litigants are unlikely to raise 
these issues in advance, a court might take steps to narrow the reach 
of its decision, and to leave other questions undecided. 

Of course a narrow decision might be challenged as insufficiently 
principled. Perhaps it  could be  thought that if  there is  a  consti- 
tutional right to have an equal chance to have one's  vote count, 
then the Court should simply say so. But judge-made law typically 
operates through narrow, case-specific rulings, and for good reasons. 
Judges are not philosopher-kings; they have limited time and capa- 
cities; they lack the information that would permit them to know, at 
the time of one ruling, about the appropriate reach of the principle 
that governs the case at hand.19 What I am suggesting is that a ruling 

19 These points are elaborated in id. and Cass R. Sunstein, One Case AtA lime 
(1999). 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

128 

CASS R. SUNSTEIN 

in the Iowa case, and the decision in Bush v. Gore, can be seen as 
an initial stage toward the recognition of a principle whose precise 
contours should be determined only through confrontation with a 
wide range of contexts. 

II.  PROBLEMS AND  DEFECTS 

My hope is that the discussion thus far has been sufficient to estab- 
lish the plausibility of the equal protection ruling in Bush v. Gore 
and of the Court's effort to ensure that its decision did not extend 
far. (Recall that I am not saying anything about the motivations of 
the justices  who joined the majority opinion.) But there are two 
problems with this effort to defend Bush v. Gore. Taken together, the 
problems suggest that if (as I am urging) there is a right to an equal 
chance to have one's vote count, the Court's decision might well 
have compromised that right more severely than a manual recount 
would have done. The appropriate solution was to remand the case 
to Florida to continue the recount under sufficiently specific stand- 
ards. I emphasize this point not to criticize the Court, but to obtain a 
better understanding of the right on which I am focussing: the right 
to have an equal chance to have one's vote counted. 

A.  Inequalities Everywhere 
Why was the Florida Supreme Court concerned about allowing a 
manual recount? The best explanation would emphasize the possi- 
bility that such a recount would count votes that machines fail to 
register. Under the conditions in Florida, the very refusal to have a 
manual recount would compromise, and did compromise, the right 
to have an equal probability that one's vote will count. Indeed, the 
Court's decision might well  have created a problem of  inequality 
even more severe than the problem that it attempted to solve. There 
are a number of complexities here; political scientist Henry Brady 
summarizes the evidence with the suggestion that "by any reck- 
oning, the machine variability in undervotes and overvotes exceeds 
the volatility due to different standards by factors of ten to twenty. 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

THE EQUAL CHANCE TO HAVE ONE'S VOTE COUNT 

129 

Far more mischief, it  seems, can be  created by poor methods of 
recording and tabulating votes than by manual recounts."20 

More particularly, there were several inequalities in the certified 
vote in Florida. Under that vote, some machines counted votes that 
were left uncounted by other machines, simply because of different 
technology. Where optical scan ballots were used, for example, 
voters were far more likely to have their votes counted than where 
punch-card ballots were  used.  In  Florida, fifteen of  every one- 
thousand punch-card ballots showed no presidential vote, whereas 
only three of every one-thousand optically scanned ballots showed 
no such vote. In all likelihood, these disparities would have been 
reduced with a manual recount. If the principle of Bush v. Gore is 
taken seriously, manual recounts might even seem constitutionally 
compelled. But the Court's decision, forbidding manual recounts, 
ensured that the relevant inequalities would not be corrected. 

There were other problems. In the recount that produced the certi- 
fied vote, some counties merely checked the arithmetic, whereas 
others put ballots through a tabulating machine. The result is a signi- 
ficant difference in the effect of the recount. In any case, the manual 
recount was picking up many votes that machines failed to include. 
As  Pamela Karlan has written, the Court "never really confronted 
the magnitude of the inequalities produced in the first instance by 
Florida's use of  different voting technologies in different parts of 
the state. The Broward County recount discerned votes on about 
20 percent of the undervoted ballots, while the Palm Beach County 
recount, using a more stringent standard, recovered votes on about 
10 percent of the undervoted ballots."21 

If the constitutional problem consists of the different treatment of 
the similarly situated, then it seems entirely possible that the manual 
recount, under the admittedly vague "intent of the voter" standard, 
would have made things better rather than worse -  and that the 
decision of the United States Supreme Court aggravated the problem 
of unjustified inequality. Now perhaps the best response is that, what 
particularly concerned the Court was not the fact of inequality, but 

20 

Henry E. Brady, Equal Protection for  Votes (unpublished manuscript, Dec. 

11,2000). 
21 See Pamela Karlan, The Newest Equal Protection, in The Vote 77, 90 (Cas 
R. Sunstein and Richard A. Epstein eds. 2001). 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

130 

CASS R. SUNSTEIN 

the combination of inequality and process failure, through a manual 
recount that seemed to  have due process-type problems. Indeed, 
the Court did speak in  due process terms on  several points. But 
its holding was based on unjustified inequalities, and on that count, 
the certified vote had formidable problems. This does not mean that 
there was no problem with the manual recount, but it bears directly 
on the issue of remedy, to which I now turn. 

B.  Remedy 
If the equality principle requires an equal chance for votes to count, 
and if  a  manual recount would thus be  unconstitutional without 
clear standards, what is the appropriate federal response? There are 
questions here of both Florida law and federal constitutional law. 

The Supreme Court halted the manual recount for one simple 
reason: The Court thought it clear that the Florida Supreme Court 
would interpret Florida law so as to halt the process. As the Court 
wrote, "The Supreme Court of  Florida has  said  that the  legis- 
lature intended the State's electors to  'participate[  ] fully in the 
federal electoral process ....  Because it is evident that any recount 
seeking to meet the December 12 date will be unconstitutional for 
the reasons we  have discussed, we  reverse the judgment of  the 
Supreme Court of Florida ordering a recount to proceed."22 Thus, 
the Court concluded that as a matter of Florida law, a continuation 
of the manual recount "could not be part of an 'appropriate' order 
authorized by" Florida law.23 

Especially if  there is  a constitutional right to  an equal chance 
to have one's vote count, this seems to have been a blunder. The 
Florida courts had never been  asked to  say  whether they would 
interpret Florida law to require a cessation in the counting of votes, 
if the consequence of the counting would be to extend the choice 
of electors past December 12. In fact, the Florida Court's pervasive 
emphasis on the need to ensure the inclusion of lawful votes would 
seem to indicate that if  a choice must be made between the safe 
harbor and the inclusion of  votes, the latter might have priority. 
Notwithstanding what I have said here, it is hard to justify the United 
States Supreme Court's failure to allow the Florida Court to consider 
22  Bush  v. Gore,  121  S Ct at 533. 
23  Id. 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

THE EQUAL CHANCE TO HAVE ONE'S VOTE COUNT 

131 

this issue of Florida law. The more natural remedy would have been 
to say that a manual recount could continue, but only pursuant to 
standards that would ensure against unjustified inequality. 

All this leaves some simple conclusions. It was plausible for the 
Bush v. Gore Court to recognize a constitutional right to an equal 
chance to have one's vote count. The Court was quite correct to see 
that this right raises serious questions about a standard-free recount, 
especially  when the record shows that the  absence of  standards 
will result in genuine inequality. But the Court was wrong to focus 
myopically on the problems introduced by the standardless recount, 
without seeing that similar problems of inequality existed under the 
certified vote, and could be cured by a standard-governed recount. 
The correct remedy was therefore to remand to Florida for such a 
recount. On this count, the Court's decision cannot be justified.24 

With each passing day, the remedy issue is  becoming ancient 
history. For the future, what matters is not the remedy, but the under- 
lying right. What is its nature? What is its ultimate reach? I offer a 
few speculations here. 

III.  RIGHTS TO PROBABILITIES? 

A.  Voting 
In Bush v. Gore, the Court attempted, in conventional minimalist 
fashion, to limit the reach of its decision. But it should be clear that 
the attempt might not prove successful. To know whether Bush v. 
Gore should be taken as unique or instead as the initial step in a 
long line of cases, we need to know whether other situations, also 
involving an apparent violation of the as-yet-undefined right, can be 
meaningfully distinguished. Consider the following cases, given in 
descending order of closeness to Bush v. Gore itself: 
1. A  statewide recount is called, but it is run by separate judges 
in  separate counties, and no  single judge  oversees the entire 
process. 

2.  Poor counties have old machinery that successfully counts 97 
percent of votes; wealthy counties have newer machinery that 
24  I discuss this point in more detail in Sunstein, Order Without Law, supra 
note*. 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

132 

CASS R. SUNSTEIN 

successfully counts 99 percent of votes. Those in poor counties 
mount a constitutional challenge, claiming that the difference in 
rejection rates is a violation of the Equal Protection Clause. 
3.  Same as the immediately preceding case, except the division 
does not involve poor and rich counties. It is  simply the case 
that some areas use machines that have a near-perfect counting 
rate, and others do not. The distribution of machines seems quite 
random. 

4.  Ballots  differ from county to  county. Some  counties use  a 
version of the controversial "butterfly ballot"; most do not. It is 
clear that where the butterfly ballot is used, an unusual number 
of  voters are confused, and do  not successfully vote for the 
candidate of their choice. Does this violate the equal protection 
clause? 

5.  It  is  a  national election.  Citizens in  Alabama use  different 
machinery from  that  used  by  citizens  in  New  York. The 
consequence is  that citizens in  Alabama are far more likely 
to have their votes uncounted than citizens in New  York. Do 
they have a valid equal protection claim? What if the statistical 
disparity is very large? 

The Bush v. Gore Court's suggestion that ordinary voting raises 
"many complexities" is  correct; but how  do  those  complexities 
justify unequal treatment in the cases just given? The best answer 
would  point  to  three practical points: logistical  considerations, 
which can make it hard to provide uniformity; budgetary considera- 
tions, which can make it difficult for some areas to provide the same 
technology as others; and the tradition of local control, which makes 
federal judges reluctant to mandate similar treatment of people in 
different areas. In case  (1),  logistical considerations are the only 
distinguishing feature from Bush v. Gore, and it is  hard to argue 
that those considerations should be decisive. It is certainly feasible, 
in case (1), to ensure a degree of uniformity. 

In case  (2),  no recount is  involved, and it would of  course be 
unusual for federal courts to require different counties to have the 
same technology. Wealthy counties might prefer to purchase more 
expensive machinery, whereas poorer communities might devote 
their limited resources to other problems. Perhaps judicial caution in 
cases (2), (3) and (5) can be justified in this way. But this is far from 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

THE EQUAL CHANCE TO HAVE ONE'S VOTE COUNT 

133 

entirely clear. Case (2) involves a form of wealth discrimination, and 
it therefore seems a stronger case for judicial involvement than case 
(3),  where the inequality does not place poor voters at a compar- 
ative disadvantage. But can the randomness be justified? On what 
grounds? It is not clear that the tradition of local control should be 
sufficient. In case (4), budgetary considerations do not seem in play, 
and it would be easy to imagine a plausible constitutional attack if 
voters in one area are subject to confusing ballots not used in other 
counties. Case (5) is the least likely setting for judicial involvement, 
simply because of  the longstanding practice of  state control over 
ballots and technologies, and because a constitutional attack on that 
practice would place courts in an uncomfortable managerial role. 

My goal here is to give a flavor of the relevant questions, not to 
resolve them. But at the very least, Bush v. Gore plainly suggests 
the legitimacy of both state and national action designed to combat 
disparities of this kind. It is for this reason that the Court's decision, 
however narrowly intended, set out a rationale that might well create 
an extremely important (and appealing) innovation in the law of 
voting rights. Perhaps legislatures will respond to the invitation if 
courts refuse to do so. 

B.  Beyond Voting: Equal Chances 
In  fact,  the  Court's rationale might extend  more  broadly still. 
Outside the context of voting, governments do not impose the most 
severely imaginable constraints on official discretion, and the result 
is  to deprive people of  equal probabilities of  facing constitution- 
ally  significant burdens and receiving constitutionally significant 
benefits. Because discretion exists, the similarly situated are treated 
differently.25 

In the  abstract, the question might seem fanciful; but related 
constitutional challenges are hardly unfamiliar. In the  1960's and 
1970's,there was an effort to use the Due Process and Equal Protec- 
tion Clauses to try to  ensure more rule-bound decisions, in  such 
contexts as licensing and admission to public housing.26 Plaintiffs 
25  This is  the basic theme of  Kenneth Culp Davis, Discretionary Justice: A 
Preliminary Inquiry (Louisiana State 1969). 

Horsby  v. Allen, 326 F2d 605 (5th Cir 1964); Holmes v. NYCHA, 398 F2d 

26 

262 (2d Cir 1968). 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

134 

CASS R. SUNSTEIN 

argued that without clear criteria to discipline the exercise of discre- 
tion, there was a risk that the similarly situated would not be treated 
similarly, and that this risk was constitutionally unacceptable. But 
outside of the most egregious settings, these efforts failed,27 appar- 
ently on the theory that rule-bound decisions produce arbitrariness 
of their own, and courts are in a poor position to know whether rules 
are better than discretionary judgments. Does Bush v. Gore require 
courts to extend the limited precedents here? 

Perhaps not. Perhaps it can be suggested that because the choice 
between rule-bound and more discretionary judgments is  difficult 
in  many cases, judicial deference is  generally appropriate -  but 
not  when  fundamental rights, such  as  the  right to  vote,  are at 
risk. If  so,  Bush v.  Gore has  a  limited scope.  But the  scope  is 
still quite large. Perhaps the most obvious example is the "beyond 
a reasonable doubt" standard for criminal conviction, a  standard 
that different juries will  inevitably interpret in  different ways. Is 
this unacceptable? A  possible answer is  that no more rule-bound 
approach would be  better, all things considered. This is  a differ- 
ence from Bush v. Gore, where it was easy to imagine a rule-bound 
approach that would add constraints on discretion without sacrifi- 
cing any important value. But does this mean that methods must be 
in place to ensure against differential treatment of those subject to 
capital punishment? To life  imprisonment? I cannot resolve these 
questions here. But for better or for worse, the rationale in Bush 
v. Gore, sympathetically viewed, appears to make it necessary to 
consider these issues anew. 

CONCLUSION 

In this essay, I have attempted to defend two aspects of the Court's 
opinion. First, I have urged that the equal protection clause is plaus- 
ibly read to create an equal chance to have one's vote actually count 
-  and that the context of  a manual recount, before a single judge, 
is an exceedingly strong one for the initial recognition of that right. 
27  For examples of unsuccessful attempts to challenge unconditioned discretion 
violative of Equal Protection in these contexts, see Phelps v. Housing Authority as 
of Woodward, 742 F2d 816 (4th Cir 1984); Atlanta Bowling Center, Inc v. Allen, 
389 F2d 713 (5th Cir 1968). 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

THE EQUAL CHANCE TO HAVE ONE'S VOTE COUNT 

135 

Second, I have urged that the minimalist character of  the Court's 
opinion also makes a great deal of sense, because in a single case, 
let alone one decided under such pressure, it is simply too difficult to 
decide the reach of the equal protection holding. If we put together 
the equal protection principle with some enthusiasm for judicial 
minimalism, we  will  be  well  on  the  way  toward a  sympathetic 
understanding of much of the opinion in Bush v. Gore. 

At the same time, I have urged that the defense of the outcome 
ultimately fails. The decision to  stop the manual recount created 
equal protection problems at least as great as those that the Court 
attempted to prevent. There was no sufficient reason not to remand 
the case  to  permit votes  to  be  counted under a  properly discip- 
lined process. But in  a  way, these qualifications are a  matter of 
detail. Once the Presidential Election of  2000  is  put to one  side, 
it is possible to see that in the domain of voting, as in many other 
contexts, the right to an equal chance has large and inadequately 
appreciated possibilities. 

University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL 60637 
USA 

This content downloaded from 195.34.78.135 on Tue, 10 Jun 2014 22:40:07 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

