Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The American Economic Review. http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 132.211.1.50 on Thu, 20 Aug 2015 22:44:55 UTC 
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions BEHAVIORAELCONOMICSP,UBLICPOLICYA,ND PATERNALISMt 
LibertarianPaternalism 
By RICHARDH. THALERANDCASSR. SUNSTEIN* 
sider the term "paternalistic"to be derogatory. Most would think that the phrase libertarian paternalismis an oxymoron.The modestgoal of this essay is to encourageeconomists to rethink their views on paternalism.We believe thatthe anti-paternalistic fervor expressed by many economists is based on a combinationof a false assumption and at least two misconceptions. The false assumptionis thatpeople always (usually?) make choices that are in theirbest interest. This claim is either tautological, and therefore uninteresting,or testable. We claim that it is testable and false-indeed, obviously false. 
The first misconceptionis that there are viable alternativesto paternalism.In many situations, some organizationor agent must make a choice thatwill affect the choices of some other people. The point applies to both private and public actors. Considerthe problem facing the directorof a company cafeteria who discovers that the order in which food is arrangedinfluences the choices people make. To simplify, consider three alternative strategies: (1) she could make choices thatshe thinkswould make the customers best off; (2) she could make choices at random;or (3) she could maliciously choose those items that she thinks would make the customers as obese as possible. Option 1 *Discussants: RobertE. Hall, StanfordUniversity;Gary Becker, Universityof Chicago;RobertBarro,HarvardUniversity. 175 appears to be paternalistic, which it is, but would anyone advocate options 2 or 3? 
The second misconceptionis thatpaternalism always involves coercion. As the cafeteria example illustrates,the choice of which order to presentfood items does not coerce anyoneto do anything, yet one might prefer some orders to others on paternalisticgrounds. Would many object to puttingthe fruitbefore the desserts at an elementary school cafeteria if the outcome were to increasethe consumptionratioof apples to Twinkies?Is this questionfundamentallydifferentif the customersareadults?If no coercion is involved, we think that some types of paternalism should be acceptable to even the most ardentlibertarianW.e call such actions libertarian paternalism. 
In our understandinga, policy counts as "paternalistic" if it is selected with the goal of influencing the choices of affected parties in a way that will make those partiesbetteroff. We intend"betteroff' to be measuredas objectively as possible, andwe clearlydo not always equate revealed preference with welfare. That is, we emphasize the possibility that in some cases individuals make inferior choices, choices that they would change if they had complete information, unlimited cognitive abilities, and no lack of willpower. Once it is understoodthat some organizational decisions are inevitable, that a form of paternalismcannot be avoided, and thatthe alternativesto paternalism(such as choosing options to make people sick, obese, or generally worse off) are unattractive,we can abandonthe less interestingquestionof whether to be paternalisticor not and turn to the more constructivequestion of how to choose among paternalisticoptions.1 
Colin related issues. That paper shares with the papers in this AEA PAPERSAND PROCEEDINGS 
I. Are ChoicesRational? 
should be free from interference is usually based on the assumptionthat people do a good job of makingchoices, or at least thatthey do a far betterjob thanthirdpartiescould do. As far as we can tell, there is little empirical support for this claim. Research by psychologists and economists over the past three decades has raised questions about the rationality of the judgmentsand decisions thatindividualsmake. People do not exhibit rationalexpectations,fail to make forecasts that are consistent with Bayes' rule, use heuristics that lead them to make systematic blunders, exhibit preference reversals(thatis, they preferA to B and B to A) and make different choices depending on the wording of the problem see the two recent collections of papers by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky [2000] andby ThomasGilovich et al. [2002]) Furthermore, in the context of intertemporalchoice, people exhibit dynamic inconsistency, valuing present consumption much more than future consumption.In other words, people have selfcontrol problems session [James Choi et al., 2003b; Ted O'DonoghueandMatthewRabin,2003] for details and references) 
Many economists are skeptical of some of these findings, thinking that people may do a betterjob of choosing in the "realworld"than they do in the laboratory.However, studies of actual choices for high stakes reveal many of the same problems. For example, the Surgeon General reports that 61 percent of Americans are either overweight or obese. Given the adverse effects obesity has on health, it is hardto claim that Americansare eating optimal diets. 
of savings behavior.Shlomo Thaler (2002 the portfolios they have selected in their defined-contributionsavings plans. Employees volunteeredto sharetheirportfoliochoices with the investigators (by bringing a copy of their session the commongoal of devisingpolicies thathelp some agentswho aremakingsome mistake,while minimizingthe costs imposed on others. most recent statementto the lab). They were then shown the probabilitydistributionsof expected retirementincome for three investment portfolios just labeled A, B, and C. Unbeknownst to the subjects, the three portfolios were their own and portfolios mimicking the averageand medianchoices of theirfellow employees. The distributionsof expected returns were computedusing the softwareof Financial Engines, the financial information company founded by William Sharpe. On average, the subjectsratedthe averageportfolioequallywith theirown portfolio,andtheyjudged the median portfolioto be significantlymore attractivethan their own. Indeed, only 20 percent of the subjects preferredtheir own portfolio to the median portfolio. Apparently,people do not gain much by choosing investment portfolios for themselves. 
II. Is PaternalismInevitable? 
illustrates, planners are forced to make some design choices. A simple and importantexample is the selection of a "default option" to determine what happens if an agent fails to choose for himself. In a fully rational world such design choices would have little effect (at least in high-stakes situations) because agents would simply choose the best option for them regardless of the default. However, numerous experimentsillustratethatthereis a very strong "statusquo" bias Richard Zeckhauser, 1988; Kahneman et al., 1991) out by private institutions or by government, tends to stick. 
from studies of automaticenrollmentin 401(k) employee savings plans. Most 401(k) plans use an opt-in design. When employees firstbecome eligible to participatein the 401(k) plan, they receive some plan informationand an enrollment form that must be completed in order to join. Under the alternativeof automaticenrollment, employees receive the same information but aretold thatunless they opt out, they will be enrolled in the plan (with some default options for savings rates and asset allocation). In companies that offer a "match" (the employer matches the employee's contributionsaccording to some formula, often a 50-percentmatch up to some cap), most employees eventuallydo join the plan, but enrollments occur much sooner under automaticenrollment.For example, Brigitte found that initial enrollmentsjumped from 49 percentto 86 percent,and similarresults for other companies. 
Should the adoptionof automaticenrollment be consideredpaternalistic?And, if so, shouldit therefore be seen as a kind of officious meddling with employee preferences?We answer these questions yes and no respectively. If the employer thinks (correctly, we believe) that most employees would preferto join the 401(k) plan if they took the time to think about it and did not lose the enrollmentform,thenby choosing automaticenrollmentthey are acting paternalistically. They are attempting to steer employees' choices in directions that will promote employees' welfare. But since no one is forced to do anything, we think this steering should be considered unobjectionableto libertarians.The employer must choose some set of rules, and either plan affects employees' choices. No law of nature says that, in the absence of an affirmativeelection by employees, zero percent of earnings will go into a retirement plan. Because both plans alter choices, neitherone can be said, more than the other, to count as a form of objectionable meddling. 
Quick-mindedreaders might be tempted to think that there is a way out of this dilemma. Employers could avoid choosing a default if they requiredemployees to make a choice, eitherin or out. But some thoughtreveals thatthis is not at all a way out of the dilemma;rather,it is simply anotheroption among many that the employer can elect. In fact, Choi et al. (2003a) findthatthis ruleincreasesenrollments(relative to the opt-in rule) though by not as much as automaticenrollment.Furthermoret,he very requirementthat employees make a choice has a paternalisticelement. Many employees do not want to have to make a choice (and would choose not to have to do so). Should employers really force them to choose? 
Why, exactly, does the setting of defaults have such large effects? With respect to savings, the designateddefaultplan apparentlycarries a certain legitimacy for many employees, perhapsbecause it seems to have resultedfrom some conscious thoughtaboutwhat makesmost sense for most people. But there is a separate explanation, involving inertia. For any employee, a change from any status quo entails time andeffort, andmanypeople seem to prefer to avoid both of these, especially if they are proneto procrastinationW.hen defaultrules are "sticky" and affect choices as a result, inertia might be the majorreason. 
Forpresentpurposes,the choice amongthese variousexplanationsdoes not muchmatter.The point is only that paternalism,in the form of effects on individualchoices, is often unavoidable. When paternalismseems absent,it is usually becausethe startingpointappearsso natural and obvious that its preference-shapingeffects are invisible to most observers. But those effects are nonetheless there. Of course it is usually good not to block choices, and we do not mean to defend non-libertarian paternalism here. But in an important respect, the antipaternalisticposition is incoherent. 
III. Beyondthe Inevitable(but Still Libertarian) 
The inevitabilityof paternalismis most clear when the plannerhas to choose defaultrules. It is reasonableto ask whetherthe plannershould go beyond the inevitable. Take the cafeteria example discussed above. Putting the fruit before the dessertsis a fairly mild intervention.A more intrusive step would be to place the desserts in anotherlocation altogether,so that diners have to get up and get a dessert after they have finished the rest of their meal. This step raises the transactionscosts of eating dessert, and accordingto a standardeconomic analysis the proposal is unattractive:it seems to make dessert-eatersworse off and no one better off. But once self-controlcosts are incorporated,we can see that some diners would prefer this arrangement,namely, those who would eat a dessert if it were put in front of them but would resist temptationif given a little help. To the extent that the dessert location is not hard to find, and no choice is forbidden,this approach meets libertarianmuster. 
In the domain of employee savings, Thaler andBenartzi(2003) have proposeda methodof increasing contributions to 401(k) plans that also meets the libertariantest. Under this plan, AEAPAPERSAND PROCEEDINGS called Save More Tomorrow, employees are invited to sign up for a programin which their contributionsto the savings plan are increased annuallywhenever they get a raise. Once employees join the plan, they stay in until they opt out or reach the maximum savings rate in the plan. In the first company to use this plan, the employees who joined increased their savings rates from 3.5 percentto 11.6 percentin a little over two years (three raises). Very few of the employees who join the plan drop out. This is successful libertarianpaternalismin action. 
IV. How to Choose:The Toolbox 
of the LibertarianPaternalist 
mean to include anyone who must design plans for others, from human-resourcedirectors to bureaucratsto kings) choose among possible systems, given that some choice is necessary? We suggest two approachesto this problem. 
If feasible, a comparison of possible rules should be done using a form of cost-benefit analysis.The goal of a cost-benefit studywould be to measurethe full ramificationsof any design choice. To illustrate,take the example of automaticenrollment.Under automaticenrollment some employees will join the plan who otherwise would not. Presumably, some are made better off (especially if there is an employer match), but some may be made worse off (e.g., those who are highly liquidityconstrained).If the issue were just enrollment, we would guess thatthe gains would exceed the losses. We base this guess partly on revealed choices. Most employees do join the plan eventually, and very few who are automaticallyenrolled opt out when they figure out what has happenedto them. We also judge thatthe costs of having too little saved up for retirementare typically greaterthanthe costs of having saved too much. 
In many cases, however, the plannerwill be unable to make a direct inquiry into welfare, eitherbecause too little informationis available or because the costs of doing the analysis are not warranted.The committed anti-paternalist might say, in such cases, that people should simply be permittedto choose as they see fit. We hope thatwe have said enoughto show why this response is unhelpful.Whatpeople choose often depends on the startingpoint, and hence the startingpoint cannot be selected by asking whatpeople choose. In these circumstances,the libertarianpaternalistwould seek indirectproxies for welfare:methodsthattest whetherone or anotherapproachis welfare-promotingwithout relying on unreliable guesswork about that question. We suggest three possible methods. 
First, the libertarianpaternalistmight select the approachthat the majoritywould choose if explicit choices were required and revealed. Useful though it is, this market-mimickingapproach raises its own problems. Perhaps the majority's choices would be insufficiently informed. Perhaps those choices, in fact, would not promotethe majority'swelfare.At least as a presumption,however, it makes sense to follow those choices, if the planner knows what they would be. A deeper problem is that the majority's choices might themselves be a functionof the startingpoint or the default rule. If so, the problem of circularity dooms the marketmimicking approach. But in some cases, at least, the majorityis likely to go one way or the otherregardlessof the startingpoint;andto that extent, the market-mimickingstrategy seems quite workable. 
Second, the libertarianpaternalistmight select the approachthat would force people to make their choices explicit. This approach might be chosen if the market-mimickingstrategy fails, eitherbecause of the circularityproblem or because the planner does not know which approachwould in fact be chosen by the majority.We have seen the possibilityof forced choices in the context of retirementplans; it would be easy to findotherexamples.Here too, however, thereis a risk thatthe choices thatare actually elicited will be inadequatelyinformed or will not promote welfare. In the case of retirementplans, for example, forced choices have been found to produce higher participation rates than requiring opt-ins, but lower rates than requiringopt-outs. If it is likely that automatic enrollment is welfare-promoting, perhaps automatic enrollment should be preferred over forced choices. The only suggestion is that, where the social planneris unsure how to handle the welfare question, he might devise a strategythatrequirespeople to choose. 
Third,the libertarianpaternalistmight select the approachthat minimizesthe numberof optouts. For example, very few employees opt out of the 401(k) plan when they are automatically enrolled,thoughmany opt in underthe standard enrollmentprocedure.This is an ex post inquiry into people's preferences,in contrastto the ex ante approachfavoredby the market-mimicking strategy.With those numbers,thereis reasonto thinkthatautomaticenrollmentis better,if only because morepeople are sufficientlysatisfiedto leave it in place. 
V. Conclusion 
Our goal here has been to defend libertarian paternalism, an approach that preserves freedom of choice but that authorizesboth private and public institutionsto steer people in directions thatwill promotetheirwelfare. Some kind of paternalismis likely whenever such institutions set out arrangementsthat will prevail unless people affirmativelychoose otherwise. In these circumstances,the goal shouldbe to avoid random, arbitrary,or harmful effects and to produce a situation that is likely to promote people's welfare, suitably defined. 
