The JBHE Foundation, Inc

Affirmative Action in Higher Education: Why Grutter Was Correctly Decided
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein
Source: The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education, No. 41 (Autumn, 2003), pp. 80-83
Published by: The JBHE Foundation, Inc
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3133777 .
Accessed: 22/06/2014 15:33

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

The JBHE Foundation, Inc is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal
of Blacks in Higher Education.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 188.72.126.182 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 15:33:15 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Affirmative Action in Higher Education: 
Why Grutter Was Correctly Decided 
by Cass R. Sunstein 

Editor's  Note:  A major  constitutional  scholar  contends  that conservatives  on  the  Court failed  to see  that 
affirmative  action  in higher  education  is  an  important  and  constitutionally  protected  institutional  liberty. 

Cass R. 

Sul 

nstein 

N Grutter v. Bollinger, the Supreme Court upheld an 
affirmative action program at  the  University of 
Michigan Law School. In Gratz v. Bollinger, the 
Supreme Court struck down the undergraduate 
affirmative action program at the same univer- 
sity. 
I believe that Grutter was correctly decided 
and that Gratz was a big mistake. The reason 
has everything to do with the importance of 
judicial restraint -  an idea that should have 
special power in the context of educational 
policy, which ought to be set by educators, not 
judges. Affirmative action may or may not be a 
good idea, but the Constitution does not forbid 
it. Federal judges should allow educational insti- 
tutions, subject as they are to political constraints, to reject 
or embrace affirmative action as they see fit. It is ironic 
indeed that conservatives, who have been rightly skeptical 
of judicial activism, now embrace an extreme form of judi- 
cial activism in their attack on affirmative action. 

"Grutter was correctly decided. But the Gratz decision 
was a big mistake." 

To understand my position, we need to back up a bit. In 
higher education, the basic constitutional framework was 
established in the famous Bakke case, decided in 1978. The 
Court's ruling was set out by Justice Lewis Powell, who 
broke a tie between four justices who wanted to require 
color-blindness and four justices who would have permitted 
colleges and universities a great deal of room to maneuver 
in their affirmative action programs. Justice Powell ac- 
knowledged that racial diversity was a legitimate and even 
compelling interest for schools of higher education to pur- 

Cass R. Sunstein is Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of 
Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago School of Law. His most recent 
book is Why Societies Need Dissent (Harvard University Press). 

sue. He pointed to the need for courts to respect reasonable 
choices by educators. But he insisted that diversity could, 
and must, be achieved through methods that were flexi- 
ble and that avoided racial rigidity. In his view, a 

stein 

quota system was constitutionally unacceptable. 
On the other hand, a university could consider 
race "as a  factor" alongside other factors. 
_{H^  ~Hence colleges and universities could give a 
to African-American candidates -  so 
l 1_  Iboost 
llong as every applicant received individual 
I_/^ 
consideration. 
For decades, then, the law was reasonably 
clear. Quota systems would be struck down, but 
colleges and universities could consider race as 
a plus. The hard questions arose only when a 
program did not clearly fall within one of Justice Powell's 
two categories. 
In the last decade and more, however, the Supreme Court 
has been increasingly skeptical of affirmative action pro- 
grams, and it has struck down a number of those programs. 
There are many ironies here, especially because the attack 
on affirmative action has been led by those ordinarily char- 
acterized as conservatives. The two leading conservatives 
on the Court, Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas, 
claim to be committed to "originalism" as a method of con- 
stitutional interpretation. For originalists, the meaning of 
the Constitution is settled by asking what the document 
meant when it was originally ratified. And to their credit, 

"Affirmative action  was  accepted  by those  who 
ratified the equal protection  clause  of the 
Fourteenth Amendment." 

Justices Scalia and Thomas do usually practice the method 
that they preach. But in the context of affirmative action, 
originalism apparently goes down the drain. A great deal of 
historical work suggests that affirmative action was accept- 

80 

AUTUMN  2003 

This content downloaded from 188.72.126.182 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 15:33:15 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION: WHY GRUTTER WAS CORRECTLY DECIDED 

| 

. 

, 

\ 

< 

i . 

ed by those who ratified the equal 
protection clause.* In the aftermath 
of the Civil War, Congress engaged 
in numerous race-conscious efforts, 
singling out African Americans for 
special help. Perhaps the historical 
work is mistaken; but Justices Scalia  - 
and Thomas have not even bothered 
to investigate it. 
i 
In any case many members of the 
current Court claim to be committed 
to  judicial restraint. Those  who  . 
believe in judicial restraint are reluc- I- 
tant to disturb the practices of state 
and  local  authorities unless  the  - 
Constitution clearly requires them to i 
do so. But in the context of affirma- 
tive action, the Court has shown lit- 
tle reluctance to  forbid states and 
localities from  doing  what they 
would like to do. In the context of  -j 
affirmative action,  restraint, along 
with originalism, has  been aban- - 
doned. (Note that the Constitution 
does not apply to the acts of private 
universities, which are governed by 
civil rights laws instead; the Consti- ~ 
tution is  applicable only to public 
institutions and public universities.) 
Thus the stage was set for Grutter 
and Gratz, the  Court's first real 
encounter with affirmative action in 
higher education since Bakke. Es- 
sentially the Court reaffirmed the 
line drawn by Justice Powell: flexible affirmative action 
programs are permissible, but rigid ones are not. In Grutter, 
the Court upheld the law school's program, concluding that 
it was sufficiently flexible. The University of  Michigan 
Law School used race as a "plus" but its program was "nar- 
rowly tailored," in the sense that the law school imposed no 
quota, reserved no places, and instead ensured individual- 
ized consideration of every applicant. Writing for the Court, 

1  . 

| 
^ 

I 0[ 

*See  Jed Rubenfeld, "Affirmative Action," 107 Yale L.H.J. 427,  430-32 
(1997); Eric Schnapper, "Affirmative Action and the Legislative History of 
the Fourteenth Amendment," 71 Va. L. Rev. 753 (1985). 

K  \ 

Justice Sandra Day O'Connor said that "a university's 
admissions program must remain flexible enough to 
ensure that each applicant is evaluated as an individ- 
ual and not in a way that makes an applicant's race 
or ethnicity the defining feature of his application." 
The law school had no mechanical or predeter- 
mined system of  diversity "bonuses," and it 
considered a wide range of qualities and expe- 
riences in addition to race. For these reasons, 
its program was acceptable. True, the law 
school sought to obtain a "critical mass" of 
African Americans, but it pursued this 
goal without compromising its commit- 
1 \  7^ ment to give individualized considera- 

i{ 

'4^7  J/ 

tion to every applicant. 
The  principal  dissenting 
opinion in Grutter came from 
^Justice Clarence Thomas. His 
opinion was exceptionally elo- 
L , 9^  ~  quent, not least because of its 
,  insistence on the moral impor- 
'  ' 
tance  of  considering  people's 
' 
'v  merits, not their skin color. But 
'o g 
- Justice Thomas' eloquent words 
b 
would be far more convincing 
from a politician than from a 
judge  who  is  committed to 
originalism and judicial  re- 
straint.  Justice  Thomas 
stresses the views of only 

d^ 
' 

.  - 
rK'- 

r 

\ 

" 

r  o^' ,& 
' 

.  ?- 
.VT 
' * 
. 
'-g  * "? "'; 

i 

;.* 

.:ht0*, 
- 
.* 

'3/ X  WiL\^K 

O  , 

erick Douglass. Of course 
Douglass was  a  great 
man, and his views are 
entitled to great respect. But to say the least, Douglass was 
not an author of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Consti- 
tution; and for an originalist, as Justice Thomas purports to 
be, Frederick Douglass should have little authority. 
Things are worse still. In his Grutter dissent, Justice 
Thomas calls for an extraordinary exercise in judicial 
activism - 
simply because his color-blindness principle 
would invalidate the voluntary practices of countless edu- 
cational institutions in numerous states and localities. Worst 
of all, Justice Thomas does not defend his color-blindness 
-0 a) 
principle by reference to history, even though a great deal of 

co 

o 
cc 

AUTUMN  2003 

81 

This content downloaded from 188.72.126.182 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 15:33:15 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

THE JOURNAL OF BLACKS IN HIGHER EDUCATION 

Conservative Panel Attacks the Grufter Decision 

onservatives, almost without exception, view Justice 
O'Connor's recent ruling upholding the affirmative 

action policies at the University of Michigan School of 
Law as a profound subversion of the constitutional order of 
the United States. 
In a symposium entitled "Has the Supreme Court Gone 
Too Far?" appearing in the October issue of the conserva- 
tive journal Commentary, former Supreme Court nominee 
Robert H. Bork writes: "Judicial invention of new and pre- 
viously unheard-of rights accelerated over the past half- 
century and has now reached warp speed. The list of 
activist decisions constitutionalizing the left-liberal cultur- 
al agenda is lengthy." 
Referring to the Grutter ruling, Robert L. Bartley, now 
columnist for The Wall Street Journal, wrote that Justice 
O'Connor's stance is "ludicrous." Bartley goes on to con- 
clude that the Court's majority admits that "we are issuing 
a decision in which we understand the equal protection 
clause of the Fourteenth Amendment prohibits the policies 
we hereby sanction. But because of our view of the current 
social situation, this part of the Constitution is hereby sus- 
pended. If I had invested my life in the law, I would find 
this, if not horrifying, at least disgusting." 

historical scholarship suggests that the framers and ratifiers 
of  the Fourteenth Amendment did not mean to condemn 
efforts to assist African Americans as such. Justice Thomas 
and his fellow dissenters are certainly entitled to say that 
affirmative action is bad policy. But they should not read 
their own views into the Constitution. The Court's majority 
was correct, in Grutter, to allow the law school to continue 
with its program. 

"What's wrong with explicitness? Why does the 
Constitution require admissions offices to hide the 
ball?" 

In Gratz, the Court said that the undergraduate program at 
the University of Michigan was invalid because it was too 
inflexible. Under that program, applicants were given spec- 
ified "points" toward admission. A  student with  100-150 
points  would  definitely be  admitted; those  with  75-99 
remained in contention. Points could be awarded based on 
standardized test scores, high school grades, alumni rela- 
tionship, personal essay, strength of high school, and more. 

An applicant who came from an underrepresented minority 
group would  be  awarded 20  points  toward admission. 
Nonminority students would receive 20 points for athletic 
ability, socioeconomic  disadvantage, or  attendance at  a 
socioeconomically disadvantaged high school. Applicants 
would  also  receive  10  points  for  being  residents  of 
Michigan, 5 for leadership and service, 5 for artistic talent, 
and so on. 

"What the Court is requiring is a costly system of indi- 
vidual discretion in which race does count as a factor, 
but in which the university is not permitted to be can- 
did, even to itself, about how much of a factor  it is." 

The Court's majority objected that this point system failed 
to provide individualized consideration to each applicant. 
Whether or not the system was  a quota, the Court com- 
plained, it "automatically distributes 20 points to every sin- 
gle applicant from" a minority group. In the Court's view, 
this automatic distribution of points has the effect of mak- 
ing the factor of  race a decisive one  "for virtually every 
minimally qualified underrepresented minority applicant." 
The University of Michigan contended that because of the 
sheer volume of applications, individualized consideration 
of  each applicant would be impractical. To this the Court 
responded dismissively: "The fact that the implementation 
of a program capable of providing individualized consider- 
ation might present administrative challenges does not ren- 
der constitutional an otherwise problematic system." 
I believe that the outcome in Gratz is most unfortunate. The 
initial problem is  that in principle the program upheld in 
Grutter is no more objectionable than the one in Gratz. The 
major distinction is that the undergraduate system used num- 
bers, rather than a system of individual discretion. But this 
should not make a constitutional difference. In trying to get 
minority students, the law school was probably as aggressive 
as the undergraduate program was. The law school avoided 
numbers, to be sure; but its admissions officers used the prac- 
tical equivalent of numbers in exercising their discretion to 
ensure that enough minority students were able to attend its 
law school. The Supreme Court found it crucial that the law 
school did not make explicit the weight that it gave to minor- 
ity applicants, whereas the undergraduate program did so. 
But  what's  wrong  with  explicitness?  Why  does  the 
Constitution require admissions offices to hide the ball? 

82 

AUTUMN 2003 

This content downloaded from 188.72.126.182 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 15:33:15 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION: WHY GRUTTER WAS CORRECTLY DECIDED 

Perhaps the Court thought that the law school gave less 
weight to race than the undergraduate school did -  that the 
law school gave the equivalent of 5 points rather than 20. 
But there is no evidence that this is true, and in any case the 
Court seems to be objecting to any system of points as such. 
What the Court is therefore requiring is a more costly sys- 
tem of individual discretion in which race does count as a 
factor, but in which the university is not permitted to be can- 
did, even to itself, about how much of a factor it is. Nothing 
in the Constitution justifies this peculiar rule. 
But the problem goes much deeper. Academic institutions 
have strong claims to self-rule -  to be free from close judi- 
cial oversight, at least where the Constitution is not clear. 
Indeed, the protection of academic institutions is connected 
with the free speech principle itself (and federal courts have 
on occasion stressed the connection). On the issue of racial 
preferences in higher education, hundreds of American uni- 
versities have engaged in affirmative action as part of their 
traditional right to determine what they will teach, whom 
they will admit for instruction, and what kind of classroom 
suits pedagogical and social needs. Racial preferences in 
higher education are not a new experiment. The nation's 
colleges and universities have been doing this for three 
decades. In this respect, the University of Michigan cases 
are very different from the other cases where the courts 
have banned racial preferences -  say, considering race in 
allocation of public contracts. 

"So long as admissions offices allow individualized 
consideration and avoid rigidity, they can take steps to 
promote a diverse educational setting." 

Universities legitimately seek diversity of many different 
kinds. They have many different ways of attempting to pro- 
duce diversity. Some go the path of the University of Mich- 
igan Law School; others try the undergraduate program's 
approach; other routes are available. In our federal system, 
one  that is  committed to  decentralization, different ap- 
proaches are entirely permissible. Now of course the Consti- 
tution forbids some imaginable approaches by educational 
institutions. It would not be constitutionally acceptable to put 
a ceiling on the number of Catholics, or to refuse to admit 
Hispanics or African Americans, or to say that a school may 
not have more than 10 percent Asians. But all of these princi- 
ples come from the unmistakable meaning of the equal pro- 

AUTUMN 2003 

Affirmative Action in Higher Education: 
He Saw the Result Three Years Ago 

_Pi^ 

'"There is ample evidence that Justice Sandra 
Day O'Connor, as well as several other mem- 
bers of the present Court, has already accepted 
that the search for racial diversity among stu- 
dents is  a  compelling interest that survives 
strict scrutiny." 

-  Ronald Dworkin, Sommer Professor of Law and Philosophy 
at New York University, writing in "Affirmative Action: Is It 
Fair?" JBHE, Number 28, Summer 2000, p. 79. 

tection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The principle of 
color-blindness 
is not part of that unmistakable meaning. On 
the contrary, it is a distortion of it, using a provision that was 
meant to  eliminate the social subordination of  African 
Americans and converting it into a weapon by which to com- 
bat reasonable efforts to undo that subordination. 
Let me conclude with two cautionary notes. First, Gratz 
was incorrect, but it is not a disaster. Because of Grutter, 
colleges and universities can do a great deal to ensure that 
they are not all white. So long as admissions offices allow 
individualized consideration and avoid rigidity, they can 
take steps to promote a diverse educational setting. Second, 
my objections to Gratz are not meant to express approval of 
any or all steps that go by the name of "affirmative action." 
Americans reasonably disagree about that topic -  about 
the sense and legitimacy of race-conscious efforts to assist 
members of traditionally disadvantaged groups. In many 
settings, including many educational settings, color-blind- 
ness is the most appealing principle. In principle, I think 
that Justice Thomas' arguments have considerable force. 
What I am urging here is that these difficult questions 
should not be decided by federal judges. The nation has 
long been in the midst of an intense dispute about affirma- 
tive action programs. Sensible people have different per- 
spectives. Sensible educational institutions have different 
practices. The Court should be faulted for its ruling in Gratz 
-  for its aggressiveness in using the Constitution to forbid 
a reasonable approach by one of the nation's great universi- 
ties. The Court should be praised for its restraint in Grutter 
-  for its willingness to allow the nation's colleges and uni- 
versities to take steps, if they choose, to ensure that the 
nation's classrooms are not all white. 

IJBHEI 

83 

This content downloaded from 188.72.126.182 on Sun, 22 Jun 2014 15:33:15 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

