Libertarian Paternalism Author(s): Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein Source: The American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the One Hundred Fifteenth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Washington, DC, January 3-5, 2003 (May, 2003), pp. 175-179 Published by: American Economic Association Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3132220 Accessed: 20-08-2015 22:44 UTC
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The American Economic
Review.
By RICHARD H. THALER AND CASS R. SUNSTEIN*
Many economists are libertarians and consider the term "paternalistic" to be derogatory. Most would think that the phrase libertarian paternalism is an oxymoron. The modest goal of this essay is to encourage economists to rethink their views on paternalism. We believe that the anti-paternalistic fervor expressed by many economists is based on a combination of a false assumption and at least two misconceptions. The false assumption is that people always (usually?) make choices that are in their best interest. This claim is either tautological, and therefore uninteresting, or testable. We claim that it is testable and false-indeed, obviously false. The first misconception is that there are viable alternatives to paternalism. In many situations, some organization or agent must make a choice that will affect the choices of some other people. The point applies to both private and public actors. Consider the problem facing the director of a company cafeteria who discovers that the order in which food is arranged influences the choices people make. To simplify, consider three alternative strategies: (1) she could make choices that she thinks would make the customers best off (2) she could make choices at random or (3) she could maliciously choose those items that she thinks would make the customers as obese as possible. Option 1
appears to be paternalistic, which it is, but
would anyone advocate options 2 or 3?
The second misconception is that paternalism always involves coercion. As the cafeteria example illustrates, the choice of which order to
present food items does not coerce anyone to do
anything, yet one might prefer some orders to
others on paternalistic grounds. Would many
object to putting the fruit before the desserts at
an elementary school cafeteria if the outcome
were to increase the consumption ratio of apples
to Twinkies? Is this question fundamentally different if the customers are adults? If no coercion
is involved, we think that some types of pater- nalism should be acceptable to even the most
ardent libertarian. We call such actions libertarian paternalism.
In our understanding, a policy counts as "paternalistic" if it is selected with the goal of
influencing the choices of affected parties in a
way that will make those parties better off. We
intend "better off' to be measured as objectively as possible, and we clearly do not always equate
revealed preference with welfare. That is, we
emphasize the possibility that in some cases
individuals make inferior choices, choices that
they would change if they had complete information, unlimited cognitive abilities, and no
lack of willpower. Once it is understood that
some organizational decisions are inevitable,
that a form of paternalism cannot be avoided,
and that the alternatives to paternalism (such as
choosing options to make people sick, obese, or
generally worse off) are unattractive, we can
abandon the less interesting question of whether
to be paternalistic or not and turn to the more
constructive question of how to choose among
paternalistic options.1
I. Are Choices Rational?
The presumption that individual choices should be free from interference is usually based on the assumption that people do a good job of making choices, or at least that they do a far better job than third parties could do. As far as we can tell, there is little empirical support for this claim. Research by psychologists and economists over the past three decades has raised questions about the rationality of the judgments and decisions that individuals make. People do not exhibit rational expectations, fail to make forecasts that are consistent with Bayes' rule, use heuristics that lead them to make systematic blunders, exhibit preference reversals (that is, they prefer A to B and B to A) and make different choices depending on the wording of the problem (for many examples, see the two recent collections of papers by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky [2000] and by Thomas Gilovich et al. [2002]). Furthermore, in the context of intertemporal choice, people exhibit dynamic inconsistency, valuing present consumption much more than future consumption. In other words, people have selfcontrol problems (see the other papers in this session [James Choi et al., 2003b Ted O'Donoghue and Matthew Rabin, 2003] for details and references).
Many economists are skeptical of some of these findings, thinking that people may do a better job of choosing in the "real world" than they do in the laboratory. However, studies of actual choices for high stakes reveal many of the same problems. For example, the Surgeon General reports that 61 percent of Americans are either overweight or obese. Given the adverse effects obesity has on health, it is hard to claim that Americans are eating optimal diets.
Another illustration comes from the domain of savings behavior. Shlomo Benartzi and Thaler (2002) investigate how much investors like the portfolios they have selected in their defined-contribution savings plans. Employees volunteered to share their portfolio choices with the investigators (by bringing a copy of their
most recent statement to the lab). They were
then shown the probability distributions of expected retirement income for three investment
portfolios just labeled A, B, and C. Unbeknownst to the subjects, the three portfolios
were their own and portfolios mimicking the
average and median choices of their fellow employees. The distributions of expected returns
were computed using the software of Financial
Engines, the financial information company
founded by William Sharpe. On average, the
subjects rated the average portfolio equally with
their own portfolio, and they judged the median
portfolio to be significantly more attractive than
their own. Indeed, only 20 percent of the subjects preferred their own portfolio to the median portfolio. Apparently, people do not gain
much by choosing investment portfolios for
themselves.
II. Is Paternalism Inevitable?
As the cafeteria line example discussed above
illustrates, planners are forced to make some
design choices. A simple and important example is the selection of a "default option" to
determine what happens if an agent fails to
choose for himself. In a fully rational world
such design choices would have little effect (at
least in high-stakes situations) because agents
would simply choose the best option for them
regardless of the default. However, numerous
experiments illustrate that there is a very strong
"status quo" bias (see William Samuelson and
Richard Zeckhauser, 1988 Kahneman et al.,
1991). The existing arrangement, whether set
out by private institutions or by government,
tends to stick.
One illustration of this phenomenon comes
from studies of automatic enrollment in 401(k)
employee savings plans. Most 401(k) plans use
an opt-in design. When employees first become
eligible to participate in the 401(k) plan, they
receive some plan information and an enrollment form that must be completed in order to
join. Under the alternative of automatic enrollment, employees receive the same information
but are told that unless they opt out, they will be
enrolled in the plan (with some default options
for savings rates and asset allocation). In companies that offer a "match" (the employer
matches the employee's contributions accord-
VOL. 93 NO. 2
ing to some formula, often a 50-percent match up to some cap), most employees eventually do join the plan, but enrollments occur much sooner under automatic enrollment. For example, Brigitte Madrian and Dennis Shea (2001) found that initial enrollments jumped from 49 percent to 86 percent, and Choi et al. (2002) find similar results for other companies.
Should the adoption of automatic enrollment be considered paternalistic? And, if so, should it therefore be seen as a kind of officious meddling with employee preferences? We answer these questions yes and no respectively. If the employer thinks (correctly, we believe) that most employees would prefer to join the 401(k) plan if they took the time to think about it and did not lose the enrollment form, then by choosing automatic enrollment they are acting paternalistically. They are attempting to steer employees' choices in directions that will promote employees' welfare. But since no one is forced to do anything, we think this steering should be considered unobjectionable to libertarians. The employer must choose some set of rules, and either plan affects employees' choices. No law of nature says that, in the absence of an affirmative election by employees, zero percent of earnings will go into a retirement plan. Because both plans alter choices, neither one can be said, more than the other, to count as a form of objectionable meddling. Quick-minded readers might be tempted to think that there is a way out of this dilemma. Employers could avoid choosing a default if they required employees to make a choice, either in or out. But some thought reveals that this is not at all a way out of the dilemma rather, it is simply another option among many that the employer can elect. In fact, Choi et al. (2003a) find that this rule increases enrollments (relative to the opt-in rule) though by not as much as automatic enrollment. Furthermore, the very requirement that employees make a choice has a paternalistic element. Many employees do not want to have to make a choice (and would choose not to have to do so). Should employers really force them to choose? Why, exactly, does the setting of defaults have such large effects? With respect to savings, the designated default plan apparently carries a certain legitimacy for many employees,
perhaps because it seems to have resulted from
some conscious thought about what makes most
sense for most people. But there is a separate explanation, involving inertia. For any employee, a change from any status quo entails
time and effort, and many people seem to prefer to avoid both of these, especially if they are
prone to procrastination. When default rules are
"sticky" and affect choices as a result, inertia
might be the major reason.
For present purposes, the choice among these
various explanations does not much matter. The
point is only that paternalism, in the form of
effects on individual choices, is often unavoidable. When paternalism seems absent, it is usually because the starting point appears so natural
and obvious that its preference-shaping effects
are invisible to most observers. But those effects are nonetheless there. Of course it is usually good not to block choices, and we do not
mean to defend non-libertarian paternalism
here. But in an important respect, the antipaternalistic position is incoherent.
III. Beyond the Inevitable (but Still Libertarian)
The inevitability of paternalism is most clear
when the planner has to choose default rules. It
is reasonable to ask whether the planner should
go beyond the inevitable. Take the cafeteria
example discussed above. Putting the fruit before the desserts is a fairly mild intervention. A
more intrusive step would be to place the desserts in another location altogether, so that diners have to get up and get a dessert after they have finished the rest of their meal. This step raises the transactions costs of eating dessert,
and according to a standard economic analysis
the proposal is unattractive: it seems to make
dessert-eaters worse off and no one better off.
But once self-control costs are incorporated, we
can see that some diners would prefer this arrangement, namely, those who would eat a dessert if it were put in front of them but would
resist temptation if given a little help. To the
extent that the dessert location is not hard to
find, and no choice is forbidden, this approach meets libertarian muster.
In the domain of employee savings, Thaler
and Benartzi (2003) have proposed a method of
increasing contributions to 401(k) plans that
also meets the libertarian test. Under this plan,
called Save More Tomorrow, employees are invited to sign up for a program in which their contributions to the savings plan are increased annually whenever they get a raise. Once employees join the plan, they stay in until they opt out or reach the maximum savings rate in the plan. In the first company to use this plan, the employees who joined increased their savings rates from 3.5 percent to 11.6 percent in a little over two years (three raises). Very few of the employees who join the plan drop out. This is successful libertarian paternalism in action.
IV. How to Choose: The Toolbox
of the Libertarian Paternalist
How should sensible planners (a category we mean to include anyone who must design plans for others, from human-resource directors to bureaucrats to kings) choose among possible systems, given that some choice is necessary? We suggest two approaches to this problem. If feasible, a comparison of possible rules should be done using a form of cost-benefit analysis. The goal of a cost-benefit study would be to measure the full ramifications of any design choice. To illustrate, take the example of automatic enrollment. Under automatic enrollment some employees will join the plan who otherwise would not. Presumably, some are made better off (especially if there is an employer match), but some may be made worse off (e.g., those who are highly liquidityconstrained). If the issue were just enrollment, we would guess that the gains would exceed the losses. We base this guess partly on revealed choices. Most employees do join the plan eventually, and very few who are automatically enrolled opt out when they figure out what has happened to them. We also judge that the costs of having too little saved up for retirement are typically greater than the costs of having saved too much.
In many cases, however, the planner will be unable to make a direct inquiry into welfare, either because too little information is available or because the costs of doing the analysis are not warranted. The committed anti-paternalist might say, in such cases, that people should simply be permitted to choose as they see fit. We hope that we have said enough to show why this response is unhelpful. What people choose
often depends on the starting point, and hence
the starting point cannot be selected by asking
what people choose. In these circumstances, the
libertarian paternalist would seek indirect proxies for welfare: methods that test whether one or
another approach is welfare-promoting without
relying on unreliable guesswork about that
question. We suggest three possible methods.
First, the libertarian paternalist might select
the approach that the majority would choose if
explicit choices were required and revealed.
Useful though it is, this market-mimicking approach raises its own problems. Perhaps the
majority's choices would be insufficiently informed. Perhaps those choices, in fact, would
not promote the majority's welfare. At least as a
presumption, however, it makes sense to follow
those choices, if the planner knows what they
would be. A deeper problem is that the majority's choices might themselves be a function of
the starting point or the default rule. If so, the
problem of circularity dooms the marketmimicking approach. But in some cases, at
least, the majority is likely to go one way or the
other regardless of the starting point and to that
extent, the market-mimicking strategy seems
quite workable.
Second, the libertarian paternalist might select the approach that would force people to
make their choices explicit. This approach
might be chosen if the market-mimicking strategy fails, either because of the circularity problem or because the planner does not know
which approach would in fact be chosen by the
majority. We have seen the possibility of forced
choices in the context of retirement plans it
would be easy to find other examples. Here too,
however, there is a risk that the choices that are
actually elicited will be inadequately informed
or will not promote welfare. In the case of
retirement plans, for example, forced choices
have been found to produce higher participation rates than requiring opt-ins, but lower
rates than requiring opt-outs. If it is likely that
automatic enrollment is welfare-promoting,
perhaps automatic enrollment should be preferred over forced choices. The only suggestion is that, where the social planner is unsure
how to handle the welfare question, he might
devise a strategy that requires people to choose.
Third, the libertarian paternalist might select
the approach that minimizes the number of opt-
