University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2003 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Richard H. Thaler 

Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an Oxymoron 
Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an Oxymoron 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein & Richard H. Thaler, "Libertarian Paternalism Is Not an Oxymoron," 70 University of 
Chicago Law Review 1159 (2003). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

2003]

Tobacco Regulation or Litigation?

1153

companies  cannot be  liable for failing  to inform people  about the risks
of  smoking  because  people  already  have  sufficient  information,  in-
deed  usually  overestimating  the  risks. If  he  is  right  about  this latter
point,  then  one  would  expect  his  reforms  to  increase the  amount  of
smoking  as  people  learn  that  smoking  is  less  risky  than  they  had  be-
lieved.

But  Viscusi  fails  to  grapple  with  the  public  health  community's
fundamental  concern  with  smoking:  that  it is  addictive. Many  people
start  smoking  when  they  are  still  children,  and  others  who  start  as
adults  do  not  have  adequate  information  about  the  dangers  of smok-
ing. They  might  know  that smoking  causes  a  high risk  of  lung  cancer
and  other  diseases, but they  do  not understand  the  power  of nicotine
addiction,  and  they  believe  that  they  will  quit  before  they  do  signifi-
cant  damage  to  their  bodies. They  also  have  trouble  resisting  peer
pressure  and  the  glamorous  image  of smoking  fed  by highly  effective
tobacco  advertising.  These  individuals  try  to  quit  later  in  life, but  are
unable  to, and high numbers  succumb  to smoking-related  illnesses.

Viscusi's  view  about  addiction  is  not clear.  On  the  one  hand, he
says  that  cigarettes  are  addictive.  On  the  other  hand,  he  stresses  that
smoking  is  a  matter of choice. He  cites  the -0.4  to  -0.7  elasticity of de-
mand  for  cigarettes  as  evidence  that  they  are  not  addictive  (pp  171-
72), but the  elasticity just tells us that  some people will  stop or reduce
smoking  when  the price rises, not that everyone  will, and  the evidence
suggests  that for a core  group even  large  price increases will not  affect
their  behavior. The  two  views  can  be  reconciled  with  the  rational  ad-
diction  model, which  Viscusi  cites.26  This  model  assumes  that  when  a
person begins  to smoke  he  takes  account  of  the  cost of  being able  to
stop. By contrast  to the public health model, which assumes  that a per-
son  starts  smoking  without  thinking  about  addiction,  and  then  finds
himself  trapped  by  the  addiction  when further  information  about the
risks persuades  him that it is time to stop, the rational addiction  model
assumes  that a person  chooses  the whole  package of cigarette-related
benefits  and  afflictions -the  pleasure  of the smoke, the  glamorous im-
age,  the  approval  of  friends,  the  possibility  of  addiction,  and  the  re-
mote  but devastating health  consequences.

The  rational  addiction  view  has  been  criticized  in  ways  that  go
beyond  the scope  of this Review.27 It is sufficient, however,  to point out
that  even  if one  accepts  its  behavioral  assumptions,  it  does  not have
strong normative  implications. Usually, when  a person makes  a  choice

26  See  Gary  S. Becker  and  Kevin  M.  Murphy, A  Theory of Rational Addiction, 96  J  Polit

Econ 675  (1988).

27  See  Ole-Jorgen  Skog,  Rationality, Irrationality, and Addiction-Notes on  Becker's and
Murphy's Theory of Addiction, in  Jon  Elster  and  Ole-Jorgen  Skog,  eds, Getting Hooked (Cam-
bridge 1999).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1159 2003

1154

The University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1141

at time  1 that  he  regrets  at time  2, we  do  not  allow  him  to escape  the
consequences  of his decision. Otherwise, it would  be  difficult  for peo-
ple  to  commit  themselves,  and  the  power  to  commit  oneself  is  ex-
tremely  valuable  in  a range  of social  and economic  relationships. But
there is  a philosophical  objection  to holding  the welfare  of the person
at  time  2  hostage  to the  preferences  of  the  person  at time  1:  There  is
no  obvious  reason  for  thinking that  welfare  at  time  1 is  more  impor-
tant  than  welfare  at  time  2,  while  it is  clear  that  individuals  discount
benefits  flowing  to  their  future  selves. These  concerns  are  relatively
minor  for  most  transactions,  but  they  loom  large  when  the  early
choice  has significant  negative consequences  in  the distant future, as is
the  case for smoking and the  consumption of other dangerous  and ad-
dictive  drugs.

Viscusi is more persuasive when he criticizes  the regulatory  pack-
age  established  by the  MSA, and in  particular the  high de  facto excise
taxes that it establishes.2  High excise taxes are  troublesome  regardless
of  whether  one  takes  Viscusi's  choice  view, or  the  public health  com-
munity's  addiction  view. If smoking  is  a  matter  of choice,  then excise
taxes  should be  used  to  deter  harms  to  others; however,  these  harms
appear  to be  relatively small, justifying only low  excise  taxes. If smok-
ing is  a  matter  of addiction,  then  excise  taxes will  deter some  people
from smoking  but  leave  unaffected  a  large  group  of people  who  will
pay more for  smoking, and  carry  a larger  part of  the  tax burden  than
nonsmokers.29  (In  theory, these  distributive  burdens  could  be  elimi-
nated by  adjusting  the income tax  but the  politics of such adjustments
are  complex.)  A  moderate  excise  tax  might  be justified,  but at  a  time
when  the drug  war  is  under  intense  criticism,  a  prohibitively  high  tax
or  an outright ban hardly seems  appropriate.

Other  policy  instruments  also  have moderate  value. Educational
efforts,  advertising  limitations,  and  regulation  of  public  spaces  show
promise  but  have  clear  limits0  One  problem  with  these  strategies,
which  is  frequently  overlooked,  is  that  their  quasi-intended  effect  of
stigmatizing  smoking may  do more harm  than good. Stigma is an  inef-
ficient way  of helping addicts; stigma harms  the addicts just like excise
taxes, but  unlike excise  taxes does  not raise revenues. In  addition, self-
conscious  efforts  by  authorities  to  create  and  reinforce  stigma  can

28  This  is  a point made  by many  other authors. See, for  example, Frank  J. Chaloupka, et al,
Taxing  Tobacco: The Impact of Tobacco Taxes on  Cigarette Smoking and Other Tobacco Use, in
Rabin and  Sugarman,  eds, Regulating Tobacco at 63-464  (cited in  note 1)  (describing  the  dispro-
portionate  impact of tobacco  excise  taxes  on low-income smokers).  But there are  complications,
as noted  in this Review.

29  See id.
30  For  discussions  of these  proposals, see  the  essays  in Rabin  and  Sugarman, eds, Regulat-

ing Tobacco (cited in  note  1).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1160 2003

2003]

Tobacco Regulation or Litigation?

1155

backfire  and  make  the  forbidden  activity  all  the  more  alluring  to
young  people  and  others  who  regard  themselves  as  nonconformists
not easily cowed  by officially endorsed  public sentiment.

III.  REGULATION  BY  LITIGATION

Viscusi  sees  the MSA  as  but  one  element  in  a  class  of cases  that
reflect a disturbing new trend  that he calls  "regulation by litigation" (p
217).  The  vast  fees  earned  by  tort  lawyers  in  the  Medicaid  litigation
have  stimulated  similar  lawsuits  against  gun  manufacturers, the  paint
and fast food industries, and HMOs. Viscusi argues that  litigation gen-
erates  bad regulation  that favors  lawyers and  interest groups, and that
legislation  and agency regulation  (he  does not distinguish the two)  are
the more  appropriate vehicles  for reining in industry, if such  reining-in
is  needed  (p 217).  He  faults  the  MSA  for  its  role in  encouraging  this
new  litigation (p 4).

This claim  that there  is  a special  class of  troubling "regulation  by
litigation" cases"  will strike  lawyers  as odd. Tort law is  a  form of regu-
lation,  and  always  has  been. Manufacturers  know  that  when they  de-
sign products  they will  be  held liable  under  tort law  if they choose  an
unreasonably  dangerous  design.  Judicial  decisions  ex  post  will  often
have the effect of creating regulation-like  commands -for  instance, do
not  design  a  car  that  explodes  if rear-ended  at  low  speeds-but  the
policy here  is  to give  manufacturers  an  ex  ante  incentive  to invest in
safety. There  is  nothing  new  about  regulation  by  litigation,  and  one
suspects that Viscusi does  not understand  this basic point.'

Viscusi  argues  that  regulation  is  superior  to litigation  because  of
the  traditional  values  of  transparency  and  accountability.  Affected
parties  have the  opportunity  to lobby  legislators  and  regulators  prior
to  the  creation  of rules. If the  public does  not  like  the  rules, they can
vote the politicians  out of office. Viscusi thinks that the  tort system, by
contrast,  has  been  corrupted  by well-financed  tort  lawyers, pusillani-
mous judges, and  populist juries.

This view  turns  traditional  public-choice  thinking  on its  head.
If  there  is  any  interest  group  with  dominant  influence,  one  would
think it the  tobacco industry -rich,  highly concentrated,  very  sophisti-
cated-  and  not so  much  the  tort lawyers, who are  much  more numer-
ous  and varying  in  their goals and, for  all their new wealth, not nearly
as rich. The  public  health  community-  another  one of Viscusi's  betes

31  See  W. Kip Viscusi,  ed,  Regulation through Litigation v  (Brookings  2002)  (contending
that  large-scale  lawsuits  over  tobacco, guns, and other  products  represent a  new  genre of litiga-
tion that confront broad policy problems better left to legislatures).

32  See  also  Randall  Lutter  and Elizabeth  Mader, Litigating Lead-Based Paint Hazards, in
Viscusi,  ed, Regulation through Litigation at 125-26  (cited  in note  31)  (calling  the tort  system's
normal retroactive  determination  of liability  "Kafkaesque").

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1161 2003

1156

The University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1141

noires -is  a  loose conglomeration  of different  interests, including doc-
tors, hospitals, insurance  companies, universities, and health  advocates.
The  fact  is  that  all  these  groups  influence  legislative  and  regulatory
outcomes,  transparency  and  accountability  notwithstanding.  The  to-
bacco  industry  subverted  the  effort  to  incorporate  a  predecessor  to
the  MSA  in  federal  legislation  when  the  proposed  bills went  beyond
the  restrictions  to  which  the  industry  had  initially  agreed.  The  tort
lawyers  persuaded  state legislatures  to enact statutes that would facili-
tate  their  Medicaid  litigation.  And  the  public  health  community  has
influenced countless  smoking-related  laws and  regulations. Indeed, all
the things  that Viscusi  deplores  in the  MSA, like the  excise  taxes  and
the advertising restrictions, can  be found  in countless  laws and regula-
tions  that  existed  long  before  the  MSA  was  negotiated.  "Regulation
by regulation"  has produced  outcomes  every bit  as bad from Viscusi's
perspective  as those  produced  by "regulation by  litigation.33

By contrast, the tort system has long been thought to be relatively
immune  to  public  choice  pressures. Although  this  view  has  come  un-
der  increasing  scrutiny, the  evidence  provides  little  support  for  Vis-
cusi's  negative  view  about  tobacco  litigation.  If Viscusi  is  right  about
the  weakness  of  the  smokers'  cases,  the  tort  system  has  performed
admirably  until  recently, resulting  in  few  awards  against  the  tobacco
industry. Although  the  tort  lawyers  won  some  important  early victo-
ries in the  Medicaid  litigation, they  also lost some important cases, and
never  obtained  a  final judgment  against  a tobacco  company. Viscusi's
own  theory-that  the cartel arrangement benefited  the  tobacco indus-
try and hurt  smokers-suggests  that the MSA can't  be blamed  on the
tort  system.  On  Viscusi's  theory,  the  tobacco  industry  would  have
agreed  to  the  MSA, or  some similar  version  of it, even  if the industry
had thought it would  do well in court.

One of Viscusi's strongest  grounds for complaint  is  the extraordi-
nary  legal  fees  won  by the  tort  lawyers, but the  blame  for  these  fees
lies  on the  shoulders  of the states  and  the  tobacco  industry. When  the
tort  lawyers  offered  to  represent  states  in  the  Medicaid  litigation,
many  states  turned  them  down  and  relied on  the staffs  of their  attor-
neys  general. Other states preferred  to use outside counsel  and agreed
to  pay a percentage  of any  damages  recovered,  or what in  other con-
texts  would  be  called  a  normal  contingency  fee  arrangement.  The
MSA contained  a vague "reasonable"  fees provision, to be determined
by  arbitration,  and  the  arbitrators  used  the  contracts  between  the
states and the lawyers  as a  guide. Because  the  states  won hundreds  of
billions of dollars, the  contingency  percentages  yielded  very  high dol-

33  For  a  detailed  discussion  of the  politics  of tobacco litigation and  legislation, see Martha

A. Derthick,  Up  in Smoke  (Congressional  Quarterly  2002).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1162 2003

20031

Tobacco Regulation or Litigation?

1157

lar values. The political outcry was muted because  under the MSA  the
tobacco  industry  had  to  pay  the  fees, though  of  course  the  payment
could  only  come  from  money  that  would  otherwise  be  available  for
the  states. However,  the  outcry  was  still  significant  enough  to  create
resistance  in some  legislatures  and  stimulate  concessions  by some  to-
bacco  lawyers. So if the  fees were  unreasonable,  the responsibility  can
be  traced  to  the  voluntary  arrangements  between  attorneys  general,
legislatures,  tobacco  executives,  and  the  tort  lawyers.  Judges,  the
guardians  of  the  tort  system,  could  not  be  expected  to  interfere  with
these arrangements. Nor could juries.

The  significant  role  of state  legislatures  and  attorneys  general  in
the  Medicaid  litigation  suggests  that  this  litigation  should  not be  the
prime  exhibit  for  the  case  against  "regulation  by litigation,"  which  is
probably  best used  to refer  to class actions  involving  private  individu-
als,  not  governments,  as  the  plaintiffs.  Because  the  states  were  the
plaintiffs  in the  Medicaid  litigation,  it is  hard  to draw  a  clean  distinc-
tion  between  a  virtuous  political  process  and  a  corrupt  legal  process.
Viscusi  complains  that  the  de  facto excise  taxes  in  the MSA  are  per-
verse  because they  are regressive, and as  a  result of them  states  bene-
fit  when  tobacco  sales  rise. States'  reluctance  to finance  antismoking
advertisements  with  their  tobacco  money,  as  they  had  promised,  is
taken  as  evidence  that  they  regard  tobacco  sales  as  a  money  pump.
But if legislatures  are  politically  responsible, why  did  they consent  to
the  excise  taxes  in  the  first  place?  And  if  they  were  presented  with
them  as  a fait accompli, why  didn't  the  legislatures  fix  the  regressive
impact  by  adjusting  income  taxes, and  why  would  they  put  revenues
over  their concern for public  health? No one argues  that the excise  tax
on  gasoline  should  be  repealed  because  it  gives  the  government  an
incentive  to encourage people  to  drive.

What  is  most  noteworthy  about  the  tobacco  litigation  is  not  its
exposure  of a  new  form  of  ex  post  regulation;  the  tort  system  is  far
older  than  the  regulatory  system  that  Viscusi  champions.  What  is
noteworthy  is  the  significant  role  in  the  litigation  of  a  group  of
wealthy  and  successful  tort  lawyer-entrepreneurs.  Viscusi  thinks  that
these people  are  bad guys  (pp  5,53-54, 134,219-20), and perhaps  they
are, but like  the tobacco  industry  executives  their sin was their  exploi-
tation  of  a  permissive  legal  environment  in  order  to make  money. So
that  this legal  environment  may be changed, understanding  the  emer-
gence  and incentives of the tort lawyers  is an important task, for which
the  crude  opposition  between  litigation  and  regulation  is  not helpful.
There  are smoke-filled  rooms  in state capitols, just as  there  are  in the
pricey hotels where  the MSA was  hammered  out.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1163 2003

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1164 2003

The University  of Chicago
Law Review

Volume  70 

Fall 2003 

Number 4

© 2003 by The  University of Chicago

ARTICLES

Libertarian  Paternalism  Is Not 

an  Oxymoron .................................................. 

Cass R. Sunstein &
Richard H. Thaler 1159

Bounded  Rationality, Standard  Form

Contracts, and  Unconscionability .................  Russell Korobkin  1203

Reports  of the Nondelegation
Doctrine's  Death Are 
Greatly  Exaggerated  ...................................  Saikrishna Prakash 1297

Larry Alexander &

Nondelegation: 

Eric A.  Posner &

A Post-mortem .................................................  Adrian Vermeule  1331

Grading  the Government  ..................................  Richard W. Parker 1345

COMMENTS

The  Illegitimacy  of Protective Jurisdiction

over Foreign Affairs ..........................................  Andrew C. Baak  1487

The  Philosophical Dimensions of the

Doctrine  of Unconscionability ...........................  Philip Bridwell  1513

State Income Taxation  of Out-of-State

Trademark  Holding  Companies .......................  Tun-Jen Chiang 1533

Viewpoint  Restrictions and

School-Sponsored  Student Speech:
Avenues for Heightened  Protection ..............  Samuel P Jordan 1555

An Antitrust  Challenge  to the

NCAA Transfer  Rules .....................................  Sarah M. Konsky  1581

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1165 2003

The Power  to Declare

Peace  Unilaterally ..............................................  Mark W  M osier 1609

Cooperative  Federalism  and
Constructive Waiver  of
State Sovereign Immunity .................................  Sarah C. Rispin  1639

REVIEW

The  Many Meanings  of Separation
Separation of Church and State
Philip Hamburger ............................................  Douglas Laycock  1667

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1166 2003

The University  of Chicago
Law Review

Volume 70 

Fall  2003 

Number 4

© 2003 by The  University of Chicago

Libertarian Paternalism Is Not  an Oxymoron

Cass R. Sunsteint
Richard H.  Thalertt

The  idea  of libertarian paternalism might seem  to be an  oxymoron, but it  is both possible

and desirable for private and public institutions to influence behavior while also respecting free-

dom of choice. Often people's preferences are unclear and ill-formed, and their choices will inevi-

tably be influenced by  default rules, framing effects  and starting points. In these circumstances, a

form of paternalism cannot be avoided. Equipped with an understanding of behavioral findings of

bounded rationality and bounded self-control, libertarian paternalists should attempt to steer peo-

ple's choices in welfare-promoting directions without eliminating freedom of choice. It is also pos-

sible to show how  a libertarian paternalist might select among the possible options and to assess

how much  choice to offer. Examples are given from many areas, including savings behavior, labor

law, and consumer protection.

INTRODUCrION

Consider  two studies of savings  behavior:
o  Hoping to increase  savings  by workers, several employers have
adopted  a simple strategy. Instead of asking workers to  elect to

t  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor,  Law School  and  Department  of Po-

litical  Science, The  University of Chicago.

cago Graduate  School  of Business.

tt  Robert  P. Gwinn  Professor of Economics  and Behavioral  Science, The  University of Chi-

We  are  grateful  to  Gary  Becker,  Bryan  Caplan,  Richard  Epstein,  Carolyn  Frantz,  Daniel
Gilbert,  Robert  Hahn, J.B.  Heaton, Christine  Jolls, Howard  Kunrenther, Owen  Lamont, Brigitte
Madrian,  Jane  Mansbridge,  Eric  Posner,  Richard  Posner, Matthew  Rabin, and David  Strauss  for
valuable  comments  on a  previous  draft. We are  also grateful to Caryn  Campbell  for excellent re-
search  assistance  and  to  participants  in  discussions  at  the  John  F  Kennedy  School  of Govern-
ment  at  Harvard  University, the Wharton  School  of the  University of  Pennsylvania,  and  a  work-
in-progress  lunch  at  the  University  of Chicago  Law  School.  Finally, thanks  to  discussants  on  a
panel  in  which  an early  version  of this Article  was  presented  at  the 2003 meetings  of the Ameri-
can Economic  Association.

1159

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1167 2003

1160

The University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

participate  in  a  401(k)  plan, workers  will  be  assumed  to  want
to  participate  in  such  a  plan,  and  hence  they  will  be  enrolled
automatically  unless  they  specifically  choose  otherwise.  This
simple  change  in  the  default  rule  has  produced  dramatic  in-
creases  in enrollment.'

*  Rather  than  changing  the  default  rule,  some  employers  have
provided  their  employees  with  a  novel option:  Allocate a por-
tion of future wage increases to savings. Employees who choose
this  plan  are  free  to  opt  out  at  any  time. A  large  number  of
employees  have  agreed  to  try  the  plan,  and  only  a  few  have
opted  out. The  result  has  been  significant  increases  in  savings
rates

Libertarians  embrace  freedom  of choice, and  so they  deplore  pa-
ternalism.'  Paternalists  are  thought to  be skeptical  of unfettered  free-
dom  of  choice  and  to  deplore  libertarianism.4  According  to  the  con-
ventional  wisdom,  libertarians  cannot  possibly  embrace  paternalism,
and paternalists  abhor libertarianism.  The idea of libertarian  paternal-
ism seems  to be  a contradiction  in terms.

Generalizing  from  the  two  studies  just  described,  we  intend  to
unsettle  the  conventional  wisdom  here. We  propose  a  form  of pater-
nalism, libertarian  in spirit, that should  be  acceptable  to  those who are
firmly committed to freedom  of choice  on grounds  of either autonomy
or  welfare.'  Indeed,  we  urge  that  libertarian  paternalism  provides  a
basis for both understanding  and  rethinking a number of areas  of con-
temporary  law, including  those  aspects  that deal  with  worker  welfare,
consumer  protection,  and  the  family.6  In  the  process  of  defending

i 

See  James  J. Choi, et  al,  Defined  Contribution  Pensions: Plan  Rules, Participant  Choices,
and  the  Path of Least  Resistance, in  James  M. Poterba, ed,  16  Tax  Policy and the  Economy  67,70
(MIT  2002); Brigitte  C. Madrian  and  Dennis F  Shea,  The Power  of Suggestion: Inertia  in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior, 116  Q J  Econ  1149,1149-50  (2001).

2 

See  Richard  H. Thaler  and  Shlomo  Benartzi,  Save  More  Tomorrow:  Using  Behavioral
to  Increase  Employee  Saving,  J  Polit  Econ  (forthcoming),  online  at  http://

Economics 
gsbwww.uchicago.edu/fac/richard.thaler/research/SMarTl4.pdf  (visited  May  10, 2003).

3  See, for example,  David Boaz,  Libertarianism:A  Primer 16-19 (Free  Press  1997).
4  See,  for  example, Robert  E.  Goodin,  Permissible  Paternalism:  In  Defense  of the  Nanny
State, 1  Responsive  Community  42, 44  (Summer  1991)  (justifying  traditional  paternalism  on the
grounds  that  "public  officials  might  better  respect  your  own  preferences  than  you  would  have
done through  your own actions").

5  A  very  brief companion  essay, intended for  an  economic  audience  and  not  dealing  with
law, investigates  some  of the  issues  explored  here.  See  Richard  H. Thaler  and  Cass  R. Sunstein,
Libertarian  Paternalism, 93  Am Econ  Rev 175  (May 2003).

6  Our defense  of libertarian paternalism  is closely  related  to the arguments for "asymmet-
ric paternalism,"  illuminatingly  discussed  in  Colin  Camerer, et  al,  Regulation for  Conservatives:
Behavioral Economics and the  Case for "Asymmetric  Paternalism,"  151  U  Pa L  Rev 1211  (2003).
Camerer, et  al, urge  that  governments  should consider  a  weak  form  of paternalism-a  form  that
attempts to  help those  who  make  mistakes, while  imposing  minimal costs  on  those  who are  fully
rational.  Id  at  1212.  Our  Article,  written  in  parallel,  has  similar  motivations,  though  libertarian
paternalism  may or may  not be asymmetric  in the sense  identified by  Camerer and his coauthors.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1168 2003

20031

Libertarian Paternalism

1161

these  claims, we  intend to make  some objections  to widely held  beliefs
about  both  freedom  of  choice  and  paternalism.7  Our emphasis  is  on
the  fact  that  in  many  domains,  people  lack  clear,  stable,  or  well-
ordered  preferences.  What  they  choose  is  strongly  influenced  by  de-
tails  of the  context  in  which  they  make  their  choice, for  example  de-
fault  rules, framing  effects  (that  is,  the  wording  of  possible  options),
and  starting points. These  contextual  influences  render  the very mean-
ing of the term "preferences"  unclear.

Consider the question  whether  to undergo a  risky medical  proce-
dure. When  people are  told, "Of those  who  undergo  this procedure, 90
percent  are  still  alive  after  five  years,"  they  are  far  more  likely  to
agree  to  the  procedure  than  when  they  are  told,  "Of  those  who  un-
dergo  this  procedure,  10  percent  are  dead  after  five  years."  What,
then,  are  the  patient's  "preferences"  with  respect  to  this  procedure?
Repeated  experiences  with  such  problems  might  be  expected  to
eliminate  this framing  effect,  but doctors  too  are  vulnerable  to it.'  Or
return  to the  question  of savings  for retirement.  It is now  clear  that if
an  employer  requires  employees  to  make  an  affirmative  election  in
favor of savings, with the default  rule  devoting 100 percent  of wages  to
current  income,  the  level  of savings  will  be  far  lower  than  if the  em-
ployer  adopts  an  automatic  enrollment  program  from  which employ-
ees are  freely  permitted  to opt  out.'  Can workers  then be said  to have
well-defined  preferences  about  how much  to  save?  This  simple exam-
ple  can  be  extended  to  many  situations  involving  the  behavior  of
workers  and consumers.

As  the savings  problem  illustrates, the  design features  of both le-
gal and  organizational  rules  have  surprisingly  powerful  influences  on
people's  choices.  We  urge  that  such  rules  should  be  chosen  with  the
explicit  goal of  improving  the welfare  of  the people  affected  by  them.
The  libertarian  aspect  of our  strategies  lies  in  the  straightforward  in-
sistence  that, in  general, people  should  be  free  to opt  out of  specified
arrangements  if they  choose  to do  so. To  borrow  a phrase,  libertarian
paternalists  urge  that  people  should  be  "free  to  choose.""  Hence  we
do not aim to defend  any  approach that blocks individual  choices.

7  See, for  example,  Dennis F  Thompson,  Political Ethics and Public Office  154-55  (Har-
vard  1987), which  lists three  criteria  for justified paternalism:  impaired judgment, temporary  and
reversible  intervention,  and  prevention  of serious  and  irreversible  harm. We  think  that  this  ac-
count  points  in  many  sensible  directions,  but  it  neglects  the  inevitable  effects  of default  rules,
framing effects, and  starting points  on choices.

8  See Donald  A. Redelmeier,  Paul  Rozin, and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Understanding Patients'

Decisions: Cognitive and Emotional Perspectives, 270 JAMA 72,73  (1993).

9  See id  ("The  framing effect  was just  as large with physicians  as with  lay people.").
10  See note  1 and  accompanying  text.
I  See  Milton  Friedman  and  Rose  Friedman,  Free to  Choose: A  Personal Statement  (Har-

court  Brace Jovanovich  1980).  To be  sure,  it would  be  possible to imagine  a  more  robust under-

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1169 2003

1162

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

The  paternalistic  aspect  consists  in  the  claim  that it  is  legitimate
for private  and  public institutions to attempt  to  influence  people's be-
havior  even  when  third-party  effects  are  absent.  In  other  words,  we
argue  for  self-conscious  efforts,  by private  and  public  institutions, to
steer  people's  choices  in  directions  that  will  improve  the  choosers'
own  welfare.  In  our  understanding,  a  policy  therefore  counts  as  "pa-
ternalistic"  if it  attempts  to influence  the choices  of affected  parties  in
a  way  that  will  make  choosers  better  off.'2  Drawing  on  some  well-
established  findings  in  behavioral  economics  and  cognitive  psychol-
ogy, we  emphasize  the possibility  that in some  cases  individuals  make
inferior  decisions  in  terms  of  their  own  welfare-decisions  that  they
would  change  if  they  had  complete  information,  unlimited  cognitive
abilities, and  no  lack  of self-control."  In  addition,  the  notion  of liber-
tarian paternalism  can be complemented  by that of libertarian benevo-
lence, by  which plan  design  features  such  as  default  rules, framing  ef-
fects, and  starting points are  enlisted in the interest of vulnerable third
parties. We  shall devote  some discussion  to this possibility.

Libertarian  paternalism  is  a  relatively  weak  and  nonintrusive
type  of paternalism,  because  choices  are  not  blocked  or  fenced  off. In
its  most  cautious  forms, libertarian  paternalism  imposes  trivial  costs
on  those who  seek to depart  from the  planner's  preferred  option.  But
the  approach  we  recommend  nonetheless  counts  as  paternalistic,  be-
cause private  and  public planners"  are not trying to  track people's  an-
ticipated  choices,  but  are  self-consciously  attempting  to move  people
in  welfare-promoting  directions.  Some  libertarians  are  likely  to  have
little  or  no  trouble  with  our  endorsement  of  paternalism  for  private
institutions;  their  chief  objection  is  to  paternalistic  law  and  govern-
ment.  But  as  we  shall  show, the  same  points  that  support  welfare-
promoting private  paternalism  apply  to government  as  well. It follows

standing  of libertarianism,  one  that  attempts  to minimize  influences  on free  choice, or to  maxi-
mize  unfettered  liberty of choice. We suggest below  that influences  on freedom  of choice are  of-
ten impossible  to avoid. We also offer  reasons to believe  that more  choices are  not always  better
than  fewer. A  policy  of  requiring  active  choices, we  shall show,  does promote  a  form  of  choice,
but it has  problems  of its own. We  hope not  to have  any real  quarrels  with libertarians  here, sim-
ply because  our approach  allows  people  to opt  out of any specified  arrangements.

12  For  a  similar  definition,  see  Donald  VanDeVeer,  Paternalistic Intervention: The  Moral

Bounds on Benevolence 22  (Princeton  1986).

13 Bounded  rationality  and  bounded  self-control  are  described  in  Christine  Jolls, Cass  R.
Sunstein,  and  Richard  Thaler,  A  Behavioral Approach to  Law  and  Economics, 50  Stan  L  Rev
1471,  1477-79  (1998).

14  When  we  use  the  word  "planner"  in  this Article,  we  mean  anyone  who  faces  the job  of
designing  institutional  features  such  as  rules, procedures, information  packages,  and  the like.  A
large  firm  will  typically  have  many employees  who  are  serving  as  "planners"  in  this  sense,  from
the human resources  manager who  chooses  the set of  health  insurance  options  to the CEO  who
decides  whether to  pay the match  in  the 401(k)  plan in shares of company stock. For most of our
examples,  planners  are  not  government  officials,  though  the  arguments  apply  to  this  class  of
planners  as well.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1170 2003

20031

Libertarian Paternalism

1163

that  one  of  our  principal  targets  is  the  dogmatic  anti-paternalism  of
numerous  analysts  of  law,  including  many  economists  and  economi-
cally  oriented  lawyers."  We  believe  that  this dogmatism  is  based  on  a
combination of a false assumption  and two  misconceptions.6

The  false  assumption  is  that  almost  all  people, almost  all  of the
time, make  choices  that  are  in  their  best  interest  or  at  the  very  least
are better, by their  own lights, than  the choices that would  be made  by
third parties. This  claim is either tautological, and therefore  uninterest-
ing, or testable. We  claim  that it is testable  and false, indeed  obviously
false.  In  fact,  we  do  not  think  that  anyone  believes  it  on  reflection.
Suppose  that  a  chess  novice  were  to  play  against  an  experienced
player.  Predictably  the  novice  would  lose  precisely  because  he  made
inferior choices-choices  that could easily be  improved  by some  help-
ful hints. More  generally, how well people choose  is an  empirical ques-
tion, one  whose  answer  is likely  to vary  across domains."  As a  first ap-
proximation,  it  seems  reasonable  to  say  that  people  make  better
choices  in  contexts  in which  they  have  experience  and  good  informa-
tion  (say, choosing  ice  cream  flavors)  than  in  contexts  in  which  they
are  inexperienced  and poorly  informed  (say, choosing  among  medical
treatments  or investment  options). So long as  people are not choosing
perfectly, it is  at least possible  that some  policy could  make  them bet-
ter  off by improving  their  decisions.

15  See, for example,  Richard  A. Epstein, In Defense  of the  Contract at Will, 51  U Chi  L Rev

947  (1984).

16  For a  complaint  similar  to ours, see Ted O'Donoghue  and Matthew  Rabin, Studying  Op-

timal Paternalism,  Illustrated by a Model  of Sin Taxes, 93 Am  Econ  Rev 186  (May 2003):

[B]y  explicitly  addressing  when  and  how  people  do and do not  pursue  their own  best inter-
ests, economists  will be  better able  to contribute  to policy  debates. To  contribute  to debates
over  regulating  private  financial  decisions,  we  must  study  whether  financial  decisions  are
based  on  fallacious  statistical  reasoning  and  whether  self-control  problems  lead  people  to
borrow  too heavily; to contribute  to debates  over  teenage smoking, we  must  study whether
teenagers become  smokers  against  their long-run  best  interest. Economists  will  and should
be  ignored  if we  continue  to insist  that  it  is axiomatic  that constantly  trading  stocks  or ac-
cumulating  consumer  debt  or becoming  a  heroin  addict must be  optimal  for  the people do-
ing  these  things  merely because  they  have chosen  to do it.

17 

In  some  areas, of course,  it will  be difficult  to  reach  uncontroversial  conclusions  on  the
basis of empirical  study  alone, because  contested judgments  of value  are in  the  background.  Do
people  choose well  if they  choose  to marry  young, or do they choose  better if they cohabit  for a
long  time  before  marrying?  Do young,  unmarried  women  choose  well  if  they choose  abortion?
Empirical  issues are highly  relevant  here, but they will  hardly resolve  all social  disputes  on these
questions. We  are not attempting  to say  anything  controversial  about welfare,  or to  take sides  in
reasonable  disputes  about how  to understand  that term. For discussion of these  normative  issues,
see Amartya Sen, Development as Freedom  74-76 (Knopf 1999)  (maintaining  that welfare  should
be  seen  in  terms  of the  substantive freedoms  of people  to choose  a  life that they  have  reason  to
value);  Daniel  Kahneman,  Ed  Diener,  and  Norbert Schwarz,  Preface, in  Daniel  Kahneman,  Ed
Diener,  and Norbert Schwarz,  eds, Well-Being: The  Foundations of Hedonic Psychology ix, xi-xii
(Russell  Sage  1999)  (urging  a  view  of human welfare  that extends  beyond  traditional  economic
indicators  to include  "desirable  goods such  as love,  mental challenge, and stress").

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1171 2003

1164

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

The  first misconception  is that there  are  viable  alternatives  to pa-
ternalism. In many situations, some organization  or agent must make a
choice  that  will  affect  the  behavior  of some  other  people. There  is, in
those  situations,  no  alternative  to  a  kind  of  paternalism-at  least  in
the  form  of  an  intervention  that  affects  what  people  choose.  We  are
emphasizing,  then, the possibility  that  people's  preferences,  in certain
domains  and  across  a  certain  range,  are  influenced  by  the  choices
made by planners.'  The  point applies to both private  and public actors,
and  hence  to  those  who  design  legal  rules  as  well  as  to  those  who
serve  consumers. As  a  simple  example, consider  the  cafeteria  at some
organization. The cafeteria must make a multitude of decisions, includ-
ing  which  foods  to serve, which  ingredients  to  use, and  in  what  order
to arrange  the choices.  Suppose  that  the  director  of  the  cafeteria  no-
tices that customers  have a  tendency  to choose  more of the items  that
are  presented  earlier  in  the  line.  How  should  the  director  decide  in
what  order  to  present  the  items?  To  simplify, consider  some  alterna-
tive  strategies  that the director  might adopt in deciding  which  items to
place  early  in the line:

1.  She  could  make  choices  that  she  thinks  would  make  the

customers  best off, all things  considered.

2.  She  could make choices  at random.
3.  She  could  choose  those items  that she thinks  would make  the

customers  as obese  as possible.

4.  She  could  give  customers  what  she thinks  they  would  choose

on their  own.

Option  1 appears  to  be paternalistic,  but would  anyone  advocate
options  2  or  3?  Option  4  is  what  many  anti-paternalists  would  favor,
but it  is  much  harder  to implement  than  it  might  seem. Across a  cer-
tain  domain  of  possibilities,  consumers  will  often  lack  well-formed
preferences, in the sense  of preferences  that are firmly  held  and preex-
ist the director's  own choices  about how to order the relevant  items. If
the  arrangement  of  the  alternatives  has  a  significant  effect  on  the  se-
lections  the  customers  make,  then  their  true  "preferences"  do  not
formally  exist.

18  For  claims  to  this  effect,  see  Russell  Korobkin,  The  Status  Quo  Bias  and  Contract  De-
fault Rules, 83  Cornell  L Rev 608,675  (1998)  (asserting  that "the  preference  exogeneity  assump-
tion,  implicit  in  all  law-and-economics  theories  of efficient  contract  default  rule  selection,  is
probably  false");  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Endogenous  Preferences, Environmental Law, 22  J  Leg Stud
217, 224  (1993)  (arguing  that  the demand  for environmental  regulation  is  affected  by the  initial
allocation  of rights  by government  planners).  Important  qualifications  come  from  Robert  C. El-
lickson,  Order without  Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes (Harvard  1991)  (discussing  settings
in  which  people  organize  their  affairs  without  reference  to  law).  But even  with  those  qualifica-
tions,  there  is  no objection  to  libertarian  paternalism;  in  the  contexts  explored  by  Ellickson,  the
default  rule  is irrelevant, not harmful.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1172 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

1165

Of  course, market  pressures  will  impose  a  discipline  on  the self-
interested  choices  of  those  cafeteria  directors  who  face  competition.
To  that  extent,  those  directors  must  indeed  provide  people  with  op-
tions they  are  willing to buy. A cafeteria that faces  competition and of-
fers  healthy  but  terrible-tasting  food  is  unlikely  to  do  well.  Market-
oriented  libertarians  might  urge  that  the  cafeteria  should  attempt  to
maximize  profits, selecting  menus in  a way  that will increase  net reve-
nues. But profit maximization  is not the appropriate goal for cafeterias
granted  a  degree  of monopoly  power-for  example,  those  in  schools,
dormitories,  or  some  companies.  Furthermore,  even  those  cafeterias
that face  competition  will  find  that  some  of the  time, market  success
will  come  not  from  tracking  people's  ex  ante  preferences,  but  from
providing  goods  and  services  that  turn  out,  in  practice,  to  promote
their  welfare, all  things  considered.  Consumers  might be  surprised  by
what  they  end  up  liking;  indeed,  their  preferences  might  change  as  a
result of consumption."  And in  some  cases, the discipline  imposed  by
market  pressures  will  nonetheless  allow  the  director  a  great  deal  of
room  to maneuver, because  people's  preferences  are  not well-formed
across the relevant  domains.

While  some  libertarians will  happily  accept  this  point for  private
institutions, they  will  object to government  efforts  to influence  choice
in  the  name  of welfare. Skepticism  about government  might  be  based
on the  fact that governments  are  disciplined  less or  perhaps  not  at all
by  market  pressures. Or  such  skepticism  might  be  based  on  the  fear
that  parochial  interests  will  drive  government  planners  in  their  own
preferred  directions  (the  public  choice  problem).2'  We  agree  that for
government, the  risks of mistake and  overreaching  are  real and  some-
times  serious.  But  governments,  no  less  than  cafeterias  (which  gov-
ernments  frequently  run),  have  to  provide  starting  points  of  one  or
another kind;  this is  not  avoidable. As we  shall  emphasize, they  do  so
every  day through  the rules  of contract  and  tort, in a way  that inevita-
bly  affects  some  preferences  and  choices.2'  In  this  respect,  the  anti-
paternalist  position  is unhelpful-a literal nonstarter.

The  second  misconception  is  that paternalism  always  involves  co-
ercion.  As  the cafeteria  example illustrates, the  choice  of the  order in
which  to  present  food  items  does  not  coerce  anyone  to  do  anything,
yet  one might  prefer some orders  to others  on grounds  that are  pater-

19  See  generally Gary  S. Becker, Accounting for Tastes (Harvard  1996).
20  For  a  classic  illustration,  see  Bruce  A.  Ackerman  and  William  T.  Hassler,  Clean
Coal/Dirty Air: Or How  the Clean  Air Act Became a Multibillion-Dollar  Bail-Oat for High-Sulfur
Coal Producers and What  Should  Be Done about It (Yale  1981).

21  See  Korobkin,  83  Cornell  L  Rev  at  611  (cited  in  note  18)  (suggesting  that  "when  law-
makers  anoint  a  contract  term  the  default,  the  substantive  preferences  of contracting  parties
shift-that term  becomes more  desirable, and other competing terms  becom[e]  less desirable").

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1173 2003

1166

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

nalistic in  the sense that we use  the term. Would anyone  object to  put-
ting  the  fruit  and  salad  before  the  desserts  at  an  elementary  school
cafeteria if the result were  to increase  the consumption ratio  of apples
to Twinkies?  Is  this question  fundamentally  different  if the  customers
are  adults?  Since  no coercion  is  involved, we  think  that some  types of
paternalism  should  be  acceptable  to  even  the  most ardent  libertarian.
In the  important  domain  of savings  behavior, we  shall  offer a  number
of illustrations. To  those  anti-libertarians  who  are  suspicious  of  free-
dom of  choice  and  would  prefer  to embrace  welfare  instead,  we  urge
that  it  is  often  possible  for  paternalistic  planners  to  make  common
cause  with  their  libertarian  adversaries  by  adopting  policies  that
promise  to promote  welfare  but that  also  make  room  for freedom  of
choice. To  confident  planners, we  suggest  that the risks  of confused  or
ill-motivated  plans are  reduced  if people are  given  the opportunity  to
reject  the planner's  preferred  solutions.

The  thrust of our argument  is that the term "paternalistic"  should
not  be  considered  pejorative,  just  descriptive.  Once  it  is  understood
that  some  organizational  decisions  are  inevitable,  that  a  form  of pa-
ternalism  cannot  be  avoided,  and  that  the  alternatives  to paternalism
(such  as  choosing options  to make  people  worse  off) are  unattractive,
we  can  abandon  the less  interesting  question  of  whether to  be  pater-
nalistic  or  not,  and  turn to  the  more  constructive  question  of  how  to
choose  among the  possible  choice-influencing  options. To  this end  we
make  two  general  suggestions. First, programs  should  be  designed  us-
ing a  type  of welfare  analysis, one  in  which  a serious  attempt is  made
to measure  the  costs and  benefits  of outcomes  (rather  than relying on
estimates  of  willingness  to  pay).  Choosers  should  be  given  more
choices  if the  welfare  benefits  exceed  the welfare  costs. Second, some
results from  the psychology  of decisionmaking  should  be  used  to pro-
vide  ex ante  guidelines  to support  reasonable judgments  about  when
consumers and workers  will gain  most by increasing  options. We argue
that  those  who  are  generally  inclined  to  oppose  paternalism  should
consider these  suggestions uncontroversial.

The  remainder  of this Article  is organized  as  follows. In  Part I, we
briefly  support  the  claim  that  people's  choices  might  not  promote
their  own  welfare.  Part  II,  in  some  ways  the  conceptual  heart  of  the
Article,  asks  whether  a  form  of  paternalism  is  inevitable. We  suggest
that because  of  the likely  effects  of default  rules, framing  effects,  and
starting  points  on  choices  and  preferences,  paternalism,  at  least  in  a
weak  sense,  is  impossible  to  avoid.  To  be  sure,  planners  can  try  to
avoid  paternalism  by  requiring  people  to  make  active  choices,  but
sometimes  people will resist any  such requirement  (which  is along one
dimension  paternalistic  too, simply  because  people  sometimes  do  not
want  to  choose).  Part  III  investigates  how  a  libertarian  paternalist

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1174 2003

20031

Libertarian Paternalism

1.167

might  select among  the major  options, including  minimal paternalism,
required  active  choices,  procedural  constraints,  and  substantive  con-
straints. Part  IV  explores  a  large  question:  How  much  choice  should
be  offered?  We  identify  a  set  of  questions  that  must  be  answered  in
order  to  know  whether  people's  welfare  is  likely  to  be  promoted  or
undermined  by a large  option set. Part V explores  objections.

I.  THE RATIONALITY  OF CHOICES

The  presumption  that  individual  choices  should  be  respected  is
usually  based  on  the  claim  that people  do  an  excellent job  of making
choices, or at least that they do a far  better job than third parties could
possibly  do.22 As far  as  we  can  tell, there  is  little empirical  support  for
this claim,  at least  if it is  offered  in  this general  form. Consider the  is-
sue  of  obesity.  Rates  of  obesity  in  the  United  States  are  now  ap-
proaching  20  percent,  and  over  60  percent  of Americans  are  consid-
ered  either  obese  or  overweight."  There  is  overwhelming  evidence
that  obesity  causes  serious  health  risks, frequently  leading  to  prema-
ture  death.24  It  is  quite  fantastic  to  suggest  that everyone  is  choosing

22 

It is usually, but not always, based on this  claim. Some  of the standard  arguments against
paternalism  rest  not  on consequences  but  on  autonomy-on  a  belief that  people  are  entitled  to
make  their  own  choices  even  if  they err. Thus John  Stuart  Mill, On  Liberty (1859),  reprinted  in
Utilitarianism, On  Liberty, Considerations on Representative Government 69  (Dent  1972)  (H.B.
Acton,  ed), is  a mix  of autonomy-based  and  consequentialist  claims. Our principal  concern  here
is  with  welfare  rnd  consequences,  though  as we  suggest  below, freedom  of choice  is  sometimes
an  ingredient  in  welfare.  We  do not  disagree  with  the view  that  autonomy  has  claims of its own,
but  we  believe  that  it would  be fanatical,  in  the settings  that we  discuss, to treat autonomy, in  the
form  of  freedom  of choice, as a  kind of trump  not to be  overridden on  consequentialist  grounds.
In  any  case,  the  autonomy  argument  is  undermined  by  the fact,  discussed  in  Part  I, that some-
times preferences  and  choices  are a  function  of given  arrangements.  Most  importantly, we  think
that  respect  for  autonomy  is  adequately  accommodated  by  the  libertarian  aspect  of  libertarian
paternalism, as discussed  below.

We  note as  well that  the complex relationship  among preferences, choices, and autonomy  is a
large  theme  in  the  liberal  tradition. See  Don  Herzog,  Happy Slaves: A  Critique of Consent The-
ory 229  (Chicago  1989)  (challenging  consent  theory on the ground that some individuals  may  not
really  be  capable  of choice,  or  that  the  preexisting  social  roles  people  occupy  do  not  provide
them  with  real  choice);  Jon  Elster, Sour  Grapes: Studies  in  the  Subversion of  Rationality 109
(Cambridge  1983)  (discussing  adaptation  of preferences  to existing opportunities).  Sometimes  it
is  emphasized  that  preferences  and choices  are  a  product  of unjust  background  conditions, jeop-
ardizing  autonomy, and  that  when  choices  are  a  product  of  background  injustice, respect  for
those  choices  may  not  promote  autonomy.  See  Amartya  Sen,  Commodities and  Capabilities
(North-Holland  1985).  Our discussion  does  not engage  these  issues, but there  is  a  clear connec-
tion  between  such  arguments  and  claims  about  "adaptive  preferences,"  see  Elster, Sour Grapes
at  109-10, and  our emphasis on status quo  bias and  the endowment  effect  in  Part II.C.

23  See  Center  for  Disease  Control  data,  online  at  http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/
obesity/trend/prev-char.htm  (visited  May  10, 2003). This represents  a 61  percent  increase in  obe-
sity  between  1991  and  2000;  38.8  million  Americans  qualify  as  obese.  See  id.  See  also  Ali  H.
Mokdad,  et  al,  The  Continuing Epidemics  of  Obesity and  Diabetes in  the  United States, 286
JAMA  1195  (2001).

24  See, for example, Eugenia  E. Calle, et al, Body-Mass Index and Mortality in a Prospective
Cohort of US. Adults, 341  New  Eng J  Med  1097  (1999)  (discussing  increased  risk  of death  from

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1175 2003

1168

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

the  optimal  diet, or  a  diet  that  is  preferable  to  what  might  be  pro-
duced  with  third-party guidance.  Of course, rational people care  about
the  taste  of  food,  not  simply  about  health,  and  we  do  not  claim  that
everyone  who  is overweight  is  necessarily  failing to act rationally. It is
the  strong  claim  that  all  or  almost  all  Americans  are  choosing  their
diet optimally that we reject  as untenable. What is true for diets  is true
as  well  for  much  other  risk-related  behavior,  including  smoking  and
drinking, which  produce  over 500,000  premature  deaths each  year."  In
these  circumstances, people's choices  cannot reasonably  be thought, in
all  domains,  to  be  the  best  means  of promoting  their  well-being. In-
deed,  many  smokers,  drinkers,  and  overeaters  are  willing  to  pay  for
third parties to  help  them choose  better consumption  sets.

On  a  more  scientific  level,  research  by  psychologists  and  econo-
mists  over  the  past  three  decades  has  raised  questions  about  the  ra-
tionality  of many judgments and  decisions that individuals  make. Peo-
ple  fail  to  make  forecasts  that  are  consistent  with  Bayes's  rule,"  use
heuristics  that  can  lead  them  to  make  systematic  blunders,27  exhibit
preference  reversals  (that  is,  they  prefer  A  to B  and B  to A),"  suffer
from  problems  of self-control, " and  make  different  choices  depending
on  the framing  of the problem.'  It is possible  to  raise  questions  about

all  causes  among the obese).  See  also National Institute of Diabetes &  Digestive  & Kidney  Dis-
eases,  Understanding  Adult  Obesity,  NIH  Pub  No  01-3680 
(Oct  2001),  online  at
http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/nutrit/pubs/unders.htm#Healthrisks  (visited May  10, 2003)  (not-
ing  links between  obesity  and  cancer, diabetes, heart disease,  high blood pressure, and stroke).

25  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Risk  and  Reason:  Safety,  Law, and  the  Environment  8-9  (Cam-
bridge  2002),  relying on  J. Michael  McGinnis  and William  H.  Foege,  Actual  Causes  of Death  in
the  United  States,  270  JAMA  2207  (1993).  For  an  interesting  discussion,  see  Jonathan  Gruber,
Smoking's  'Internalities,'  25  Regulation  52,  54-55  (Winter  2002/2003)  (finding  a  disconnect  be-
tween  smokers'  short-term  desire  for  self-gratification  and  their  long-term  desire  for  good
health,  and  suggesting  that  cigarette  taxation  can help  smokers  exercise  the self-control  needed
to act on behalf of their  long-term interests).

26  See  David  M. Grether, Bayes  Rule as a  Descriptive Model:  The  Representativeness  Heu-
ristic, 95  Q  J  Econ  537  (1980).  Bayes's  rule  explains  how  to  change  existing  beliefs  as  to  the
probability of a  particular  hypothesis  in the  light of new evidence.  See Jonathan  Baron, Thinking
and Deciding  109-15  (Cambridge  3d ed  2000)  (giving a  mathematical  explanation  and  examples
of the rule's  application).

27  See,  for example,  Daniel  Kahneman  and  Shane  Frederick,  Representativeness  Revisited:
Attribute  Substitution  in Intuitive Judgment, in  Thomas  Gilovich,  Dale Griffin,  and  Daniel  Kah-
neman, eds, Heuristics and  Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment 49,53  (Cambridge  2002);
Amos  Tversky  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Judgment  under  Uncertainty: Heuristics  and  Biases,  185
Science  1124  (1974);  Amos Tversky  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Availability: A  Heuristic for Judging
Frequency  and Probability, 5  Cognitive  Psych  207  (1973).

28  See  Richard  H. Thaler,  The Winner's  Curse:  Paradoxes and Anomalies of Economic  Life

79-91  (Free  Press  1992).  In  the legal  context, see  Cass  R. Sunstein,  et  al,  Predictably Incoherent
Judgments, 54  Stan L  Rev  1153  (2002).

29  See  Shane Frederick, George  Loewenstein,  and Ted  O'Donoghue,  Time Discounting and

Time  Preference: A  Critical Review, 40 J Econ  Lit 351,367-68  (2002).

30  See  Colin  F. Camerer,  Prospect  Theory  in the  Wild: Evidence from  the  Field, in  Daniel
Kahneman  and  Amos  Tversky, eds, Choices, Values, and  Frames  288,  294-95  (Cambridge  2000);
Eric J. Johnson,  et  al,  Framing, Probability Distortions, and  Insurance  Decisions, in  id  at 224,238.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1176 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

1169

some  of these findings  and to  think that people may  do a better job of
choosing  in  the real  world than  they  do in the laboratory."  But studies
of  actual  choices  reveal  many  of  the  same  problems, even  when  the
stakes  are  high."

We  do not intend  to  outline  all  of the relevant  evidence  here, but
consider  an  illustration from the  domain  of savings behavior.  Benartzi
and Thaler  have  investigated  how  much  investors  like  the  portfolios
they  have  selected  in  their  defined  contribution  savings  plans."  Em-
ployees volunteered  to share  their portfolio  choices with the investiga-
tors by  bringing  a copy  of their  most recent statement to  the lab. They
were  then  shown  the probability  distributions  of expected  retirement
income  for  three  investment  portfolios  simply  labeled  A,  B,  and  C.
Unbeknownst  to  the subjects, the  three  portfolios were  their  own  and
portfolios  mimicking  the  average  and  median  choices  of  their  fellow
employees. The  distributions of expected  returns were computed  using
the software  of Financial  Engines, the  financial  information  company
founded  by  William  Sharpe.  On  average,  the  subjects  rated  the  aver-
age  portfolio  equally  with  their  own  portfolio, and  judged  the median
portfolio  to  be  significantly  more  attractive  than  their  own.  Indeed,
only  20  percent  of  the  subjects  preferred  their  own  portfolio  to  the

Note  also the  emerging  literature  on  people's inability  to predict  their  own  emotional  reactions
to events, a literature  that might  well bear  on the uses  of libertarian  paternalism. See Timothy  D.
Wilson  and Daniel  T. Gilbert, Affective  Forecasting, 35  Advances in  Experimental  Soc  Psych  345
(2003).

31  For some  evidence  in favor of consumer  sovereignty, see Joel Waldfogel,  Does Consumer
Irrationality Trump  Consumer Sovereignty?: Evidence  from  Gifts  and  Own  Purchases (Feb
2003), online  at http://papers.ssrn.com/abstractid=337261  (visited  May  10,  2003). Waldfogel finds
that people  value  their  own  purchases  more  highly  than  they  value  gifts  from  third  parties-a
finding  that, in  his  view, provides  support  for the idea  that consumers  are the best judges of what
goods  will  promote  their  welfare. We  do not  doubt  the finding. Note, however,  that Waldfogel  is
studying  the context  of ordinary  consumer  purchases, in  which people  are in  an  especially  good
position  to know what they like. We  are focusing  on less familiar situations, which present special
puzzles.

32  For evidence  that  heuristics and  biases  operate  in  the real  world, even  when  dollars are
involved, see Werner F.M. De Bondt  and  Richard  H. Thaler, Do Security Analysts Overreact?, 80
Am  Econ Rev 52  (1990)  (demonstrating  that security  analysts overreact  to  market data  and pro-
duce forecasts  that  are either  too  optimistic  or too pessimistic);  Robert  J. Shiller, Irrational Exu-
berance 135-47  (Princeton 2000)  (discussing  anchoring  and overconfidence  in market behavior);
Colin  F.  Camerer  and  Robin  M. Hogarth,  The  Effects  of Financial Incentives in  Experiments: A
Review  and Capital-Labor-Production Framework, 19  J  Risk  &  Uncertainty  7  (1999)  (finding
that  financial  incentives  have  never eliminated  anomalies  or persistent  irrationalities).  See  also
Colin  F. Camerer,  Behavioral Game Theory: Experiments in Strategic Interaction 60-62  (Prince-
ton  2003)  (finding  little effect  from  increased  stakes in  ultimatum  games designed  to test  the hy-
pothesis  that  people  are  self-interested,  and adding,  "If I had  a  dollar for  every  time  an  econo-
mist  claimed  that  raising  the  stakes  would  drive  ultimatum  behavior  toward  self-interest,  I'd
have  a  private jet on standby  all day").

33  See  Shlomo  Benartzi  and Richard  H. Thaler, How  Much Is Investor Autonomy  Worth?,

57  J  Fin 1593  (2002).

34 

Id at  1598.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1177 2003

1170

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

median portfolio."  Apparently, people  do not  gain much,  by their  own
lights, from choosing  investment portfolios  for themselves.

Or  consider  people's  willingness  to take  precautions.  In  general,
the decision to buy  insurance  for natural  disasters is a  product not of a
systematic inquiry into  either costs  or benefits, but of recent events."  If
floods  have  not  occurred  in  the  immediate  past,  people  who  live  on
flood plains  are  far less likely to purchase  insurance. 7 In the aftermath
of an  earthquake, the level  of insurance coverage  for earthquakes rises
sharply-but it declines steadily  from that point, as vivid memories  re-
cede. " Findings  of  this kind  do  not establish  that  people's  choices  are
usually  bad  or  that  third  parties  can  usually  do  better. But  they  do
show  that  some  of  the  time,  people  do  not  choose  optimally  even
when the stakes are  high.

It  is  true  that  people  sometimes  respond  to  their  own  bounded
rationality  by, for  example,  hiring  agents  or  delegating  decisions  to
others. " It is  also  true that learning  frequently enables  people  to over-
come  their own  limitations. But many of the most important  decisions
(for  example,  buying  a  home  or  choosing  a  spouse)  are  made  infre-
quently  and  typically  without  the  aid  of impartial  experts. The  possi-
bilities  of delegation  and  learning  are  insufficient  to ensure  that peo-
ple's choices  always  promote  their  welfare  or that  they  always  choose
better than third parties would.

In any  event, our emphasis  here is not on blocking  choices, but on
strategies  that move  people  in welfare-promoting  directions  while  also
allowing  freedom  of  choice.  Evidence  of  bounded  rationality  and
problems  of self-control is  sufficient  to suggest  that such strategies  are
worth  exploring.  Of course  many  people  value  freedom  of  choice  as
an end  in itself, but they  should not object to approaches  that preserve
that freedom  while also  promising  to improve  people's lives.4'

35 

Id.

36  See  Paul Slovic,  Howard  Kunreuther, and  Gilbert F  White, Decision Processes, Rational-

ity and Adjustment  to  Natural  Hazards (1974),  reprinted  in  Paul  Slovic,  The  Perception of Risk 1,
14  (Earthscan  2000)  (explaining  that  the availability  heuristic  "is  potentially  one  of the most im-
portant  ideas  for helping  us understand  the  distortions  likely to occur  in our perceptions of natu-
ral  hazards").  See  also  Howard  Kunreuther,  Mitigating Disaster Losses through Insurance, 12  J
Risk  &  Uncertainty  171,  174-78  (1996)  (explaining  why  individuals  fail  to  take  cost-effective
preventative  measures  or voluntarily  insure  against natural  disasters).

37  See  Kunreuther,  12  J  Risk  & Uncertainty  at  176-77  (cited  in note  36)  (concluding,  based
in  part  on  in-person  interviews  of homeowners  in  flood-prone  areas, that  "[tihe  occurrence  of a
disaster  causing  damage  to  one's  home  is  likely  to have  a  significant  impact  on the  demand  for
insurance").

38  See  id; Slovic,  Kunreuther,  and White, Decision Processes at  14  (cited  in  note 36).
39  See  Cass  R. Sunstein  and  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions, 110  Ethics  5

(1999).

4(l  See  note  22.  Some  people  will  favor  uninfluenced  choice, and  object  to  any  effort  to
move people's choices  in certain  directions. But as  Part  II explains, it is often  impossible  to avoid
influences  on choice.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1178 2003

20031

Libertarian Paternalism

II.  Is PATERNALISM  INEVITABLE?

A  few  years  ago,  the  tax  law  was  changed  so  that  employees
could  pay  for  employer-provided  parking  on  a  pre-tax  basis."  Previ-
ously, such  parking  had  to be  paid  for with  after-tax  dollars. Our em-
ployer,  and  the  employer  of  some  of  our  prominent  anti-paternalist
colleagues,  sent  around  an  announcement  of  this  change  in  the  law,
and  adopted  the  following  policy:  Unless  the  employee  notified  the
payroll  department, deductions  for  parking would  be  taken  from  pre-
tax rather  than post-tax  income. In other words, the University  of Chi-
cago  decided  that  the default  option would be  to pay for parking  with
pre-tax  dollars, but  employees  could  opt  out of  this arrangement  and
pay with after-tax  dollars. Call this choice  Plan A. An obvious  alterna-
tive, Plan  B, would  be  to announce  the  change  in the  law  and  tell em-
ployees that if they  want to switch  to the new  pre-tax plan they should
return  some  form  electing  this  option.  The  only  difference  between
the  two  plans  is  the  default. Under  Plan  A  the  new  option  is  the  de-
fault, whereas  under Plan  B  the status  quo is the  default. We will  refer
to  the  former  as  an  "opt-out"  strategy  and  the  latter  as  an  "opt-in"
strategy.

42

How  should  the  university  choose  between  opt-in  and  opt-out?
In  the  parking  example,  it seems  to  be  the  case  that  every  employee
would  prefer  to pay for parking  with pre-tax dollars  rather  than after-
tax  dollars.  Since  the  cost  savings  are  substantial  (parking  costs  as
much  as  $1200  per  year)  and  the  cost  of  returning  a  form  is  trivial,
standard economic  theory  predicts that the university's choice  will not
really  matter.  Under  either  plan,  all  employees  would  choose  (either
actively  under Plan  B or  by  default  under Plan  A) the  pre-tax option.
In  real  life,  however,  had  the  university  adopted  Plan  B, we  suspect
that  many  employees,  especially  faculty  members  (and  probably  in-
cluding  the  present  authors),  would  still  have  that form  buried  some-
where  in  their  offices  and  would  be  paying  substantially  more  for
parking  on an after-tax basis. In short, the default plan  would have had
large  effects on  behavior. Throughout  we shall be drawing  attention to
the  effects  of  default  plans  on  choices.  Often  those  plans  will  be  re-
markably  "sticky."

41  See 26  USC  § 132(f)  (2000).
42  Of course,  what  counts  as  opt-out  and what  counts as  opt-in depends on the  default op-

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1179 2003

1172

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

A.  Savings  and Employers

1.  Data and  default rules.

Our conjecture  that default plans affect  outcomes is supported by
the  results  of  numerous  experiments  documenting  a  "status  quo"
bias.43 The existing  arrangement, whether set  out by private institutions
or  by  government,  is  often  robust.  One  illustration  of  this phenome-
non  comes  from  studies of  automatic  enrollment  in 401(k)  employee
savings  plans,"  and  we now  elaborate  the brief account  with  which  we
began. Most  401(k)  plans  use  an  opt-in  design. When  employees  first
become  eligible  to  participate  in  the  401(k)  plan,  they  receive  some
plan  information  and  an  enrollment  form  that  must  be  completed  in
order to join. Under the alternative  of automatic  enrollment, employ-
ees receive  the same  information but are  told that unless  they opt out,
they will  be enrolled  in the plan (with  default  options for savings rates
and asset allocation). In companies  that offer  a "match"  (the  employer
matches  the employee's  contributions  according  to some formula,  of-
ten  a  50  percent  match  up  to  some  cap),  most  employees  eventually
do join  the plan,  but  enrollments  occur much  sooner under  automatic
enrollment. For  example,  Madrian  and  Shea  found  that initial  enroll-
ments jumped  from 49 percent  to 86 percent, 4' and  Choi and his  coau-
thors found  similar results."

Should  the  adoption  of  automatic  enrollment  be  considered  pa-
ternalistic? And  if so, should  it be seen  as a  kind of officious  meddling
with employee  preferences?  We  answer these  questions  yes and  no re-
spectively.  If  employers  think  (correctly,  we  believe)  that  most  em-
ployees  would  prefer  to  join  the 401(k)  plan  if  they  took  the  time  to

43  See  Daniel  Kahneman,  Jack  L.  Knetsch,  and  Richard  H.  Thaler, Anomalies:  The  En-
dowment  Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias, 5  J  Econ  Persp  193,197-99  (1991);William
Samuelson  and  Richard  Zeckhauser,  Status  Quo  Bias in  Decision Making, 1  J  Risk  &  Uncer-
tainty 7 (1988).

44  See note  I and  accompanying  text.
45  See  Madrian  and  Shea,  116  Q  J  Econ at  1158-59  (cited  in  note  1).
46  See  Choi,  et  al,  Defined Contribution Pensions at  76-77  (cited  in  note  1)  (finding  em-
ployee  enrollment  six  months  after  hire  at  three  companies  increased  after  the  adoption  of
automatic  enrollment,  from  26.4  percent  to 93.4  percent, 35.7  percent  to  85.9  percent, and  42.5
percent  to 96  percent).  In  a  separate  phenomenon,  the  default  rule  also  had  a  significant  effect
on the  chosen  contribution  rate. See  Madrian  and  Shea,  116  Q J  Econ  at  1162-76  (cited  in  note
1).  The  default contribution  rate  (3  percent) tended  to stick;  a  majority  of employees  maintained
that  rate  even  though  this  particular  rate  was  chosen  by  around  10  percent  of employees  hired
before  the automatic  enrollment. ld at  1162-63. The same  result  was  found for the default alloca-
tion  of the investment: While  less  than 7 percent of employees chose  a  100 percent  investment al-
location  to the  money  market  fund,  a  substantial  majority  (75  percent) of employees stuck  with
that  allocation  when  it  was  the default  rule. Id at  1168-71.  The  overall default  rate  (participation
in  the plan, at  a  3 percent  contribution  rate,  investing  100  percent  in  the money market  fund)  was
61  percent,  but  only  1 percent  of employees  chose  this  set  of options  prior  to their  adoption  as
defaults. Id at  1171-72.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1180 2003

20031

Libertarian Paternalism

1173

think  about it  and  did not lose  the enrollment  form, then  by  choosing
automatic  enrollment,  they  are  acting  paternalistically  by our  defini-
tion  of the  term. They  are  not  attempting  to protect  against  harms  to
third  parties, but  to steer employees'  choices  in directions  that will, in
the  view  of  employers,  promote  employees'  welfare.  Since  no  one  is
forced  to do  anything, we think  that this steering should be considered
unobjectionable  even  to  committed  libertarians. The  employer  must
choose  some  set  of rules, and  either  plan  affects  employees'  choices.
No law  of nature  says that in the  absence of an  affirmative election  by
employees, 0  percent  of  earnings  will  go  into  a  retirement  plan.  Be-
cause  both plans  alter choices, neither one  can  be said,  more than  the
other, to count  as a form  of objectionable  meddling.

2.  Skeptics.
Skeptical  readers,  insistent  on  freedom  of  choice,  might  be
tempted  to  think  that there  is  a  way  out  of  this dilemma.  Employers
could  avoid  choosing  a  default if they required employees  to make  an
active choice, either in or out. Call this option required active choosing.
Undoubtedly  required  active  choosing  is  attractive  in  some  settings,
but  a  little  thought  reveals  that  this  is  not  at  all  a  way  out  of  the  di-
lemma.  On  the  contrary,  required  active  choosing  is  simply  another
option  among  many  that  the  employer  can  elect.  In  fact  the  very  re-
quirement  that  employees  make  a  choice  has  a  strong  paternalistic
element.  Some  employees  may  not  want  to  have  to  make  a  choice
(and  might  make  a  second-order  choice  not  to  have  to  do  so).  Why
should  employers force  them to choose?

Required  active  choosing  honors  freedom  of  choice  in  a  certain
respect;  but  it  does  not  appeal  to  those  who  would  choose  not  to
choose,  and  indeed  it  will  seem  irritating  and  perhaps  unacceptably
coercive  by  their lights. In  some circumstances, required  choosing will
not  even  be  feasible."  In  any  case,  an  empirical  question  remains:
What  is  the  effect  of  forced  choosing?  Choi, et  al,  find  that required
active  choosing  increases  enrollments  relative  to  the  opt-in  rule,
though  not  by  as  much  as  automatic  enrollment  (opt-out).'  Our  dis-

47  Consider  the cafeteria  example: Any  menu  has  to predate  choosing. The  same  is  true  in
any  context, such  as social  security privatization,  in  which  planners  must provide  a menu  of op-
tions. Perhaps  it will be  responded  that  planners  might ask  choosers to  select "any  option  at all,"
but this is  unlikely to be  feasible.

48  Compare  Choi,  et al,  Defined Contribution Pensions at  86 (cited  in  note  1) (noting that
78  percent  of employees  offered  enrollment  in  a  program  committing  to  savings  from  future
raises  accepted,  and  62  percent  accepted  and  stayed  in  through  three  pay  raises),  with  id  at  77
(showing  enrollment  rates  in  opt-out  savings plans  at  three  companies six  months  after  hire  at
93.4 percent, 85.9  percent, and 96.0 percent).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1181 2003

11.74

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

cussion  in  Part  III  below  offers  some  suggestions  about  the  circum-
stances  in which  it makes most sense  to force people  to choose.

Other skeptics  might  think that employers  should avoid  paternal-
ism  by  doing what  most  employees  would  want  employers  to  do. On
this  approach,  a  default  rule  can  successfully  avoid  paternalism  if  it
tracks  employees'  preferences.  Sometimes  this  is  a plausible  solution.
But  what  if  many  or  most  employees  do  not  have  stable  or  well-
formed  preferences,  and  what  if  employee  choices  are  inevitably  a
product of the default rule? In such cases, it is meaningless  to ask  what
most  employees  would  do. The  choices  employees  will  make  depend
on  the  way  the  employer  frames  those  choices.  Employee  "prefer-
ences,"  as such,  do not exist  in those  circumstances.

We  think  that  savings  is  a  good  example  of  a  domain  in  which
preferences  are  likely  to  be  ill-defined.  Few  households  have  either
the  knowledge  or  inclination  to  calculate  their  optimal  life-cycle  sav-
ings  rate, and  even  if they  were  to make  such  a calculation,  its results
would  be  highly  dependent  on  assumptions  about  rates  of return and
life  expectancies.  In  light  of this, actual  behavior  is highly  sensitive  to
plan design features.

B.  Government

Some enthusiasts  for free  choice might  be willing  to acknowledge
these  points  and  hence  to  accept  private  efforts  to  steer  people's
choices  in  what seem  to  be  the right directions. Market  pressures, and
the frequently wide  range  of possible  options, might  be thought to im-
pose  sufficient  protection  against  objectionable  steering. But our  em-
phasis  has been  on  the inevitability  of paternalism,  and  on this  count,
the  same points apply to some choices  made by governments  in estab-
lishing legal  rules.

1.  Default  rules.

Default  rules  of some  kind  are  inevitable,  and  much  of  the  time
those  rules will affect  preferences  and choices."  In the neglected words
of a classic  article:

[A]  minimum  of state  intervention  is always  necessary....  When
a  loss  is  left  where  it  falls  in  an  auto  accident,  it  is  not  because
God  so ordained  it. Rather  it is  because  the state has  granted  the
injurer  an entitlement  to be  free  of liability and  will  intervene to

49  See  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Switching  the Default Rule, 77  NYU  L  Rev  106  (2002)  (showing
that  employees  sometimes  value  certain  rights  simply  because  they  have  been  granted  such
rights  in  the  first  instance); Korobkin,  83  Cornell  L Rev 608  (cited  in  note  18)  (arguing  that  evi-
dence  of status  quo bias  belies  the standard  law-and-economics  assumption  that  preferences  are
exogenous  to  the default  rule).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1182 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

1175

S  •  50

prevent  the  victim's  friends,  if  they  are  stronger,  from  taking
compensation  from the  injurer.
If the  entitlement-granting  rules  seem  invisible, and  seem  to  be  a
simple  way  of protecting  freedom  of choice, it is  because  they appear
so sensible  and natural  that they  are  not taken  to be  a legal  allocation
at  all. But  this  is  a  mistake. What  we  add  here  is'that  when  a  default
rule  affects  preferences  and  behavior,  it  has  the  same  effect  as  em-
ployer  presumptions  about savings  plans. This  effect  is  often both un-
avoidable  and  significant.  So  long as  people  can  contract  around  the
default  rule, it is fair to say that the legal  system is  protecting freedom
of choice, and in  that sense  complying with libertarian  goals.

Consumers,  workers, and  married  people,'  for  example,  are  sur-
rounded  by  a  network  of  legal  allocations  that  provide  the  back-
ground  against  which  agreements  are  made.  As  a  matter  of  employ-
ment  law, and  consistent  with  freedom  of contract,  workers  might  be
presumed  subject  to  discharge  "at  will,"  or  they  might  be  presumed
protected  by  an  implied  right to be  discharged  only "for  cause." They
might be  presumed to have  a right to vacation  time, or not. They might
be  presumed protected  by safety  requirements, or the employer  might
be free  to invest in  safety as  he wishes, subject  to market  pressures. In
all cases, the law must establish  whether workers have  to  "buy"  certain
rights from employers or vice  versa."  Legal  intervention, in this impor-
tant sense, cannot be  avoided. The same is  true for consumers, spouses,
and  all  others  who  are  involved  in  legal  relationships.  Much  of  the
time, the  legal  background  matters, even  if transaction  costs  are  zero,
because  it  affects  choices  and  preferences."0  Here,  as  in  the  private
context, a form of paternalism  is unavoidable.

In  the  context  of  insurance,  an  unplanned,  natural  experiment
showed  that the  default rule  can be  very "sticky.""  New  Jersey  created
a  system  in  which  the  default  insurance  program  for  motorists  in-
cluded  a relatively  low premium  and  no  right  to sue; purchasers  were
allowed  to deviate  from the default  program  and to purchase the  right
to  sue  by  choosing  a  program  with  that  right  and  also  a  higher  pre-
mium. By contrast, Pennsylvania  offered a default  program  containing
a  full  right  to  sue  and  a  relatively  high  premium;  purchasers  could

5  Guido Calabresi  and A. Douglas Melamed,  Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inaliena-

bility: One View  of the Cathedral,  85  Harv  L  Rev  1089,  1090-91  (1972).

51  On  marriage  and  legal  rules, see  generally  Susan  Moller  Okin, Justice, Gender, and the

52  See  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Human Behavior and the Law of Work, 87 Va  L  Rev  205,208-12

Family  (Basic  1989).

(2001).

53  See  the demonstrations  in  Korobkin,  83 Cornell  L  Rev  at  633-64  (cited  in  note  18),  and

Kahneman,  Knetsch, and  Thaler, 5  J  Econ  Persp at  194-204  (cited  in  note 43).

54  See  Camerer,  Prospect Theory in  the Wild  at  294-95  (cited  in  note  30); Johnson,  et  al,

Framing, Probability Distortions, Insurance Decisions at  238 (cited  in note  30).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1183 2003

1176

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:11.59

elect  to  switch  to a  new  plan  by  "selling"  the more  ample  right  to  sue
and  paying  a lower  premium. In  both cases, the default  rule  tended  to
stick. A  strong  majority  accepted  the  default  rule  in  both states, with
only  about 20 percent  of New  Jersey drivers  acquiring the  full right to
sue, and  75  percent of Pennsylvanians  retaining  that right." There is no
reason  to think  that the  citizens  of  Pennsylvania  have  systematically
different preferences  from the citizens  of New Jersey. The default plan
is  what  produced  the ultimate  effects. Indeed, controlled  experiments
find  the  same  results,  showing  that  the  value  of  the  right  to  sue  is
much higher when  it is presented  as  part of the default package."

In  another  example,  a  substantial  effect  from  the  legal  default
rule  was  found  in  a  study  of  law  student  reactions  to  different  state
law provisions  governing  vacation  time from  firms.7 The  study  was  in-
tended  to be  reasonably  realistic, involving  as  it did a  pool of subjects
to  whom the underlying  issues were  hardly foreign. Most law  students
have  devoted  a  good  deal  of time  to thinking  about salaries, vacation
time, and  the  tradeoffs  between  them. The  study  involved  two  condi-
tions. In the first, state law  guaranteed  two  weeks  of vacation  time, and
students  were  asked  to  state  their  median  willingness  to  pay  (in  re-
duced  salary)  for  two  extra  weeks  of  vacation.  In  this  condition, the
median  willingness  to pay was  $6,000.,, In  the  second  condition, state
law  provided  a  mandatory, non-waivable  two-week  vacation  guaran-
tee, but  it also  provided  employees  (including  associates  at law  firms)
with  the  right  to two  additional  weeks  of vacation,  a  right  that  could
be  "knowingly  and  voluntarily  waived."  Hence  the  second  condition
was  precisely  the  same  as  the  first, except  that  the  default  rule  pro-
vided  the  two  extra  weeks  of  vacation.  In  the  second  condition,  stu-
dents  were  asked  how  much  employers  would  have  to  pay  them  to
give  up  their  right  to  the  two  extra  weeks. All  by  itself, the  switch  in
the default  rule  more  than doubled  the students'  responses, producing
a median  willingness  to  accept  of $13,000."

We  can  imagine  countless  variations  on  these  experiments.  For
example, the law  might  authorize  a situation  in which  employees  have
to opt into  retirement  plans, or it  might require  employers  to  provide
automatic  enrollment  and  allow  employees  to  opt out. Both  systems
would respect  the freedom  of employees  to choose, and  either system
would  be libertarian  in  that sense. In  the  same vein, the  law might  as-

55  See Johnson,  et al,  Framing,  Probability Distortions, Insurance Decisions  at 238  (cited  in

Id at  235-38.

note 30).
56 
57  See Sunstein,  77  NYU  L  Rev  at  113-14  (cited  in  note 49).
58  The  question  asked students  to assume  that  no adverse  employment  consequences could

come  from asking  for, and  receiving, those  two extra  weeks  in  vacation. See  id at  113.

59  See  id.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1184 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

1177

sume  that  there  is  no  right  to  be  free  from  age  discrimination  in em-
ployment,  permitting  employees  (through  individual  negotiation  or
collective  bargaining)  to  contract  for  that right. Alternatively, it might
give  employees  a  nondiscrimination  guarantee,  subject  to  waiver  via
contract. Our  suggestion here is  that one or  another approach  is likely
to  have effects  on the  choices  of employees. This  is the  sense  in  which
paternalism  is  inevitable,  from  government  no  less than  from  private
institutions.

2.  Anchors.

In  emphasizing  the  absence  of  well-formed  preferences,  we  are
not  speaking  only  of  default  rules.  Consider  the  crucial  role  of "an-
chors," or starting points, in contingent  valuation studies, an influential
method  of valuing  regulatory goods  such  as increased  safety  and envi-
ronmental  protection.'  Such  studies, used  when market  valuations  are
unavailable,  attempt  to ask  people  their  "willingness  to pay"  for vari-
ous  regulatory  benefits.'  Contingent  valuation  has  become  prominent
in  regulatory  theory  and  practice. "2  Because  the  goal  is  to  determine
what  people  actually  want,  contingent  valuation  studies  are  an  effort
to  elicit, rather than to  affect, people's  values. Paternalism, in the sense
of effects  on preferences  and  choices, is not supposed  to  be part  of the
picture. But  it is  extremely difficult  for contingent  valuation  studies to
avoid constructing  the very  values that they  are  supposed to discover."
The  reason  is  that in the  contexts  in which  such  studies  are  used, peo-
ple  do  not  have  clear  or  well-formed  preferences,  and  hence  it is  un-
clear  that  people  have  straightforward  "values"  that  can  actually  be
found.  Hence  some  form  of  paternalism  verges  on  the  inevitable:
Stated values  will often be  affected,  at least  across a range, by how  the
questions  are  set up.

Perhaps  the  most  striking  evidence  to  this  effect  comes  from  a
study  of willingness  to  pay to  reduce  annual  risks  of death  and  injury

60  See,  for  example,  Ian  J.  Bateman  and  Kenneth  G. Willis,  eds, Valuing  Environmental
Preferences  (Oxford  1999).  But see Peter  A. Diamond  and Jerry  A. Hausman,  Contingent  Valua-
tion: Is Some  Number  Better  than  No  Number?,  8  J  Econ  Persp  45, 49-52  (1994)  (arguing  that
contingent  valuation  surveys  fail  to accurately  measure  willingness  to pay  preferences  with  re-
gard  to public goods);  Note, "Ask a Silly Question...": Contingent  Valuation of Natural Resource
Damages,  105  Harv  L  Rev  1981  (1992)  (criticizing  contingent valuation  in  ascertaining  natural
resource  damages, on the grounds  that  it  produces  biased  results  that  will  lead  to unfair liability
burdens).

61  See  Ian J.  Bateman  and  Kenneth  G. Willis,  Introduction and  Overview, in  Bateman  and

Willis, eds, Valuing  Environmental  Preferences 1, 1-3  (cited  in  note 60).

62  See generally  id.
63  See  John  W. Payne, James  R.  Bettman,  and  David A.  Schkade,  Measuring  Constructed

Preferences: Towards  a Building  Code, 19  J  Risk  &  Uncertainty  243,266 (1999).

64  See  id  at  245-47.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1185 2003

1178

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

in motor  vehicles."  The  authors  of that  study  attempted  to  elicit  both
maximum  and  minimum  willingness  to  pay  for  safety  improvements.
People  were  presented  with  a  statistical  risk  and  an  initial  monetary
amount, and  asked  whether  they  were  definitely  willing  or definitely
unwilling to  pay that  amount to eliminate  the risk, or if they were  "not
sure."  If  they  were  definitely  willing,  the  amount  displayed  was  in-
creased  until they  said that they  were  definitely unwilling. If they  were
unsure, the number  was  moved  up and  down  until people  could  iden-
tify the minimum  and maximum.

The  authors  were  not attempting  to test  the effects  of anchors;  on
the  contrary,  they  were  alert  to  anchoring  only  because  they  "had
been  warned"  of  a  possible  problem  with  their  procedure,  in  which
people  "might  be unduly  influenced  by  the first  amount of money that
they  saw  displayed."6  To  solve  that  problem,  the  study  allocated  peo-
ple  randomly  to  two  subsamples,  one  with  an  initial  display  of  25
pounds,  the  other  with  an  initial  display  of  75  pounds. The  authors
hoped  that  the  anchoring  effect  would  be  small,  with  no  significant
consequences  for  minimum  and  maximum  values. But  their  hope  was
dashed.  For every  level  of risk, the  minimum  willingness to pay  was
higher with the  75 pound starting point than the maximum  willingness
to pay  with the 25 pound starting point! 67 For  example,  a  reduction  in
the annual  risk of death  by 4  in  100,000  produced  a maximum willing-
ness  to  pay  of  149  pounds  with  the  25  pound  starting  value,  but  a
minimum willingness  to  pay of 232  pounds  with  the 75  pound  starting
value  (and  a  maximum, in  that  case,  of 350  pounds)." The  most sensi-
ble conclusion  is that  people  are  sometimes  uncertain  about appropri-
ate values, and whenever  they are, anchors  have  an effect-sometimes
a  startlingly large  one.

It is not clear how  those interested  in eliciting  (rather than  affect-
ing) values  might  respond  to  this problem." What  is clear  is that in the
domains  in  which  contingent  valuation  studies  are  used, people  often
lack well-formed  preferences,  and  starting points  have important  con-
sequences  for behavior  and  choice.

65  See  Michael  Jones-Lee  and  Graham  Loomes, Private  Values  and Public Policy, in  Elke
U. Weber,  Jonathan  Baron, and  Graham  Loomes, eds, Conflict and Tradeoffs in Decision Making
205,208-12  (Cambridge 2001).

68 
69  For a  general  discussion, see Payne, Bettman,  and  Schkade, 19  J  Risk  & Uncertainty  243

66 

67 

Id at  210.
ldat211.
Id.

(cited  in  note 63).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1186 2003

20031

Libertarian Paternalm

1179

3.  Framing.

We  have  suggested  that in the important  context  of medical deci-
sions, framing effects  are substantial."  Apparently, most people  do not
have  clear  preferences  about  how to  evaluate  a  procedure  that leaves
90 percent  of people  alive  (and  10 percent  of people dead)  after  a pe-
riod  of  years.  A  similar  effect  has  been  demonstrated  in  the  area  of
obligations  to  future  generations,7'  a  much-disputed  policy  question. 2
This  question  does  not directly  involve  paternalism,  because  those  in-
terested  in  the  valuation  of  future  generations  are  not  attempting  to
protect  people  from their  own errors. But a  regulatory  system  that at-
tempts  to  track  people's  preferences  would  try  to  measure  intergen-
erational  time  preferences,  that  is,  to  elicit  people's  judgments  about
how to  trade  off the protection  of current  lives and  future lives.7

Hence  an  important  question,  asked  in  many  debates  about  the
issue,  is  whether  people  actually  make  such judgments  and  whether
they  can  be elicited. And indeed, an  influential set  of studies finds  that
people  value the lives  of those  in the current generation  far more than
the  lives  of  those  in  future  generations.7  From  a  series  of  surveys,
Maureen  Cropper  and  her  coauthors  suggest  that  people  are  indiffer-
ent  between  saving  1 life today  and  saving 44 lives  in  100 years. 7  They
make  this  suggestion  on the  basis of questions  asking  people whether
they would  choose  a program  that saves "100  lives  now"  or a  program
that saves  a substantially  larger number "100  years from now."6

But it turns  out that  other descriptions  of the  same problem yield
significantly  different  results.17  Here, as  in  other  contexts, it is  unclear
whether people  actually  have  well-formed  preferences  with which the
legal  system  can  work.  For  example,  most  people  consider  "equally

70  See  note  8 and  accompanying  text.
71  See  Shane  Frederick,  Measuring Intergenerational Time  Preference: Are  Future Lives
Valued  Less?, 26  J  Risk  &  Uncertainty  39  (2003)  (finding  that  imputed  intergenerational  time
preferences can be  dramatically  affected  by  the specific question  asked).

72  See  Richard  L.  Revesz,  Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and  the Dis-
counting of Human Lives, 99 Colum  L Rev  941,947,987-1016  (1999)  (arguing  that  the discount-
ing of harms  to future  generations is  "ethically  unjustified");  Edward  R. Morrison, Comment,Ju-
dicial Review of Discount Rates Used in Regulatory Cost-Benefit Analysis, 65  U Chi  L  Rev  1333
(1998)  (discussing  the  ethical  and economic  dimensions  of the  debate  over  the  appropriate  dis-
count rate for  regulations  and other  public  projects).

73  See  Revesz,  99 Colum  L  Rev  at 996-1007  (cited  in  note  72). We  are  not suggesting  that

the preferences  of current generations  are decisive  on the policy question.

74  See  Maureen  L.  Cropper,  Sema  K. Aydede,  and  Paul  R.  Portney,  Preferences for  Life
Saving Programs: How the  Public Discounts Time  and Age, 8 J  Risk  &  Uncertainty  243  (1994);
Maureen  L. Cropper, Sema  K. Aydede, and  Paul R. Portney, Rates of Time Preference for Saving
Lives, 82 Am Econ  Rev 469,472  (1992).

75  Cropper, Aydede, and  Portney, 8 J  Risk  & Uncertainty  at  244 (cited in  note  74).
76  See  id  at 245-46  (explaining survey methodology).
77  See  Frederick, 26  J Risk  & Uncertainty  at  50 (cited in  note  71)  ("Many  of the elicitation

procedures  tested here indicate  no substantial  discounting of future  lives.").

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1187 2003

1180

The University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

bad"  a  single  death  from  pollution  next  year  and  a  single  death  from
pollution  in  100  years"-implying  no  preference  for  members  of  the
current  generation.  In  another finding  of no strong  preference  for  the
current  generation, people are  equally  divided  between  two programs:
one  that will save 55  lives  now and  105  more  lives in 20 years; and  one
that will save  100 lives now and  50 lives 25  years  from now. " It  is even
possible  to frame  the question  in such  a way  as to  find that future lives
are valued  more, not less, highly than current  lives.  The most sensible
conclusion  is  that people  do  not  have  robust,  well-ordered  intergen-
erational  time  preferences.  If so, it  is  not  possible  for  government  to
track  those  preferences, because  they  are  an  artifact  of how the  ques-
tion  is  put. The  point  applies  in  many  contexts.  For  example,  people
are  unlikely  to  have  context-free  judgments  about  whether  govern-
ment should  focus  on statistical  lives or  statistical  life-years  in  regula-
tory  policy;  their  judgments  will  be  much  affected  by  the  framing  of
the question."

C.  Why Effects  on Choice Can Be Hard  to Avoid

1.  Explanations.

Why, exactly, do default  rules, starting  points, and framing  effects
have  such  large  effects?  To  answer  this  question,  it  is  important  to
make some distinctions.

a) Suggestion.  In  the face of uncertainty  about  what should  be
done, people might rely  on one of two related  heuristics: do what most
people  do, or  do what informed  people  do.8  Choosers might think that
the default  plan  or  value  captures  one  or  the  other. In  many settings,
any  starting point will  carry  some  informational  content  and  will thus
affect  choices. When  a  default  rule  affects  behavior,  it might  well  be
because  it  is  taken  to  carry  information  about  how  sensible  people

78  Id  at 43.
79  Id at 44.
8t See  id  at  45.  Frederick  asked  subjects  to choose  between  two  programs. The  first  would
become  more  effective  over  time, saving  100  lives  this decade,  200 lives  in  the following  decade,
and  300  lives  in  the decade  after  that. The  second  would  become  less effective  over  time, saving
300  lives  this  decade,  200  lives  in  the following  decade,  and  100  lives  in  the  decade  after  that.
Most  people  preferred  the first program, apparently  suggesting  that  future lives  are valued more
highly. Id.

81  See  Cass  R. Sunstein, Lives,  Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, Colum L  Rev (forthcom-

ing  2004).

82  See  the  discussion  of imitation  as  a  fast  and  frugal  heuristic  in  Joseph  Henrich,  et  al,
What Is  the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality?, in  Gerd  Gigerenzer  and  Reinhard  Selten,
eds, Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox 343,344  (MIT 2001)  ("Cultural  transmission ca-
pacities  allow  individuals  to shortcut  the costs  of search, experimentation,  and data  processing
algorithms,  and  instead  benefit  from  the  cumulative  experience  stored  in  the  minds  (and  ob-
served  in  the behavior)  of others.").

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1188 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

usually  organize  their  affairs.  Notice  that  in  the  context  of  savings,
people  might  have  a  mild  preference  for  one  or  another  course,  but
the  preference  might  be  overcome  by  evidence  that  most  people  do
not take  that course. Some workers  might think, for example, that they
should not  enroll in  a 401(k)  plan  and  have a  preference  not  to do  so;
but the  thought  and  the preference  might  shift with evidence  that the
employer  has made enrollment  automatic.

With  respect  to  savings,  the  designated  default  plan  apparently
carries  a  certain  legitimacy  for  many  employees,  perhaps  because  it
seems  to  have  resulted  from  some  conscious  thought  about  what
makes  most  sense  for  most  people."3 This  interpretation  is  supported
by  the  finding  that  the  largest  effects  from  the  new  default  rule  are
shown  by  women  and  African-Americans."  We  might  speculate  that
members  of  such  groups  tend  to  be  less confident  in  their  judgments
in this domain  and  may have  less experience  in assessing  different sav-
ings plans.

b)  Inertia.  A  separate  explanation  points  to  inertia. "  Any
change  from the default  rule or starting value is likely  to require  some
action. Even a trivial  action, such as  filling in some form and returning
it,  can  leave  room  for  failures  due  to  memory  lapses,  sloth,  and  pro-
crastination.  Many people wait until the last minute  to file their  tax re-
turn, even when  they  are  assured  of getting  a refund. The  power  of in-
ertia  should  be  seen  as  a  form  of  bounded  rationality. Although  the
costs  of  switching  from  the  default  rule  or  the  starting  point  can  be
counted  as  transaction  costs, the fact that large  behavioral changes  are
observed  even  when such  costs are  tiny  suggests  that a purely  rational
explanation  is difficult to accept.

c)  Endowment effect.  A default  rule might create  a "pure"  en-
dowment  effect. It is well  known that people tend to value goods more
highly  if  those  goods  have  been  initially  allocated  to  them  than  if
those  goods  have  been  initially  allocated  elsewhere."  And  it  is  well
known  that, in many  cases, the default  rule  will create  an  endowment
effect.  When  an  endowment  effect  is  involved,  the  initial  allocation,
by  private  or  public  institutions,  affects  people's  choices  simply  be-
cause  it affects  their  valuations.

d)  Ill-formed preferences.  In  the  cases  we  have  discussed,
people's  preferences  are  ill-formed  and  murky. Suppose,  for example,

83  See  Madrian  and  Shea,  116  Q J Econ  at  1177-78  (cited  in note  1).
84  See  id  at  1160-61.
85  See  id  at  1171  (noting  that, under  automatic  enrollment,  individuals  become  "passive

savers"  and "do  nothing  to move  away  from  the default  contribution  rate").

86  See  generally  Korobkin,  83  Cornell  L  Rev  608  (cited  in  note  18);  Richard  H.  Thaler,

Quasi Rational  Economics (Russell  Sage  1991).

87  See  note 43.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1189 2003

1182

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

In 

to  understand 

these  circumstances, 

that  people  are  presented  with  various  payouts  and  risk  levels  for
various  pension  plans.  They  might  be  able 
the
presentation;  there  might be  no confusion.  But  people  might not have
a  well-defined  preference  for, or  against,  a  slightly  riskier  plan  with a
slightly  higher  expected  value. 
their
preferences  might  be  endogenous  to  the  default  plan  simply  because
they  lack  well-formed  desires  that  can  be  accessed  to  overrule  the
default  starting points. In unfamiliar  situations, it is  especially unlikely
that  well-formed  preferences  will  exist.  The  range  of  values  in  the
highway  safety  study  is  likely  a  consequence  of  the  unfamiliarity  of
the context, which  leaves  people  without clear preferences  from which
to generate  numbers. The effects  of framing on intergenerational  time
preferences  attest  to  the  fact  that  people  do  not  have  unambiguous
judgments  about  how  to  trade  off the  interests  of  future  generations
with  those of people  now  living.m

2.  The inevitability  of paternalism.

For  present  purposes,  the  choice  among  these  various  explana-
tions  does  not  greatly matter. The  central  point is that effects  on indi-
vidual  choices  are  often  unavoidable.  Of course  it  is usually  good  not
to  block  choices, and we do  not mean  to defend  non-libertarian  pater-
nalism  here. But  in  an  important  respect  the  anti-paternalist  position
is  incoherent,  simply  because  there  is  no  way  to avoid  effects  on  be-
havior  and  choices. The  task  for  the  committed  libertarian  is,  in  the
midst of such  effects, to  preserve  freedom of choice.

Because framing  effects  are  inevitable, it is hopelessly inadequate
to say  that when  people  lack relevant  information  the best  response  is
to provide  it. In order to be  effective, any  effort  to inform  people must
be rooted  in  an  understanding  of how people  actually  think. Presenta-
tion  makes  a great  deal of difference: The  behavioral  consequences  of
otherwise  identical  pieces  of  information  depend  on  how  they  are
framed.

Consider  one  example  from  the  realm  of  retirement  savings.
Benartzi  and  Thaler  asked  participants  in  a  defined  contribution  sav-
ings  plan  to  imagine  that  they  had  only  two  investment  options, Fund
A and  Fund  B, and  asked  them  how  they  would  allocate  their  invest-
ments between  these  two funds."  (The two funds  were, in fact, a diver-
sified  stock  fund  and  an  intermediate  term  bond  fund.)  All  subjects
were  given  information  about  the  historic  returns  on  these  funds.
However,  one  group  was  shown the  distribution  of annual rates  of re-

88  See  notes 75-80  and accompanying  text.
89  See  Shlomo  Benartzi  and  Richard  H. Thaler,  Risk Aversion or Myopia? Choices in Re-

peated Gambles and Retirement Investments, 45  Mgmt  Sci 364,375  (1999).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1190 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

1183

turn, whereas  another  group was  shown  simulated  thirty-year  rates of
return. "  The  long-term  rates  of  return were  derived  from  the  annual
rates  of return  (by  drawing years  at random  from history),  and  so the
two  sets  of information  were, strictly speaking, identical. Nevertheless,
participants  elected  to invest about  40 percent  of their money  in equi-
ties  when  shown  the  annual  returns  and  90  percent  when  shown  the
long-term  rates  of return.'  The  lesson  from  this example  is  that  plan
sponsors  cannot  avoid  influencing  the  choices  their participants  make
simply  by  providing  information. The  way  they  display  the  informa-
tion will, in some situations, strongly alter  the choices  people make.

The  point  that the  presentation  of information  influences  choice
is  a  general  one. In  the face  of health  risks, for example,  some  presen-
tations  of  accurate  information  might  actually  be  counterproductive,
because  people  might  attempt  to  control  their  fear  by  refusing  to
think  about  the  risk  at  all. In  empirical  studies, "some  messages  con-
veying  identical  information  seemed  to  work  better than  others, and
[ ] some  even  appeared  to  backfire.""'  When  information  campaigns
fail  altogether, it  is  often  because  those  efforts "result  in  counterpro-
ductive defensive  measures.""'  Hence  the most effective  approaches  go
far beyond mere  disclosure and combine  "a  frightening  message about
the  consequences  of inaction  with  an  upbeat  message  about  the  effi-
cacy of a proposed program  of prevention. "4

There  are  complex  and  interesting  questions  here  about  how  to
promote  welfare. If information  greatly  increases  people's  fear, it will
to  that  extent  reduce  welfare-in  part because  fear  is  unpleasant, in
part  because  fear  has  a range  of  ripple effects  producing  social  costs.
We  do  not speak  to  the  welfare  issue  here.  Our  only  suggestions  are
that  if people  lack  information,  a  great  deal  of attention  needs  to  be
paid  to  information  processing,  and  that  without  such  attention,  in-
formation  disclosure  might  well  prove  futile  or  counterproductive.
And  to  the  extent  that  those  who  design  informational  strategies  are
taking account  of how people  think and  are  attempting to steer people
in desirable  directions, their  efforts will  inevitably have  a paternalistic
dimension.

90  See id.
91  Id  at  377.
92  Andrew  Caplin,  Fear as a Policy Instrument, in  George  Loewenstein,  Daniel  Read,  and
Roy  Baumeister, eds, Time and Decision: Economic and Psychological Perspectives on Intertem-
poral Choice 441,443  (Russell  Sage 2003).

93 
94 

Id  at 442.
Id at 443.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1191 2003

1184

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

D.  Beyond the Inevitable  (But Still  Libertarian)

The  inevitability  of  paternalism  is  most  clear  when  the  planner
has  to  choose  starting  points  or  default  rules. But  if  the  focus  is  on
welfare, it is  reasonable  to ask  whether  the planner  should  go  beyond
the  inevitable, and  whether  such  a  planner  can  also  claim  to be  liber-
tarian. To  illustrate  the  problem, return  to  the simple  cafeteria  exam-
ple  discussed  above.  Putting  the: fruit  before  the  desserts  is  a  fairly
mild  intervention. A  more  intrusive  step  would  be  to  place  the  des-
serts  in another  location  altogether, so  that diners  have  to get up  and
get  a  dessert  after  they  have  finished  the  rest of  their  meal. This  step
raises  the  transaction  costs  of eating  dessert, and  according  to a  stan-
dard  economic  analysis the proposal  is quite  unattractive-it  seems  to
make  dessert  eaters  worse  off and no one  better off. But many people
face  problems  of  self-control,  and  the  results  include  illness  and  dis-
ease, small and  large."  Once  the  costs of self-control  are  incorporated
into  the  analysis,  we  can  see  that  some  diners  would  prefer  this  ar-
rangement,  namely  those  who  would  eat  a  dessert  if  it  were  put  in
front of  them  but  would  resist  temptation  if  given  a  little  help. To  fit
with  libertarian  principles, the  planner  could  arrange  two  lines  in  the
cafeteria:  the  tempting  line  and  the  non-tempting  line. The  tempting
line  would  include  everything,  whereas  the  non-tempting  line  would
make  unhealthy  foods less  available. Since  people could  choose  either
line, this  passes  the  libertarian  test. (As  a  solution  to  the  self-control
problem, it might  not be  entirely  adequate, because  people  would  be
tempted  to  join  the  tempting  line.)  Hence  it  is  possible  to  preserve
freedom  of  choice,  and  to  allow  opt-outs,  but  also  to  favor  self-
conscious  efforts to  promote  welfare  by helping people  to solve prob-
lems  of bounded  rationality  and  bounded  self-control.  Efforts  of this
kind need  not  attempt  to give  people what they would choose  ex ante,
even  in cases  in which  preferences  exist; but such  efforts  would  none-
theless allow people  to move  in their  preferred  directions.

In  the  domain  of employee  behavior,  there  are  many  imaginable
illustrations. Employees  might  be  automatically  enrolled  in  a  401(k)
plan, with  a right to opt out, but employers  might require  a waiting pe-
riod,  and  perhaps  a  consultation  with  an  adviser,  before  the  opt-out
could  be  effective."  Thaler  and  Benartzi  have  proposed  a  method  of

95  See  O'Donoghue  and  Rabin, 93  Am  Econ  Rev  at  187  (cited  in  note  16)  (arguing  that
"imposing  seemingly  large sin  taxes  on unhealthy  items while  lowering  taxes on other items may
not  hurt  rational  consumers  by  much,"  and  may  "create  significant  benefits  for those  who  over-
consume  the unhealthy  items due  to self-control  problems"); Jolls, Sunstein,  and  Thaler, 50  Stan
L Rev at  1479  (cited  in note  13).

96  Note  that  some  committed  libertarians  might  be  uncomfortable  with  waiting  periods,
separate  cafeteria  lines, and  the like,  especially if  these are  defended  as a  way  of changing  pref-
erences. Our  main  goal  here, however,  is to  help people  to solve  their  self-control  problems, and

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1192 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

1185

increasing  contributions  to 401(k)  plans that also meets the libertarian
test."7  Under  the  Save  More  Tomorrow  plan,  briefly  described  in  the
Introduction,  employees  are  invited  to sign  up for  a program  in which
their  contributions  to the  savings  plan  are  increased  annually  when-
ever  they get a  raise. Once  employees  join the  plan, they  stay in  until
they  opt  out or  reach  the maximum  savings  rate. In  the first company
to  use  this  plan,  the  employees  who  joined  increased  their  savings
rates  from  3.5  percent to  11.6  percent  in  a  little over  two  years (three
raises).98 Very few of the employees who join the plan drop  out. We be-
lieve  that  this  is  successful  libertarian  paternalism  in  action.  In  fact,
the ideas  of automatic  enrollment  and  Save  More Tomorrow  provide
quite  promising models for increasing  saving; they might  well be  more
effective  than imaginable economic  incentives, as  for example  through
decreased  taxes on  savings.

The  same  sort  of  strategy  might  be  used  in  many domains.  Mov-
ing  from  paternalism  to protection  of third  parties, employers  (or  the
state)  might seek  to increase  charitable  giving from  workers. Is  it pos-
sible  to  produce  a  form  of  libertarian  benevolence,  and  if  so,  how
might  this be  done?  Moral suasion  may or  may not succeed,  but com-
pare  a  system of Give  More  Tomorrow. Because  workers  appear quite
willing  to part with  a  fraction of their  future raises, such  a system, like
Save  More  Tomorrow, would  be  highly  appealing  to many  people. In
fact  the ideas  explored  here  might  well  be used  to produce  significant
increases  in  charitable  donations  (of  course,  there  are  obvious  com-
plexities about  institutional  design and  appropriate  default  beneficiar-
ies').

It should now be clear  that the difference  between  libertarian  and
non-libertarian  paternalism  is not simple and  rigid. The libertarian pa-
ternalist  insists  on preserving  choice, whereas  the  non-libertarian  pa-
ternalist  is willing  to foreclose  choice. But in  all cases, a  real  question
is  the  cost  of exercising  choice, and  here  there  is  a  continuum  rather
than a  sharp dichotomy. A libertarian paternalist  who  is especially  en-
thusiastic  about  free  choice  would  be  inclined  to  make  it  relatively
costless for people  to obtain  their preferred  outcomes. (Call  this  a lib-
ertarian paternalist.)  By contrast, a libertarian  paternalist who  is espe-

for  this  reason  the  objection,  from  the standpoint  of liberty, seems  weak, at  least  if  freedom  of
choice is  preserved.

Id.

97  See Thaler and Benartzi, J Polit  Econ  (forthcoming)  (cited  in note  2).
98 
99  We  acknowledge  that  a  Give  More  Tomorrow  program  is  more  easily abused  than  one
involving  Save  More  Tomorrow.  In  the  latter  case,  the  resources  remain  with  the  employee,
whereas  in  the former, the resources  go  elsewhere, and  perhaps  to  those whom  employers  favor.
Any  development  of a  Give  More  Tomorrow  plan  should  have  safeguards  against  employer
favoritism  or self-dealing, just  as one  would want  safeguards  to prevent  self-dealing in  the choice
of mutual  funds to include  in the 401(k)  plan.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1193 2003

1186

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

cially  confident  of his  welfare  judgments  would  be  willing  to impose
real  costs  on workers  and  consumers  who seek  to do  what, in  the pa-
ternalist's  view, would  not be  in  their  best  interests. (Call  this  a  liber-
tarian paternalist.)

Rejecting  both  routes,  a  non-libertarian  paternalist  would  at-
tempt  to  block  certain  choices.  But  notice  that  almost  any  such  at-
tempt  will  amount,  in  practice,  to  an  effort  to  impose  high  costs  on
those  who try  to  make those  choices. Consider a  law  requiring drivers
to  wear  seat belts. If  the  law  is  enforced,  and  a  large  fine  is  imposed,
the  law is  non-libertarian  even  though  determined  violators can  exer-
cise  their  freedom  of  choice-at  the  expense  of  the  fine. But  as  the
expected  fine approaches  zero, the law  approaches  libertarianism. The
libertarian  paternalism  that we  are  describing  and  defending  here  at-
tempts to ensure, as  a general rule, that people  can easily  avoid  the pa-
ternalist's  suggested  option.""

E. 

Illustrations  and Generalizations

Many  actual  and  proposed  legal  provisions  embody  libertarian
paternalism.  Some  of  those  provisions  require  disclosure  of informa-
tion; some  of them  shift  the  default  rule; some  of them preserve  free-
dom  of contract  but  impose  procedural  or  substantive  restrictions  on
those  who  seek  to move  in  directions  that seem, to the  planner, to be
contrary  to their  welfare. We  divide this brief catalogue  into  two parts,
the first dealing  with  labor and  employment  law, and the  second  deal-
ing with  consumers  more  generally.""

1.  Labor and  employment law.

Under  the  Age  Discrimination  in  Employment  Act  (ADEA),
employees  are  permitted  to waive  their rights when  they are  retiring, '
and  hence  the  statutorily  conferred  right-to  be  free  from  age  dis-
crimination-does  not  reject  the  libertarian  commitment  to freedom
of contract.  But  the employee  is  presumed  to have  retained  that right
unless  there  has  been  a "knowing  and  voluntary"  waiver."" To  ensure
that the waiver  is  knowing  and  voluntary, the ADEA  imposes a  range
of  procedural  hurdles.  Thus  the  waiver  must  specifically  refer  "to
rights  or  claims  arising  under"  the  ADEA;""  the  employee  must  be

I)  We are  not, therefore, attempting  to enter  into the debate between  paternalists and  anti-

paternalists, though  obviously much  of our discussion  bears on  that debate.

101 For  an  overlapping  catalogue,  see  Camerer, et  al,  151  U  Pa  L  Rev  at  1224  (cited  in

note 6).

H)2  29  USC § 626(f)(1)  (2000).
103  Id.
HK4 Id  § 626(f)(1)(B).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1194 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

1187

advised  in  writing  to  consult  with  an  attorney  before  executing  the
agreement;'Ol  the  employee  must  be  given  "at  least  21  days  within
which  to  consider  the  agreement";"' and  the  agreement  must provide
for a  minimum of a  seven-day post-execution  revocation  period. '7 The
ADEA  has  an  unmistakable  paternalistic  dimension  insofar  as  it
switches  the  default  rule  to  one  favoring  the  employee  and  also  cre-
ates  a set  of procedural  barriers  to insufficiently  informed waivers. At
the same  time, the ADEA goes beyond the inevitable  minimal level  of
paternalism  by  imposing  those  barriers,  which  significantly  raise  the
burdens  of  waiver.  But  the ADEA  preserves  freedom  of  choice  and
thus satisfies  the libertarian criterion.

Labor  and  employment  law  offers  several  other  examples.  The
Model  Employment  Termination  Act  alters  the  standard  American
rule, which  holds  that employees  may  be  discharged  for  no  reason  or
for  any reason at  all."  Under the  Model Act, employees  are  given  the
right  to  be  discharged  only  for  cause.'9  But  the  Model Act  complies
with  libertarian  principles  by  allowing  employers  and  employees  to
waive  the  right  on the  basis of an agreement, by  the employer, to pro-
vide  a  severance  payment  in  the  event  of  a  discharge  not  based  on
poor  job  performance.'0  That  payment  must  consist  of  one  month's
salary  for  every  year  of  employment."'  This  limitation  on  waiver  is
substantive  and in  that sense quite  different  from the procedural  limi-
tation  in the ADEA;  in this  way it  is  less libertarian  than  it might  be.
But freedom of choice  is nonetheless  respected.

An  important  provision  of the  Fair Labor  Standards Act belongs
in  the  same  category."2  Under  that  provision,  employees  may  waive
their right  not to work  for more than forty hours per week,  but only at
a  governmentally  determined  premium  (time  and  a  half)."'  Here, as
under the  Model Act, a  substantive  limitation  is  imposed  on workers'
rights to opt out of a  default arrangement.

2.  Consumer protection.

In  the  law of consumer  protection, the most  obvious examples  of
libertarian  paternalism  involve  "cooling-off"  periods  for  certain  deci-

105 

Id §  626(f)(1)(E).

Id § 626(f)(1)(F)(i).

]06 
107  Id § 626(f)(1)(G).
108  See  Model  Employment  Termination  Act,  reprinted  in  Mark  A. Rothstein  and  Lance
Liebman, Statutory Supplement,  Employment Law: Cases and Materials 211  (Foundation  2003).

109  Id § 3(a).
110  Id § 4(c).
III  Id.
I 1t2  See  29 USC  § 207(f)  (2000).
113 Id.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1195 2003

1188

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

sions.'" The  essential  rationale  is  that  under  the  heat  of  the  moment,
consumers  might  make  ill-considered  or  improvident  decisions.  Both
bounded  rationality  and  bounded  self-control  are  the  underlying con-
cerns.  A  mandatory  cooling-off  period  for  door-to-door  sales,  of  the
sort  imposed  by  the Federal  Trade  Commission  in  1972,"'  provides  a
simple  illustration.  Under  the  Commission's  rule, door-to-door  sales
must  be  accompanied  by written  statements  informing  buyers  of their
right  to  rescind  purchases  within  three  days  of  transactions."'  Some
states  also  impose  mandatory  waiting  periods  before  people  may  re-
ceive  a  divorce  decree.'"7  We  could  easily  imagine  similar restrictions
on  the decision to marry, and some states have  moved in this direction
as  well."" Aware  that  people  might  act  impulsively  or  in  a  way  that
they will regret, regulators  do not block  their choices, but ensure a  pe-
riod  for sober  reflection.  Note in  this regard  that  mandatory cooling-
off periods  make best sense, and  tend to be imposed, when  two condi-
tions  are  met:  (1) people  are  making  decisions  that  they  make  infre-
quently  and  for which  they  therefore  lack  a  great  deal  of experience,
and  (2)  emotions  are  likely  to be  running  high. These  are  the  circum-
stances-of  bounded  rationality  and  bounded  self-control  respec-
tively-in  which  consumers  are  especially  prone  to  making  choices
that they  will regret.

3.  Generalizations.

We  are  now  in a position  to categorize  a diverse set  of paternalis-
tic  interventions:  minimal  paternalism,  required  active  choices, proce-
dural constraints, and substantive  constraints.

a)  Minimal paternalism. Minimal  paternalism  is  the  form  of
paternalism  that  occurs  whenever  a  planner  (private  or  public)
constructs  a default  rule  or starting  point with  the goal  of influencing
behavior. So  long as it is  costless  or  nearly  costless to depart from  the
default  plan, minimal  paternalism  is  maximally  libertarian. This  is  the
form of paternalism  that we have  described  as inevitable.

b)  Required active choices.  Unsure  of  what  choices  will  pro-
mote  welfare,  a  planner  might  reject  default  plans  or  starting  points

114  See  the  valuable  discussion  in  Camerer,  et  al,  151  U  Pa  L  Rev  at  1240-42  (cited  in

note 6).

115  16  CFR  § 429.1 (a)  (2003).
116  Id.
117  See, for  example, Cal Fam Code  § 2339(a)  (requiring  a six-month  waiting  period  before
a  divorce  decree  becomes  final); Conn Gen  Stat Ann § 46b-67(a)  (requiring  a  ninety-day  waiting
period  before  the  court  may  proceed  on  the  divorce  complaint).  For  a  general  discussion,  see
Elizabeth Scott, Rational Decisionmaking about Marriage and Divorce, 76 Va  L Rev 9  (1990).

18  See  Camerer,  et al,  151  U  Pa  L  Rev  at  1243  (cited in  note  6)  (citing state  statutes  that
"force  potential  newlyweds  to wait  a  short  period  of time  after  their  license has  been  issued be-
fore they can tie the  knot").

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1196 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

1189

entirely  and force  people to choose  explicitly  (what we have described
as  the strategy of required  active  choices). This approach  finds an ana-
logue in information-eliciting  default  rules in contract law, designed  to
give  contracting  parties  a strong  incentive  to  say  what  they  want."' To
the  extent  that planners  force  people  to  choose  whether or not people
would  like to  choose, there  is a paternalistic dimension  to their actions.
("Choosing  is  good  for  both  freedom  and  welfare,"  some  appear  to
think, whether  or  not people  agree  with  them!)  We  think  that  the  ar-
gument  for  requiring  choices  stands  or  falls  largely  on  the  welfare
consequences.

c)  Procedural constraints.  A  slightly more  aggressive  form  of
paternalism  occurs  when  the  default  plan  is  accompanied  by  proce-
dural constraints  designed  to  ensure  that  any  departure  is fully  volun-
tary  and  entirely  rational. When procedural  constraints  are  in  place, it
is  not costless  to  depart  from  the  default  plan. The  extent  of the  cost,
and  the aggressiveness  of the  paternalism, will of course  vary  with  the
extent  of the  constraints. The  justification  for  the constraints  will de-
pend  on  whether  there  are  serious  problems  of  bounded  rationality
and  bounded self-control;  if so, the  constraints  are  justified not on  the
ground  that  the  planner  disagrees  with  people's  choices, but  because
identifiable  features of the  situation make it  likely that choices  will be
defective.  Such  features  may  include  an  unfamiliar  setting,  a  lack  of
experience,  and  a  risk  of  impulsiveness.  The  Age  Discrimination  in
Employment Act is our principal  example  here.

d)  Substantive  constraints.  Alternatively,  a  planner  might
impose  substantive  constraints,  allowing  people  to  reject  the  default
arrangement,  but  not  on  whatever  terms  they  choose.  On  this
approach,  the planner  selects the  terms along which  the parties  will be
permitted 
their  preferred  directions.  The  Model
Termination  Act  and  the  Fair  Labor  Standards  Act  are  illustrations.
The  extent  of  the departure  from  libertarianism  will  be  a  function  of
the gap  between  the legally specified  terms and  the  terms  that parties
would  otherwise  reach.  Here  too  the  justification  for  the  constraint
depends  on bounded  rationality  and bounded  self-control.

to  move 

in 

e) A  thin line.  A planner might reject  freedom of choice  on the
ground  that  those  who  reject  the default  plan  will  err all  or  almost  all
of the  time. Such a  planner  will impose  significant  costs  on those  who
depart  from  the  plan. As  we  have  said,  there  is  a  thin  line  between
non-libertarian  paternalists  and  libertarian  paternalists  who  impose
high  costs,  procedural  or  substantive,  on  those  who  reject  the  plan.
Almost  all  of the  time, even  the  non-libertarian  paternalist  will  allow

119 See  Ian  Ayres  and  Robert  Gertner,  Filling Gaps in Incomplete Contracts:An Economic

Theory of Default Rules, 99 Yale  L J 87,91  (1989).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1197 2003

1190

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

choosers, at  some  cost, to reject  the  proposed  course  of  action. Those
who  are  required  to wear  motorcycle  helmets  can  decide  to  risk  the
relevant  penalty, and  to  pay  it  if  need  be. Employers  and  employees
might  agree  to sub-minimum  wage  work  and  risk  the penalties  if they
are  caught. In this particular  sense, penalties  are  always prices.

III.  How TO  CHOOSE: THE TOOLBOX  OF THE
LIBERTARIAN  PATERNALIST

How  should  sensible  planners  choose  among  possible  systems,
given  that  some  choice  is  necessary?  We  suggest  two  approaches  to
this  problem.  If  feasible,  a  comparison  of  possible  rules  should  be
done  using a form of cost-benefit  analysis, one  that pays serious  atten-
tion  to welfare  effects. In  many  cases, however, such  analyses  will  be
both difficult  and  expensive. As  an  alternative,  we offer  some rules  of
thumb  that  might  be  adopted  to  choose  among  various  options.  In
general,  it  makes  sense  to  experiment  with  possible  approaches  to
identify  their  results  for both  choices  and  outcomes. We  have  empha-
sized  automatic  enrollment  plans  and  Save  More Tomorrow  because
studies  have  suggested  that both  of these  have  a  great  deal  of poten-
tial. In  other  domains,  plans  are  likely  to be  proposed  in  the  face  of
highly  imperfect  information;  more  data  will  reveal  a  great  deal.
Large-scale  programs  are  most justified  if repeated  experiments  have
shown that they actually  work.

A.  Costs and  Benefits

The  goal  of  a  cost-benefit  study  would  be  to  measure  the  full
ramifications  of  any  design  choice.  In  the  context  at  hand,  the  cost-
benefit  study  cannot  be  based  on  willingness  to pay  (WTP),  because
WTP will  be  a function  of the  default  rule."" It  must be  a  more  open-
ended (and inevitably  somewhat  subjective)  assessment  of the welfare
consequences. To illustrate, take  the example  of automatic enrollment.
Under  automatic  enrollment,  some  employees, who  otherwise  would
not  join  the  plan,  will  now  do  so.  Presumably,  some  are  made  better
off (especially  if there  is an  employer  match),  but some may  be  made
worse off  (for example, those who are  highly liquidity-constrained  and
do  not  exercise  their  right  to opt  out).  A  cost-benefit  analysis  would
attempt  to evaluate  these  gains and  losses.

If  the  issue  were  only  enrollment,  we  think  it  highly  likely  that
the  gains  would  exceed  the  losses. Because  of  the  right  to  opt  out,

120  See  Kahneman,  Knetsch,  and  Thaler,  5  J  Econ  Persp  at  202-03  (cited  in  note  43). See
also  Korobkin, 83  Cornell L  Rev at  636-41  (cited  in note  18).  For a discussion of the variation  of
potential  employees'  VTP  for vacation  days based on  default  rules, see text accompanying  notes
57-59.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1198 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

those who  need  the  money immediately  are  able to have  it.  In princi-
ple  one  could also  compare the costs of foregone current  consumption
and  the  benefits  of increased  consumption  during  retirement,  though
this is, admittedly, difficult to do in practice. It is also  possible  to make
inferences  from  actual  choices  about  welfare. For  example, most  em-
ployees do join the plan eventually, and very few drop  out if automati-
cally enrolled.'2' These facts suggest  that, at least  on average, defaulting
people  into  the  plan will  mostly  hasten  the  rate  at  which  people  join
the plan, and that  the vast majority  of those  who are so nudged will be
grateful.

Some  readers  might  think  that our reliance  on  behavior as  an  in-
dication of welfare is  inconsistent with one of the central  claims of this
Article-that  choices  do not  necessarily  coincide  with  welfare. But  in
fact,  there  is  no  inconsistency.  Compare  rules  calling  for  mandatory
cooling-off periods. The  premise of  such rules  is that people  are  more
likely  to  make  good  choices  when  they  have  had  time  to  think  care-
fully  and  without  a  salesperson  present.  Similarly, it  is  reasonable  to
think  that  if,  on  reflection,  workers  realized  that  they  had  been
"tricked"  into  saving  too  much,  they  might  take  the  effort  to opt out.
The fact  that very  few participants  choose  to opt out supports (though
it  does  not  prove)  the  claim  that  they  are  helped  by  a  system  that
makes joining easy.

Once  the other  effects  of  automatic  enrollment  are  included,  the
analysis  becomes  cloudier. Any  plan  for  automatic  enrollment  must
include  a  specified  default  savings  rate.  Some  of  those  automatically
enrolled  at a 3 percent  savings  rate-a typical  default in automatic  en-
rollment-would  have  chosen  a  higher  rate  if  left  to  their  own  de-
vices. '  If automatic  enrollment  leads  some  or many  people to save  at
a  lower rate  than  they  would  choose, the plan  might  be objectionable
for  that reason.  Hence  we  are  less  confident  that  this more  complete
cost-benefit  analysis  would  support  the  particular  opt-out  system,
though  a  higher  savings  rate  might  well  do  so. A  more  sophisticated
plan, avoiding  some  of these pitfalls, is discussed  below.

Similar  tradeoffs  are  involved  with  another  important  issue:  the

appropriate  default  rule  for  organ  donations.  In  many  nations-
Austria, Belgium,  Denmark, Finland, France, Italy, Luxembourg, Nor-
way, Singapore, Slovenia, and  Spain-people  are  presumed  to consent
to  allow  their  organs  to be  used, after  death, for  the  benefit  of others;
but  they  are  permitted  to  rebut  the  presumption, usually  through  an
explicit  notation  to  that  effect  on  their  drivers'  licenses. '  In  the

121  See  Choi, et  al, Defined  Contribution  Pensions at 78  (cited  in  note  1); Madrian  and Shea,

116  Q J Econ  at  1158-61  (cited  in  note 1).

122 See  Choi, et al, Defined  Contribution  Pensions at 78-79  (cited  in  note  1).
123 See  http://www.presumedconsent.org/solutions.htm  (visited  Sept 6,2003).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1199 2003

1192

The University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

United  States, by contrast, those who  want their  organs to be available
for  others  must affirmatively  say  so,  also  through  an  explicit  notation
on  their  drivers'  licenses. The  result is  that in "presumed  consent"  na-
tions over  90 percent  of people consent to make their  organs available
for donation, whereas  in the United  States, where  people have  to take
some action  to make their organs  available, only 28 percent  elect  to do
so. ' We  hypothesize  that  this  dramatic  difference  is  not a  product  of
deep cultural  differences,  but  of the massive  effect  of the  default  rule.
Hence  we  would  predict  that  a  European-style  opt-out  rule  in  the
United States  would produce  donation  rates similar to those  observed
in  the  European  countries  that  use  this  rule.  Note  in  this regard  that
by  one  report,  over  85  percent  of  Americans  support  organ  dona-
tion -a  statistic that suggests  opt-outs would  be relatively  rare."'

A recent  study strongly supports this prediction."  Suggesting that
preferences  are  constructed  by  social  frames, Johnson  and  Goldstein
urge  that  with  respect  to  organ  donation,  people  lack  stable  prefer-
ences and  that their decisions  are  very  much influenced  by  the default
rule. '  A  controlled  online  experiment  showed  a  substantial  effect
from  the default  rule: The  opt-in  system  created  a  42 percent  consent
rate,  about  half  of  the  82  percent  rate  for  an  opt-out  system. '  The
real-world  evidence  is even  more dramatic. Presumed  consent  nations
show  consent  rates  ranging  from a  low  of 85.9  percent  (Sweden)  to  a
high  of  100 percent  (Austria),  with a  median  of 99  percent.2  The  de-
fault  also  produces  a  significant, though  less  dramatic, increase  in  ac-
tual  donations, meaning  that many  people  are  saved  as  a result  of the
presumed  consent  system."" There  is  reason  to  believe  that  in  the
United  States,  a  switch  in  the  default  rule  could  save  thousands  of
lives.

The  default  rules  for  organ  donation  do not  fit  the  usual defini-
tion  of  paternalism.  The  issue  is  the  welfare  of  third  parties,  not  of

124  Id  (reporting  opt-out  rates in  presumed  consent  nations); Jean  Kadooka  Mardfin, Heart
and  Soul: Anatomical  Gifts for Hawaii's Transplant  Community  5,  Hawaii  Legislative  Reference
Bureau  Report  No  3  (1998),  online  at  http://www.state.hi.us/lrb/rpts98/soul.pdf  (visited  Nov  20,
2003)  (reporting  results  of a  1993  Gallup  poll that  asked  Americans  whether  they  had "granted
permission for  organ  donation on [their]  driver's license  or on a  signed donor card").

125  See  http://www.presumedconsent.org/issues.htm  (visited  Sept 6,2003).
126  See  Eric I. Johnson  and  Daniel  Goldstein, Do Defaults Save  Lives? (unpublished  work-

ing paper, Center  for Decision  Sciences, Columbia University, 2003).

127  Id  at 2.
128 Id at  6-7.
129 Id at  7, Figure  2.
130  Id  at  8-9.  Many  factors  determine how  many  organs  are  actually  made  available  and
used  for  transplants. The  transplant  infrastructure  is  certainly  important,  and  fewer  organs  will
be  available  if  family  members  and  heirs  can  veto  transplants, even  under  a  presumed  consent
regime. Johnson  and  Goldstein  estimate that  switching  to an  opt-out system  increases  organs ac-
tually  used  by 16  percent, holding everything  else constant.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1200 2003

2003]

Libertarian Paternalism

1193

choosers. Here  we  are  speaking  not  of libertarian  paternalism, but of
libertarian  benevolence:  an  approach  that  attempts  to  promote  be-
nevolence,  and  to assist  vulnerable  people, without  mandating  behav-
ior  in any way. We suggest  that changes  in default  rules, or  a system  of
Give  More  Tomorrow, could  produce  large  increases  in  public  assis-
tance-  and  that such  approaches  could do  so  in a  way  that avoids  co-
ercion.  With  respect  to  behavior,  the  analysis  of  libertarian  benevo-
lence  is  quite  similar to that of libertarian paternalism. One  of the ad-
vantages  of  that  analysis  is  the  demonstration  that  when  third-party
interests  are  at  stake, the  default  rule  will  matter  a  great  deal. It  fol-
lows  that planners  can  often  deliver  significant  benefits  to  third  par-
ties  simply by switching  the default rule. In the case  of organ donation,
this is what  we observe.

Does  one  or  another  default  rule  promote  welfare?  At  first
glance,  the  opt-out  rule  common  in  Europe  seems  better, simply  be-
cause it should  save a large  number of lives without  compromising  any
other  important  value. The  most  that  can  be  said  against  the  opt-out
rule  is  that  through  inertia,  perceived  social  pressure,  or  confusion,
some  people  might  end  up  donating  their  organs  when  they  would
not, all  things  considered, prefer  to do  so  ex ante. (Their ex post pref-
erences  are difficult to infer!)  If this objection  (or some  other'31 ) seems
forceful,  an alternative  would  be  to require  active  choices-for  exam-
ple,  to mandate, at  the time  of applying  for a  driver's license,  that  ap-
plicants  indicate  whether  they  want  to  allow  their  organs  to  be  used
for the  benefit of others. We  make only two claims  about this example.
First, the evaluative  question  turns in  large part on  empirical issues  of
the  sort  that it  would  be  both possible  and  useful  to  investigate. Sec-
ond, the opt-in  approach  is  unlikely to  be best.32

B.  Rules of Thumb

In many cases, the planner  will be unable  to make a direct  inquiry
into  welfare, either  because  too  little  information  is  available  or  be-
cause  the  costs  of  conducting  the  analysis  are  not  warranted.  The
committed  anti-paternalist  might say, in such cases, that people should
simply  be  permitted  to choose  as  they  see  fit. We  hope  that we  have
said  enough  to  show  why  this  response  is  unhelpful.  What  people
choose  often  depends  on  the  starting  point,  and  hence  the  starting
point  cannot  be  selected  by  asking  what  people  choose.  In  these  cir-

131  It  is conceivable  that  the care  of fatally  ill patients  might be  sacrificed  in order to harvest

their  organs, but  no evidence  suggests that  this  is a serious  risk.

132  It  follows  from  this  example  that  if private  or  public  planners  would  like  to  increase

charitable  donations, they could easily  do  that  simply  by creating automatic  deductions  for char-
ity.  Even  if  workers  are  allowed  to  opt  out,  clever  planners  should  easily  be  able  to  ensure  a
much higher  level of donations.

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1201 2003

1194

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[70:1159

cumstances,  the libertarian  paternalist  would seek  indirect proxies  for
welfare-methods  that  test  whether  one  or  another  approach  pro-
motes  welfare  without  relying  on  guesswork  about  that  question. We
suggest  three  possible methods.

First, the libertarian paternalist  might select the  approach that the
majority would choose if explicit choices were required and revealed. In
the  context  of contract  law, this is  the  most familiar  inquiry  in  the se-
lection  of  default  rules'-  provisions  that  govern  contractual  ar-
rangements  in  the  absence  of express  decisions  by  the parties. Useful
though  it is,  this market-mimicking  approach  raises its  own  problems.
Perhaps  the  majority's  choices  would  be  insufficiently  informed,  or  a
reflection  of  bounded  rationality  or  bounded  self-control.  Perhaps
those  choices  would  not,  in  fact,  promote  the  majority's  welfare.  At
least  as  a  presumption,  however,  it  makes  sense  to  follow  those
choices  if the planner knows what  they would  be. A deeper  problem is
that the majority's choices  might themselves  be a function  of the start-
ing  point  or  the  default  rule. If  so,  the  problem  of circularity  dooms
the  market-mimicking  approach.  But  in  some  cases,  at  least,  the
majority  might  go  one  way  or  the  other  regardless  of  the  starting
point;  and  to  that  extent,  the market-mimicking  strategy  is  workable.
Note  that  in  the  cafeteria  example,  some  options  would  not  fit  with
the  majority's  ex  ante  choices  (healthy  but  terrible-tasting  food,  for
example),  and  that  for  savings,  some  allocations  would  certainly
violate  the  choices  of  ordinary  workers  (say,  an  allocation  of  30
percent  or  more  to savings).  In fact  a clear  understanding  of majority
choices  might  well  support  a  default  rule  that  respects  those  choices
even  if the  planner  thinks  that an  inquiry  into  welfare  would  support
another  rule.  At  the  very  least,  planners  should  be  required  to  have
real  confidence  in  their judgment  if  they  seek  to  do something  other
than what a suitably informed  majority would  find  to be  in its interest.
Second,  the  libertarian  paternalist  might  select the  approach  that
we  have called  required  active  choices, one  that would force people to
make their choices explicit. This  approach  might  be  chosen if the  mar-
ket-mimicking  strategy  fails, either because  of the circularity  problem
or  because  the  planner  does  not  know  which  approach  would  in  fact
be  chosen  by  the  majority. We  have  seen  the  possibility  of  requiring
active  choices  in the  context of retirement  plans  and organ  donations;
it  would  be  easy  to  multiply  examples.  In  the  law  of  contract,  courts
sometimes  choose  "penalty  defaults" -default 
rules  that  penalize  the
party in  the  best  position  to  obtain  a clear  statement  on  the question
at hand, and  hence  create  an incentive  for clarity  for the person who is

133 See, for example, Ayres and  Gertner, 99 Yale  L J at 90-91  (cited  in  note  119).

HeinOnline  -- 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1202 2003

