Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The JBHE Foundation, Inc is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The Journal
of Blacks in Higher Education.
by Cass R. Sunstein
Michigan Law School. In Gratz v. Bollinger, the
"Grutter was correctly decided. But the Gratz decision was a big mistake."
"Affirmative action was accepted by those who
ratified the equal protection clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment."
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION: WHY GRUTTER WAS CORRECTLY DECIDED
tive action, the Court has shown lit-
goal without compromising its commit-
^Justice Clarence Thomas. His
' ' i ' 'o
. ?- .VT
' * .
* "?
tance of considering people's
merits, not their skin color. But
- Justice Thomas' eloquent words
from a politician than from a
judge who is committed to
originalism and judicial re-
- .* '3/
. - rK'- WiL\^K
THE JOURNAL OF BLACKS IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Conservative Panel Attacks the Grufter Decision
onservatives, almost without exception, view Justice O'Connor's recent ruling upholding the affirmative action policies at the University of Michigan School of Law as a profound subversion of the constitutional order of the United States. In a symposium entitled "Has the Supreme Court Gone Too Far?" appearing in the October issue of the conservative journal Commentary, former Supreme Court nominee Robert H. Bork writes: "Judicial invention of new and previously unheard-of rights accelerated over the past halfcentury and has now reached warp speed. The list of activist decisions constitutionalizing the left-liberal cultural agenda is lengthy." Referring to the Grutter ruling, Robert L. Bartley, now columnist for The Wall Street Journal, wrote that Justice O'Connor's stance is "ludicrous." Bartley goes on to conclude that the Court's majority admits that "we are issuing a decision in which we understand the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment prohibits the policies we hereby sanction. But because of our view of the current social situation, this part of the Constitution is hereby suspended. If I had invested my life in the law, I would find this, if not horrifying, at least disgusting."
historical scholarship suggests that the framers and ratifiers of the Fourteenth Amendment did not mean to condemn efforts to assist African Americans as such. Justice Thomas and his fellow dissenters are certainly entitled to say that affirmative action is bad policy. But they should not read their own views into the Constitution. The Court's majority was correct, in Grutter, to allow the law school to continue with its program.
"What's wrong with explicitness? Why does the Constitution require admissions offices to hide the ball?"
In Gratz, the Court said that the undergraduate program at the University of Michigan was invalid because it was too inflexible. Under that program, applicants were given specified "points" toward admission. A student with 100-150 points would definitely be admitted those with 75-99 remained in contention. Points could be awarded based on standardized test scores, high school grades, alumni relationship, personal essay, strength of high school, and more.
An applicant who came from an underrepresented minority
group would be awarded 20 points toward admission.
Nonminority students would receive 20 points for athletic
ability, socioeconomic disadvantage, or attendance at a
socioeconomically disadvantaged high school. Applicants
would also receive 10 points for being residents of
Michigan, 5 for leadership and service, 5 for artistic talent,
and so on.
"What the Court is requiring is a costly system of individual discretion in which race does count as a factor,
but in which the university is not permitted to be candid, even to itself, about how much of a factor it is."
The Court's majority objected that this point system failed
to provide individualized consideration to each applicant.
Whether or not the system was a quota, the Court complained, it "automatically distributes 20 points to every single applicant from" a minority group. In the Court's view,
this automatic distribution of points has the effect of making the factor of race a decisive one "for virtually every
minimally qualified underrepresented minority applicant."
The University of Michigan contended that because of the
sheer volume of applications, individualized consideration
of each applicant would be impractical. To this the Court
responded dismissively: "The fact that the implementation
of a program capable of providing individualized consideration might present administrative challenges does not render constitutional an otherwise problematic system."
I believe that the outcome in Gratz is most unfortunate. The
initial problem is that in principle the program upheld in
Grutter is no more objectionable than the one in Gratz. The
major distinction is that the undergraduate system used numbers, rather than a system of individual discretion. But this
should not make a constitutional difference. In trying to get
minority students, the law school was probably as aggressive
as the undergraduate program was. The law school avoided
numbers, to be sure but its admissions officers used the practical equivalent of numbers in exercising their discretion to
ensure that enough minority students were able to attend its
law school. The Supreme Court found it crucial that the law
school did not make explicit the weight that it gave to minority applicants, whereas the undergraduate program did so.
But what's wrong with explicitness? Why does the
Constitution require admissions offices to hide the ball?
