American Economic Association

The American Economic Review, Vol. 93, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of the One 

Libertarian Paternalism 
Author(s): Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein 
Source: 
Hundred Fifteenth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Washington, DC, 
January 3-5, 2003 (May, 2003), pp. 175-179
Published by: 
Stable URL: 
Accessed: 20-08-2015 22:44 UTC

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3132220

American Economic Association

 

 

 

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The American Economic
Review.

 

 

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 132.211.1.50 on Thu, 20 Aug 2015 22:44:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS, PUBLIC POLICY, AND PATERNALISMt 

Libertarian Paternalism 

By  RICHARD H.  THALER AND CASS R.  SUNSTEIN* 

Many economists are libertarians and con- 
sider the term "paternalistic" to be derogatory. 
Most  would  think that the  phrase libertarian 
paternalism is an oxymoron. The modest goal of 
this essay is to encourage economists to rethink 
their views on paternalism. We believe that the 
anti-paternalistic fervor  expressed  by  many 
economists is based on a combination of a false 
assumption and  at  least  two  misconceptions. 
The false assumption is that people always (usu- 
ally?) make choices that are in their best inter- 
est.  This  claim  is  either  tautological,  and 
therefore uninteresting, or  testable. We  claim 
that it is  testable and false-indeed,  obviously 
false. 

The first misconception is that there are via- 
ble  alternatives to paternalism. In many situa- 
tions, some organization or agent must make a 
choice that will affect the choices of some other 
people.  The point applies to  both private and 
public actors. Consider the problem facing the 
director of  a company cafeteria who discovers 
that the order in which food is  arranged influ- 
ences  the  choices  people  make. To  simplify, 
consider  three  alternative strategies: (1)  she 
could make choices that she thinks would make 
the  customers best  off;  (2)  she  could  make 
choices at random; or (3) she could maliciously 
choose those items that she thinks would make 
the customers as  obese  as  possible.  Option 1 

* Discussants: Robert E. Hall, Stanford University; Gary 
Becker, University of Chicago; Robert Barro, Harvard Uni- 
versity. 

* Thaler: Department of Economics and Behavioral Sci- 
ence, University of  Chicago Graduate School of Business, 
1101  E.  58th  Street,  Chicago,  IL  60637 
(e-mail: 
thaler@gsb.uchicago.edu); Sunstein: Law School  and De- 
partment of Political Science, University of Chicago, 1111 
E.  60th  Street,  Chicago,  IL  60637  (e-mail:  csunstei@ 
midway.uchicago.edu). We are grateful to Richard Epstein, 
Russ Fuller, Owen Lamont, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, 
and David  Wilcox  for valuable comments on  a  previous 
draft. 

appears to  be  paternalistic, which  it  is,  but 
would anyone advocate options 2 or 3? 

The second misconception is that paternalism 
always involves coercion. As  the cafeteria ex- 
ample illustrates, the choice of  which order to 
present food items does not coerce anyone to do 
anything, yet one might prefer some orders to 
others on  paternalistic grounds. Would many 
object to putting the fruit before the desserts at 
an elementary school cafeteria if  the outcome 
were to increase the consumption ratio of apples 
to Twinkies? Is this question fundamentally dif- 
ferent if the customers are adults? If no coercion 
is involved, we think that some types of pater- 
nalism should be  acceptable to  even  the most 
ardent libertarian. We call such actions libertar- 
ian paternalism. 

In our understanding, a policy counts as "pa- 
ternalistic" if  it  is  selected  with  the  goal  of 
influencing the choices of  affected parties in a 
way that will make those parties better off. We 
intend "better off'  to be measured as objectively 
as possible, and we clearly do not always equate 
revealed preference with welfare. That is,  we 
emphasize the  possibility  that in  some  cases 
individuals make inferior choices, choices that 
they would change if they had complete infor- 
mation, unlimited cognitive  abilities,  and  no 
lack of  willpower. Once it  is  understood that 
some  organizational decisions  are  inevitable, 
that a form of  paternalism cannot be  avoided, 
and that the alternatives to paternalism (such as 
choosing options to make people sick, obese, or 
generally worse  off)  are unattractive, we  can 
abandon the less interesting question of whether 
to be paternalistic or not and turn to the more 
constructive question of how to choose among 
paternalistic options.1 

1 Readers interested in  this  topic  should also  consult 
Colin Camerer et al. (2001) for an illuminating discussion of 
related issues.  That paper shares with  the papers in  this 

175 

This content downloaded from 132.211.1.50 on Thu, 20 Aug 2015 22:44:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

176 

AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS 

MAY 2003 

I.  Are Choices Rational? 

The  presumption that  individual  choices 
should  be  free  from  interference is  usually 
based on the assumption that people do a good 
job of making choices, or at least that they do a 
far better job than third parties could do. As far 
as we  can tell, there is  little empirical support 
for this claim. Research by  psychologists and 
economists  over  the  past  three  decades  has 
raised  questions about the  rationality of  the 
judgments and decisions that individuals make. 
People do not exhibit rational expectations, fail 
to  make  forecasts  that  are  consistent  with 
Bayes'  rule, use  heuristics that lead  them to 
make  systematic blunders, exhibit  preference 
reversals (that is, they prefer A to B and B to A) 
and make different choices  depending on  the 
wording of  the problem (for many examples, 
see  the  two  recent collections  of  papers by 
Daniel  Kahneman and Amos  Tversky [2000] 
and by Thomas Gilovich et al. [2002]). Further- 
more, in  the  context of  intertemporal choice, 
people exhibit dynamic inconsistency, valuing 
present consumption much  more  than future 
consumption. In other words, people have self- 
control problems (see  the other papers in  this 
session  [James  Choi  et  al.,  2003b;  Ted 
O'Donoghue and Matthew Rabin, 2003] for de- 
tails and references). 

Many economists are skeptical of  some  of 
these findings, thinking that people may do  a 
better job of choosing in the "real world" than 
they do in the laboratory. However, studies of 
actual choices  for high stakes reveal many of 
the same problems. For example, the Surgeon 
General reports that 61  percent of  Americans 
are either overweight or obese.  Given the ad- 
verse effects obesity has on health, it is hard to 
claim that Americans are eating optimal diets. 
Another illustration comes from the domain 
of savings behavior. Shlomo Benartzi and Tha- 
ler (2002) investigate how much investors like 
the  portfolios  they  have  selected  in  their 
defined-contribution savings plans. Employees 
volunteered to share their portfolio choices with 
the investigators (by  bringing a  copy  of  their 

session the common goal of devising policies that help some 
agents who are making some mistake, while minimizing the 
costs imposed on others. 

most recent statement to  the lab). They  were 
then shown the probability distributions of  ex- 
pected retirement income for three investment 
portfolios just  labeled  A,  B,  and  C.  Unbe- 
knownst to  the  subjects, the  three portfolios 
were  their own  and portfolios mimicking the 
average and median choices of their fellow em- 
ployees.  The distributions of  expected returns 
were computed using the software of Financial 
Engines,  the  financial  information company 
founded by  William Sharpe. On  average, the 
subjects rated the average portfolio equally with 
their own portfolio, and they judged the median 
portfolio to be significantly more attractive than 
their own. Indeed, only 20 percent of  the sub- 
jects  preferred their own  portfolio to  the me- 
dian portfolio. Apparently, people do not gain 
much  by  choosing  investment portfolios for 
themselves. 

II. Is Paternalism Inevitable? 

As the cafeteria line example discussed above 
illustrates, planners are forced to  make some 
design choices. A  simple and important exam- 
ple  is  the  selection  of  a  "default option" to 
determine what happens if  an  agent fails  to 
choose  for  himself.  In  a  fully  rational world 
such design choices would have little effect (at 
least in  high-stakes situations) because agents 
would simply choose the best option for them 
regardless of  the default. However, numerous 
experiments illustrate that there is a very strong 
"status quo" bias (see William Samuelson and 
Richard Zeckhauser, 1988;  Kahneman et  al., 
1991).  The  existing  arrangement, whether set 
out by  private institutions or by  government, 
tends to stick. 

One illustration of  this phenomenon comes 
from studies of automatic enrollment in 401(k) 
employee savings plans. Most 401(k) plans use 
an opt-in design. When employees first become 
eligible to  participate in the 401(k)  plan, they 
receive  some plan information and an enroll- 
ment form that must be completed in order to 
join. Under the alternative of automatic enroll- 
ment, employees receive the same information 
but are told that unless they opt out, they will be 
enrolled in the plan (with some default options 
for savings rates and asset allocation). In com- 
panies  that  offer  a  "match" (the  employer 
matches the  employee's  contributions accord- 

This content downloaded from 132.211.1.50 on Thu, 20 Aug 2015 22:44:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

VOL. 93 NO. 2 

BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS, PUBLIC POLICY, AND PATERNALISM 

177 

ing to some formula, often a 50-percent match 
up to some cap), most employees eventually do 
join  the  plan,  but  enrollments  occur  much 
sooner under automatic enrollment. For exam- 
ple,  Brigitte Madrian and Dennis Shea (2001) 
found that initial enrollments jumped from 49 
percent to 86 percent, and Choi et al. (2002) find 
similar results for other companies. 

Should the adoption of automatic enrollment 
be considered paternalistic? And, if so, should it 
therefore be  seen  as  a  kind of  officious med- 
dling with employee preferences? We  answer 
these questions yes  and no respectively. If the 
employer  thinks  (correctly, we  believe)  that 
most employees would prefer to join the 401(k) 
plan if they took the time to think about it and 
did not lose the enrollment form, then by choos- 
ing automatic enrollment they are acting pater- 
nalistically.  They  are  attempting  to  steer 
employees' choices in directions that will pro- 
mote employees'  welfare. But since no one is 
forced to  do  anything, we  think this  steering 
should be  considered unobjectionable to liber- 
tarians. The employer must choose some set of 
rules,  and  either  plan  affects  employees' 
choices.  No  law  of  nature says  that,  in  the 
absence of  an affirmative election by employ- 
ees,  zero  percent of  earnings will  go  into  a 
retirement  plan.  Because  both  plans  alter 
choices, neither one can be said, more than the 
other,  to  count  as  a  form  of  objectionable 
meddling. 

Quick-minded readers might be  tempted to 
think that there is  a way out of  this dilemma. 
Employers could  avoid  choosing  a  default if 
they required employees to make a choice, ei- 
ther in or out. But some thought reveals that this 
is not at all a way out of the dilemma; rather, it 
is  simply another option among many that the 
employer can elect. In fact, Choi et al. (2003a) 
find that this rule increases enrollments (relative 
to  the  opt-in rule) though by  not  as  much as 
automatic enrollment. Furthermore, the very re- 
quirement that employees make a choice has a 
paternalistic element. Many employees do not 
want  to  have  to  make  a  choice  (and  would 
choose not to have to do so). Should employers 
really force them to choose? 

Why,  exactly,  does  the  setting of  defaults 
have  such large effects? With respect to  sav- 
ings, the designated default plan apparently car- 
ries a  certain legitimacy for many employees, 

perhaps because it seems to have resulted from 
some conscious thought about what makes most 
sense for most people. But there is  a  separate 
explanation, involving  inertia.  For  any  em- 
ployee,  a  change from any  status quo entails 
time and effort, and many people seem to prefer 
to  avoid both of  these, especially  if  they  are 
prone to procrastination. When default rules are 
"sticky" and affect choices  as  a result, inertia 
might be the major reason. 

For present purposes, the choice among these 
various explanations does not much matter. The 
point is  only  that paternalism, in  the form of 
effects on individual choices, is often unavoid- 
able. When paternalism seems absent, it is usu- 
ally because the starting point appears so natural 
and obvious that its preference-shaping effects 
are invisible to  most observers. But those ef- 
fects are nonetheless there. Of course it is usu- 
ally good not to block choices, and we  do not 
mean  to  defend  non-libertarian paternalism 
here.  But  in  an  important respect,  the  anti- 
paternalistic position is incoherent. 

III. Beyond the Inevitable (but Still Libertarian) 

The inevitability of paternalism is most clear 
when the planner has to choose default rules. It 
is reasonable to ask whether the planner should 
go  beyond  the  inevitable. Take  the  cafeteria 
example discussed above. Putting the fruit be- 
fore the desserts is a fairly mild intervention. A 
more intrusive step would be to place the des- 
serts in another location altogether, so that din- 
ers have to get up and get a dessert after they 
have finished the rest of  their meal. This step 
raises the transactions costs  of  eating dessert, 
and according to a standard economic analysis 
the proposal is  unattractive: it  seems to  make 
dessert-eaters worse off  and no one better off. 
But once self-control costs are incorporated, we 
can see that some diners would prefer this ar- 
rangement, namely, those who would eat a des- 
sert if  it  were put in  front of  them but would 
resist temptation if  given  a  little help. To  the 
extent that the dessert location is  not hard to 
find, and no choice is forbidden, this approach 
meets libertarian muster. 

In the domain of  employee savings, Thaler 
and Benartzi (2003) have proposed a method of 
increasing contributions to  401(k)  plans  that 
also meets the libertarian test. Under this plan, 

This content downloaded from 132.211.1.50 on Thu, 20 Aug 2015 22:44:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

178 

AEA PAPERS AND PROCEEDINGS 

MAY 2003 

called  Save  More  Tomorrow, employees  are 
invited to sign up for a program in which their 
contributions to the savings plan are increased 
annually whenever they get a raise. Once em- 
ployees join the plan, they stay in until they opt 
out or reach the maximum savings rate in the 
plan. In the first company to use this plan, the 
employees who joined increased their savings 
rates from 3.5 percent to 11.6 percent in a little 
over two years (three raises). Very few  of  the 
employees who join the plan drop out. This is 
successful libertarian paternalism in action. 

IV. How to Choose: The Toolbox 
of the Libertarian Paternalist 

How should sensible planners (a category we 
mean to include anyone who must design plans 
for  others, from  human-resource directors to 
bureaucrats to  kings)  choose  among possible 
systems, given that some choice is  necessary? 
We suggest two approaches to this problem. 

If  feasible,  a  comparison of  possible  rules 
should be  done using  a  form of  cost-benefit 
analysis. The goal of a cost-benefit study would 
be to measure the full ramifications of  any de- 
sign choice. To illustrate, take the example of 
automatic enrollment. Under automatic enroll- 
ment some employees will join  the plan who 
otherwise  would  not.  Presumably, some  are 
made better off  (especially if  there is  an em- 
ployer match), but some may be  made worse 
off  (e.g.,  those  who  are  highly  liquidity- 
constrained). If the issue were just enrollment, 
we would guess that the gains would exceed the 
losses.  We  base this guess partly on  revealed 
choices. Most employees do join the plan even- 
tually, and very few who are automatically en- 
rolled opt out when they figure out what has 
happened to them. We also judge that the costs 
of having too little saved up for retirement are 
typically greater than the costs of having saved 
too much. 

In many cases, however, the planner will be 
unable to  make a  direct inquiry into welfare, 
either because too little information is available 
or because the costs of  doing the analysis are 
not  warranted. The  committed anti-paternalist 
might  say,  in  such  cases,  that people  should 
simply be permitted to choose  as they see  fit. 
We hope that we have said enough to show why 
this response is unhelpful. What people choose 

often depends on the starting point, and hence 
the starting point cannot be selected by asking 
what people choose. In these circumstances, the 
libertarian paternalist would seek indirect prox- 
ies for welfare: methods that test whether one or 
another approach is welfare-promoting without 
relying  on  unreliable  guesswork  about  that 
question. We suggest three possible methods. 
First, the libertarian paternalist might select 
the approach that the majority would choose if 
explicit  choices  were  required and  revealed. 
Useful though it is,  this market-mimicking ap- 
proach raises  its  own  problems. Perhaps the 
majority's choices  would be  insufficiently in- 
formed. Perhaps those choices,  in  fact, would 
not promote the majority's welfare. At least as a 
presumption, however, it makes sense to follow 
those choices, if  the planner knows what they 
would be. A deeper problem is that the major- 
ity's choices might themselves be a function of 
the starting point or the default rule. If so, the 
problem  of  circularity  dooms  the  market- 
mimicking  approach. But  in  some  cases,  at 
least, the majority is likely to go one way or the 
other regardless of the starting point; and to that 
extent,  the  market-mimicking strategy seems 
quite workable. 

Second, the libertarian paternalist might se- 
lect  the  approach that would force  people  to 
make  their  choices  explicit.  This  approach 
might be chosen if the market-mimicking strat- 
egy fails, either because of the circularity prob- 
lem  or  because  the  planner does  not  know 
which approach would in fact be chosen by the 
majority. We have seen the possibility of forced 
choices  in  the  context of  retirement plans; it 
would be easy to find other examples. Here too, 
however, there is a risk that the choices that are 
actually elicited will  be inadequately informed 
or  will  not  promote welfare.  In  the  case  of 
retirement plans, for  example, forced choices 
have been found to produce higher participa- 
tion  rates  than  requiring opt-ins,  but  lower 
rates than requiring opt-outs. If it is likely that 
automatic  enrollment  is  welfare-promoting, 
perhaps automatic enrollment should be  pre- 
ferred over forced choices.  The only  sugges- 
tion is that, where the social planner is unsure 
how to handle the welfare question, he might 
devise a strategy that requires people to choose. 
Third, the libertarian paternalist might select 
the approach that minimizes the number of opt- 

This content downloaded from 132.211.1.50 on Thu, 20 Aug 2015 22:44:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

VOL. 93 NO. 2 

BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS, PUBLIC POLICY, AND PATERNALISM 

179 

outs. For example, very few employees opt out 
of the 401(k) plan when they are automatically 
enrolled, though many opt in under the standard 
enrollment procedure. This is an ex post inquiry 
into people's preferences, in contrast to the ex 
ante approach favored by the market-mimicking 
strategy. With those numbers, there is reason to 
think that automatic enrollment is better, if only 
because more people are sufficiently satisfied to 
leave it in place. 

V.  Conclusion 

Our goal here has been to defend libertarian 
paternalism, an  approach that preserves free- 
dom of  choice but that authorizes both private 
and public institutions to steer people in direc- 
tions that will promote their welfare. Some kind 
of  paternalism is  likely whenever such institu- 
tions set out arrangements that will prevail un- 
less  people affirmatively choose  otherwise. In 
these circumstances, the goal should be to avoid 
random, arbitrary, or  harmful effects  and  to 
produce a  situation that is  likely  to  promote 
people's welfare, suitably defined. 

REFERENCES 

Benartzi, Shlomo and Thaler, Richard H. "How 
Much Is Investor Autonomy Worth?" Jour- 
nal  of  Finance,  August  2002,  57(4),  pp. 
1593-1616. 

Camerer, Colin; Issacharoff, Samuel; Loewen- 
stein, George; O'Donoghue, Ted and Rabin, 
Matthew.  "Regulation  for  Conservatives: 
Behavioral  Economics  and  the  Case  for 
Asymmetric Paternalism." Working paper, 
California Institute of Technology, 2001. 
Choi, James; Laibson, David; Madrian, Brigitte C. 
and Metrick, Andrew. "Defined Contribution 
Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Decisions, 

and the Path of  Least Resistance," in James 
M. Poterba, ed., Tax policy and the economy, 
Vol.  16. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002, 
pp. 67-113. 

. "Benign Paternalism and Active Deci- 
sions: A  Natural Experiment." Working pa- 
per, University of Chicago, Graduate School 
of Business, 2003a. 

.  "Optimal Defaults." American Eco- 
nomic Review, May 2003b (Papers and Pro- 
ceedings), 93(2), pp. 180-85. 

Gilovich, Thomas; Griffin, Dale and Kahneman, 
Daniel, eds. Heuristics and biases:  The psy- 
chology  of  intuitive judgment. Cambridge, 
U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
Kahneman, Daniel; Knetsch, Jack L. and Thaler, 
Richard H.  "The Endowment Effect,  Loss 
Aversion, and Status Quo Bias." Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, Winter 1991,  5(1), 
pp. 193-206. 

Kahneman, Daniel  and  Tversky, Amos,  eds. 
Choices,  values,  and  frames.  Cambridge, 
U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
Madrian, Brigitte and Shea, Dennis. "The Power 
of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation 
and Savings Behavior." Quarterly Journal of 
Economics,  November  2001,  116(4),  pp. 
1149-87. 

O'Donoghue, Ted and Rabin, Matthew. "Study- 
ing  Optimal Paternalism, Illustrated by  a 
Model  of  Sin  Taxes." American Economic 
Review,  May  2003  (Papers  and  Proceed- 
ings), 93(2), pp. 186-91. 

Samuelson, William and Zeckhauser, Richard J. 
"Status Quo Bias in Decision Making." Jour- 
nal  of  Risk and  Uncertainty, March 1988, 
1(1), pp. 7-59. 

Thaler, Richard H. and Benartzi, Shlomo. "Save 
More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Econom- 
ics to Increase Employee Saving." Journal of 
Political Economy, 2003 (forthcoming). 

This content downloaded from 132.211.1.50 on Thu, 20 Aug 2015 22:44:55 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

