Each government agency uses a uniform figure to measure the value of a statisticallife (VSL). This is a serious mistake. The very theory that underlies currentpractice calls for far more individuation of the relevant values. According to that theory, VSL should vary across risks. More controversially, VSL should vary across individuals-even or especially if the result would be to produce a lower number for some people than for others. One practical implication is that a higher value should be given to programs that reduce cancer risks. Another is that government should use a higher VSL for programsthat disproportionatelybenefit the wealthy-and a lower VSL for programs that disproportionatelybenefit the poor. But there are two serious complications here. First, bounded rationality raises problems for the use of private willingness to pay, which underlies current calculations of VSL. Second, the beneficiaries of regulation sometimes pay only a fraction or even none of its cost; when this is so, the appropriateVSL for poorpeople might be higher, on distributional grounds, than market evidence suggests. An understandingof this point has implicationsfor foundational issues about government regulation,including valuation of persons in poor and wealthy nations. 
Copyright © 2004 by Cass R. Sunstein. 
t Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. A version of this Article was presented as one of the 2004 Seeley Lectures at the University of Cambridge, and I thank the audience at that occasion for many illuminating comments and questions; a version of the lectures, and hence of this Article, will appear in CASS R. SUNSTEIN, LAWS OF FEAR: BEYOND THE PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE (forthcoming 2005). I am grateful to participants in a workshop at the University of London and at a work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago Law School and to Matthew Adler, Robert Hahn, Eric Posner, Richard A. Posner, Robert Stavins, David Strauss, Adrian Vermeule, and W. Kip Viscusi for valuable comments on a previous draft. Special thanks to Ronald Dworkin for particularly illuminating comments. Sarah Sulkowski provided outstanding research assistance. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction ............................................................................................. 386 I. WTP: Theory and Practice ................................................................ 396 A . A gency Practice .......................................................................... 396 B. Of Welfare and Autonomy ....................................................... 400 C. Questions and Doubts ............................................................... 401 D. The Value of Statistical Risks, Not the Value of 
Statistical Lives ........................................................................... 404 II. Individuation ....................................................................................... 404 A . Risks ............................................................................................. 405 B . Person s ......................................................................................... 412 C. Theory and Practice ................................................................... 416 III. Why WTP? Easy Cases, Hard Cases .............................................. 421 A . Easy Cases ...................................4.2.2...... B. Harder Cases: Autonomy, Kaldor-Hicks, and Welfare ......... 434 C. Harder Cases as Easy Ones, and VSL Again .......................... 437 IV. Global Risk Regulation and Cross-National Valuations ............. 439 A. Are Indian Lives Worth Less Than American Lives? ........... 439 B. Policy and Practice ..................................................................... 442 Conclusion ................................................................................................ 444 
For over two decades, executive orders have required regulatory agencies to engage in cost-benefit analysis of major regulations,' and Congress has imposed similar requirements in several statutes.2 To 120-35 (5th ed. 2002) (examining executive orders that require federal agencies to balance the benefits of their decisions against the cost). 
(2000) (defining "unreasonable adverse effects on the environment" as "any unreasonable risk to man or the environment, taking into account the economic, social, and environmental costs and benefits of the use of any pesticides"); Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2605(c)(1) conduct cost-benefit analysis, agencies must assign monetary values to human lives that are potentially saved by a proposed regulation. How do they come up with the numbers that they use? Do some deaths count for more than others? 
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) uses a uniform value for a statistical life (VSL): $6.1 million? Other agencies use numbers that are both higher and lower than the EPA's VSL, with a range, in recent years, between $1.5 million (the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in 1990') and the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA's) current figure of $6.5 million. Although substantial differences can be found across agencies,6 uniformity is the intended practice within each agency.7 No agency treats cancer risks, (2000) (mandating that the administrator consider and publish a statement documenting the effects, benefits, and economic impacts of proposed toxic substance regulations); Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C. § 300g-l(b)(3)(c) (2000) (requiring the documentation of quantifiable and nonquantifiable costs and benefits in the establishment of maximum contaminant levels). 
Compliance and New Source Contaminants Monitoring, 66 Fed. Reg. 6976, 7012 (Jan. 22, 2001) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 9, 141, and 142). I refer throughout to uniform numbers, but this is of course a simplification. There are differences across agencies, and within agencies practices are variable over time and across regulations. By referring to a uniform number, I mean that regulatory agencies do not distinguish among risks or among protected classes, so as to produce the variations that I emphasize here. Within regulations, uniform numbers are used, and when disparate numbers are used across regulations, it is not because of a judgment about different risks or different protected classes. 
In its July 2003 regulation governing food labeling of trans-fatty acids, the Food and Drug Administration used a VSL of $6.5 million. Food Labeling: Trans Fatty Acids in Nutrition Labeling, Nutrient Content Claims, and Health Claims, 68 Fed. Reg. 41,434, 41,489 (July 11, 2003) (codified at 21 C.F.R. pt. 101). In its March 2003 proposed rule on dietary ingredients and dietary supplements, the same agency suggested a VSL of $5 million. See Current Good Manufacturing Practice in Manufacturing, Packing, or Holding Dietary Ingredients and Dietary Supplements, 68 Fed. Reg. 12,158,12,229 (proposed Mar. 13, 2003) (to be codified at 21 C.F.R. pts. 111, 112) (using this value to calculate the "value of a statistical life day"). 
than the VSL used by most agencies. See Brake System Safety Standards for Freight and Other Non-Passenger Trains and Equipment; End-of-Train Devices, 67 Fed. Reg. 17,556, 17,560 (Apr. 10, 2002) (codified at 49 C.F.R. pt. 232) (recording the Department of Transportation's VSL as $2.7 million). 

constant figure for the monetized value of life" is one means of correcting for wealth distortions in individual preferences). There are some differences within agencies across contexts and across time, but those differences do not seem deliberate. See supra note 3 (comparing VSLs both within and across agencies). The most explicit discussions of varying VSLs have come from or other mortality risks that produce unusual fear or involve special suffering, as worthy of more concern (and a higher valuation) than other risks. No agency contends that distinctive values should be assigned to the risks associated with airplane deaths, motor vehicle deaths, or deaths from defective children's toys. No agency treats young people as worth more than old people.8 No agency values the lives of poor people less than the lives of rich people. No agency distinguishes between whites and African Americans or between men and women. For statistical lives, the governing idea is that each life is the EPA. In its 2003 discussion of hazardous air pollutants, National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Industrial/Commercial/Institutional Boilers and Process Heaters, 68 Fed. Reg. 1660 (proposed Jan. 13, 2003) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 63), the EPA noted: There is general agreement that the value to an individual of a reduction in mortality risk can vary based on several factors, including the age of the individual, the type of risk, the level of control the individual has over the risk, the individual's attitude toward risk, and the health status of the individual. 
Id. at 1695. Nonetheless, the agency announced, without explanation, that it "prefers not to draw distinctions in the monetary value assigned to the lives saved even if they differ in age, health status, socioeconomic status, gender or other characteristic of the adult population." Id. 
An extended discussion of related issues can be found in the EPA's arsenic proposal, National Primary Drinking Water Regulations; Arsenic and Clarifications to Compliance and New Source Contaminants Monitoring, 65 Fed. Reg. 38,888 (proposed June 22, 2000) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 141, 142). In this proposal, the EPA noted that the factors which may influence the estimate of economic benefits associated with avoided cancer fatalities include (1) a possible 'cancer premium' (i.e., the additional value or sum that people may be willing to pay to avoid the experiences of dread, pain and suffering, and diminished quality of life associated with cancer-related illness and ultimate fatality); (2) the willingness of people to pay more over time to avoid mortality risk as their income rises; (3) a possible premium for accepting involuntary risks as opposed to voluntary [sic] assumed risks; (4) the greater risk aversion of the general population as compared to workers in the wage-risk valuation studies; (5) 'altruism' or the willingness of people to pay more to reduce risk in other sectors of the population; and (6) a consideration of health status and life years remaining at the time of premature mortality. 
Id. at 38,945. The EPA acknowledged that these factors "may significantly increase the present value estimate," but said that "there is currently neither a clear consensus among economists about how to simultaneously analyze each of these adjustments nor is there adequate empirical data to support definitive quantitative estimates for all potentially significant adjustment factors." Id. Hence the EPA solicited comments on these issues and said that it would ask its Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) to conduct a review. Id. As noted below, the comments produced a sensitivity analysis that contains several upward adjustments from the $6.1 million figure, see infra note 100 and accompanying text, but the SAB's review suggested that at the present time, upward adjustments were not justified by existing evidence, see infra note 141 and accompanying text. 
Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, 104 COLUM. L. REV. 205, 206 (2004) ("[G]overnment should consider not simply. .. the VSL; it should concern itself also or instead with the number of life-years at stake, or the value of statistical life-years (VSLY). At the very least, the number of statistical life-years is a more precise measure of what is involved."). worth exactly the same. With respect to cost-benefit analysis, much is disputed.9 But on the idea of a uniform value per life saved, there is a solid consensus, at least in terms of regulatory practice.'0 
The stakes are exceedingly high. If cost-benefit analysis is the basis for the ultimate decision to approve or reject a proposed regulation, everything turns on the selected VSL. If an agency uses a VSL of, say, $15 million, many more regulations will be justified than if it uses a VSL of, say, $2 million. And if a uniform number is rejected, the pattern of justified regulations will shift dramatically. Some existing regulations will be revealed as too weak, and more stringency will be required; others will seem too aggressive and will have to be weakened or even eliminated. If agencies shifted to using VSLs that varied along one or more variables, the regulatory system would look very different from how it does today. 
In this Article, I intend to question the consensus in favor of a uniform VSL, and to do so in a way that raises foundational issues about the economic valuation of human lives. I suggest that a uniform value is obtuse. Under the very approach that agencies use to produce the current numbers, VSL should vary along two dimensions. VSL is calculated based on people's willingness to pay (WTP) to avoid particular risks, and if WTP is particularly high, VSL will be high as well. For two reasons, VSL should be expected to be highly variable, in a way that makes a uniform number senseless. 
THE PRICE OF EVERYTHING AND THE VALUE OF NOTHING (2004) (attacking the very practice of assigning dollar values to lives and health as part of cost-benefit analysis); W. KIP VISCUSI, FATAL TRADEOFFS: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RESPONSIBILITIES FOR RISK (1992) (suggesting that the government should "respect citizens' preferences" in assigning valuation and thus should consider subjective valuation in cost-benefit analysis, even when such valuation is irrational); Adler & Posner, supra note 5, at 1106 ("The problem with the traditional definition of [costbenefit analysis] in terms of actual preferences is that satisfaction of actual preference and maximization of well-being are not equivalent.... Cost-benefit analysis can be redefined as the sum of welfare equivalents...."). 
focus on lives or instead life-years; the latter approach might well value older people less than younger ones. For discussion, see Sunstein, supra note 8, at 205. Professor W. Kip Viscusi implicitly challenges the consensus, stating: "The current approach of ignoring length-of-life issues creates inequities by valuing the life of a person with . . . a 6-month life expectancy the same as a ... person with a 40-year life expectancy." W. Kip Viscusi, Risk Equity, 29 J. LEGAL STUD. 843, 870 (2000). W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph E. Aldy note the existence of heterogeneity by income, union status, and age, and they explain that the "existence of such heterogeneity provides a cautionary note for policy." W. Kip Viscusi & Joseph E. Aldy, The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates Throughout the World, 27 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 5,7 (2003). 
First, VSL should vary across risks. For example, people are willing to pay high amounts to avoid cancer risks, and hence there is reason to think that people's VSL is higher for cancer deaths than for sudden, unanticipated deaths." Cancer risks are involved in the work of many regulatory agencies, and people seem to be particularly concerned about such risks, in a way that should produce a high VSL-almost unquestionably higher than the values that agencies now use. More generally, deaths that produce unusual fear,'2 or that are accompanied by high levels of pain and suffering, should be expected to produce a higher VSL. Human beings face countless mortality risks, and it would be truly bizarre to maintain that people value avoiding each of those risks identically. 
Second, VSL should vary across individuals, simply because different people are willing to pay different amounts to avoid risks. People who are risk averse will be willing to pay more, and will therefore show a higher VSL, than people who are risk-seeking.'" Those who are rich will show a higher VSL than those who are poor. People who are thirty might well show a higher VSL than people who are sixty." It follows that different demographic groups will show diversity in their VSLs as well.'6 
of Mortality Risk, 28 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 73, 80 (2004) ("The value of preventing a fatal cancer is often considered to be greater than the value of preventing a fatal trauma in a workplace or transportation accident."). 
Carlsson et al., Is TransportSafety More Valuable in the Air?, 28 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 147, 148 (2004) ("There are several reasons why individuals would be willing to pay more for the same risk reduction when traveling by air compared to by other transport modes, such as car or train."). 
statistical life to non-labor market contexts, as is the case in benefit-cost analyses of environmental health policies for example, should recognize that different populations have different preferences over risks and different values on life-saving."). 
are willing to pay especially high amounts to reduce the risks associated with flying). 
STATISTICAL LIFE I (Nat'l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper No. 10199,2003) ("[Olne might expect that older individuals may value reducing risks to their lives less because they have shorter remaining life expectancy."). 
Values of a StatisticalLife, 27 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 239, 252 tbl. of the story: I am not arguing that government should assign a higher VSL to white lives than to African-American lives. I am speaking here of demographic differences that would emerge from a fully individuated approach to VSL, in which each person's WTP was calculated on an individual basis. Once these values are aggregated, the white VSL would likely be higher than 
If these two forms of variability-across risks and across persons-are put together, it will be clear that the unitary $6.1 million figure used by the EPA is far too crude." Each person in society is willing to pay a distinctive amount to avoid each risk. It follows that in theory, each person should have a particular VSL for each and every risk, resulting in a fully individuated VSL. s Such a fully individuated VSL would mean, for example, that agencies would value avoidance of cancer risks more highly than many other mortality risks-and that the VSL of some racial groups would likely be lower than that of others.19 But the latter differences would not be the result of a governmental decision to take racial characteristics into account; in fact it would not be a product of any kind of group-level discrimination on the government's part.0 The differences would be the result of aggregating the VSLs calculated for each individual. the African-American VSL, simply because of disparities in wealth and income. Richer people pay more for safe cars and smoke alarms than poor people do. See infra text accompanying notes 17-21. 
figure, but the analysis applies equally to any agency's unitary figure, and to uniformity across agencies. 
than elicited, by social situations-an especially serious complication for contingent valuation studies. See John W. Payne et al.M,easuring ConstructedPreferences: Toward a Building Code, 19 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 243, 244 (1999) (addressing the "alternate viewpoint .. . that preferences are generally constructed-not revealed-at the time a valuation question is asked"); Cass R. Sunstein & Richard H. Thaler, LibertarianPaternalismIs Not an Oxymoron, 70 U. CHI. L. REV. 1159, 1177-78 (2003) ("[I]n the contexts in which [contingent valuation] studies are used,... it is unclear that people have straightforward 'values' that can actually be found. Hence some form of paternalism verges on the inevitable: Stated values will often be affected.., by how the questions are set up." (footnote omitted)). 
Nonfatal Injury Risk by Gender and Race, 27 J.RISK & UNCERTAINTY 257, 270 (2003) (finding that the implied VSL for Hispanic males is $5.0 million overall and $4.2 million for blue-collar workers, whereas the implied VSL for white males is $3.4 million overall and $4.2 million for blue-collar workers); Viscusi, supra note 16, at 252 (finding VSLs of $15 million for whites and $7.2 million for African Americans, $18.8 million for white males and $9.4 million for white females, and $6.9 million for African-American females and $5.9 million for African-American males). 
for the unequal opportunities that produce lower VSLs for African Americans than for whites. See Viscusi, supra note 16, at 255. Professor Viscusi goes on to suggest that "it is inappropriate to attribute the observed differences to a greater willingness by black workers to bear risk." Id. In a sense Professor Viscusi is correct; there is no reason to think that African-American workers have an intrinsically greater predisposition to take risks. But in the market, one's willingness to bear risks is a product of "market opportunities," and hence those with fewer opportunities will show a greater willingness to bear risk. Such aggregation occurs today in, for example, ordinary consumer markets that price reduction of the statistical risks associated with smoke alarms, unusually safe cars, and much more.2 
In practice, of course, a fully individuated VSL is not feasible, for two different reasons. First, government lacks the information that would permit the calculation. Regulators do not know how much each person would be willing to pay to reduce each statistical risk; generalizations through the use of categories are therefore inevitable. Second, many regulatory programs involve collective goods and protect many people at once. A clean air program, for example, cannot easily ensure that some people in a geographical region are exposed to no more than 10 parts per billion (ppb) of some pollutant, while others in the same region are subjected to 50 ppb. Because collective goods are typically involved in regulation, the problem is pervasive. When government is providing a regulatory good to many people at once, feasibility requires that it use a single VSL, not a range of VSLs. 
Notwithstanding issues of feasibility, an understanding of the reasons for individuating VSL is important for two reasons. The first involves conceptual clarity. The theory behind the use of VSL and WTP remains poorly understood. In brief, VSL, as currently understood, is a product of agency judgments about people's WTP to reduce or eliminate certain risks. When a particular VSL is used (say, $6 million), it is because the agency estimates that people are willing to pay a certain amount to reduce statistical risks of a specified magnitude. This point should be enough to show that whatever terminology agencies use, there is no "value of a statistical life"; there are only values for the reduction of statistical risks." Once regulators identify the real question as the identification of those values, they will find it difficult to defend a unitary VSL, simply because there is no such thing. An appreciation of the case for individuation will clarify the theory-both its rationale and its limitations, empirical and ethical. I emphasize that the theory is undergirded by considerations terms). 
Industrial/Commercial/Institutional Boilers and Process Heaters, 68 Fed. Reg. 1660, 1695 (proposed Jan. 13, 2003) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 63) (noting that the value of a statistical life is "the value to an individual of a reduction in mortality risk"). of both autonomy and welfare-and that those considerations also show when the use of WTP to calculate VSL is misguided. 
The second reason involves the possibility of moving a long way toward greater individuation, even if full individuation is not feasible. With respect to the reduction of cancer risks, for example, there is reason to believe that people are willing to pay an extra amount; hence VSL, based on WTP, is significantly higher than studies of risks not involving cancer suggest." For this reason, the government's current valuation of cancer risks is probably too low, resulting in widespread underprotection of the public. Similarly, there is reason to think that VSL should be higher for mortality risks from airplanes than for statistically identical risks on the highways. 2' More generally, different agencies, dealing with qualitatively different risks, might well use different VSLs, simply because market evidence is likely to show just those differences.25 Full individuation is not feasible, but greater individuation would be quite easy. The result would be different judgments from agencies, simply because new VSLs-some higher, others lower-would produce different conclusions about when regulation is justified. 
A far more troublesome problem, to which I will devote considerable attention, involves disparities along demographic lines. Ftoorpanyo,wa,ndnotthicoeseawsiitmh pliltetlefaicntcuoamlpeoainntd: wWeTaPlthiswdilelpsehnodwenlitttloen WabTiPli.ty26 It follows that the VSL of poor people, when calculated based on WTP, will be lower than the VSL of rich people, simply because poor people are poorer. Suppose that the $6.1 million figure used by the EPA represents the average WTP of a population-wide sample. When risks are faced disproportionately by wealthy people, VSL, 
airline deaths is more than double their WTP to reduce the risk of taxi deaths). 
these differences seem random and do not stem from a careful inquiry into the questions that I am emphasizing here. 
use regulatory policy to promote redistributive goals. Regulation would be based on WTP, and tax laws would ensure such redistribution. Hence the analysis of VSL and WTP would be different with an optimal tax policy from what it must be without such a policy. If tax policy were optimal, a highly variable WTP would be appropriate and there would be no need to take account of distributional concerns. The discussion below is based on the assumption that more redistribution is desirable and that regulatory policy can sometimes help to promote that goal, though less effectively than an optimal tax. based on actual WTP, should be higher than $6.1 million-just as it should be lower when the regulated risks are faced disproportionately by poor people." It is inevitable that people in poor nations will have a lower VSL than people in rich nations, a point with implications for valuation of the harms from global warming." Similarly, people in poor areas will have a lower VSL than those in wealthy areas, a point with implications for valuation of a variety of risks in the domestic setting. If variations across risks and persons are significant, the question of individuation should be a central part of the second generation of cost-benefit analysis-a step beyond the firstgeneration debate about whether to do such analysis at all, and a step toward doing such analysis in a way that is more refined and more closely attuned to the consequences of regulations in terms of choice, welfare, and distributional equity. 
Of course it is offensive and wrong to suggest that in principle, poor people are "worth less" than rich people. If poor people are subject to a risk of 1/10,000, they do not have less of a claim to public attention than wealthy people who are subject to the same risk; in fact they may have a greater claim, if only because they lack the resources to reduce that risk on their own. But the topic here is regulation rather than subsidy, and the two ought not to be confused. In principle, government should not force people to buy protection against statistical risks at a price that seems excessive to them.29 At least as a general rule, people should not be required to pay $70 to reduce a risk of 1/100,000 if they are willing to pay no more than $50. 
If a uniform VSL would benefit the poor, there is a strong argument for a uniform VSL. But regulation based on a uniform VSL may or may not produce a more equitable distribution of income; in fact any redistribution may be perverse, and a single VSL might not promote equality at all.' ° And if poor people are forced to pay an amount for risk reduction that exceeds their WTP, desirable redistribution will hardly result; forced exchanges, on terms that people would voluntarily reject, are not a good way of redistributing assigning them a higher VSL, then there is a good argument for assigning them a higher VSL. I explore this issue in Part III.B. 

basis of a uniform VSL, and if the public as a whole pays for it, then any redistribution will benefit the wealthy, not the poor. wealth to the disadvantaged. (Requiring poor people to buy Volvos is not the most sensible means of assisting them.) On the other hand, it is possible that some regulatory programs, based on a uniform VSL, will help those in need, if their beneficiaries receive risk reduction for which they pay little or nothing-an issue to which I will devote considerable attention. 
A larger lesson follows from this discussion. For purposes of law and politics, there is no sensible answer to the abstract question about the correct monetary value of human life. Any judgment about the appropriate VSL, and about individuation, must be heavily pragmatic; it must rest on the consequences of one or another choice. Whether government should use a higher or lower VSL across demographic lines cannot be answered simply. An important implication involves the assessment of VSL across nations. A poor nation would do well to adopt a lower VSL than a wealthy nation; for China or India, it would be disastrous to use a VSL equivalent to that of the United States or Canada. But this point should not be taken to support the ludicrous proposition that donor institutions, both public and private, should value risk reduction in a wealthy nation above equivalent risk reduction in a poor nation. 
This Article is organized as follows. Part I clarifies the theory behind the valuation of statistical lives. The major point is that regulators do not really use a VSL; instead they use a mean WTP to eliminate a statistical risk. For example, agencies might say that they are using a VSL of $6 million, but when they do so, they are relying on evidence more or less establishing that the average person is paid $600 to face a risk of 1/10,000. The case for using this evidence depends on considerations of both autonomy and welfare. Part II, in some ways the heart of the Article, explores the need for individuation across both risks and persons. Part III offers a more ambitious discussion of the uses and limits of WTP in regulatory policy. It distinguishes between easy and hard cases for using WTP to calculate VSL. The central claim in Part III is that the argument for using WTP is strongest when the beneficiaries of regulation must pay all of its cost-though even in that event, the argument is subject to important qualifications, above all involving bounded rationality. The argument for using WTP is weaker when the beneficiaries of regulation pay only a fraction of that cost. When this is so, some people will benefit from regulation even if it is inefficient in economic terms. I discuss the implications of this point for a uniform or fully individuated VSL. Part IV turns to global regulation and the question of cross-national differences in VSL. My conclusion is that while thirdparty donors should help those people who need help most, without reference to lower VSLs in poor countries, governments in wealthy nations should use a higher VSL than governments in poor ones. 
I begin with an explanation of existing agency practice in calculating VSL and of the theory that underlies it. As discussed below, agencies calculate VSL on the basis of market evidence of WTP. Agencies are not really able to identify a "value of a statistical life"; instead they take advantage of information about how much people are willing to pay for facing statistical risks. I suggest that considerations of both welfare and autonomy make it reasonable for agencies to consult WTP. Unfortunately, many questions might be raised about the numbers that agencies now use. 
It has now become standard for regulatory agencies to assign monetary values to human lives. Consider the following table, which captures several examples of agency practices from 1996 through 2003: 
EPA EPA EPA EPA EPA 
Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations (Feb. 3, 2003) 31 
1051, 1065, and 1068). 

Transportation/FAA Licensed Launch Activities (Aug. 26, 1998)0" Department of Health Quality Mammography Standards (Oct. 28, & Human Services/FDA 1997) 44 Department of Health Regulations Restricting the Sale and & Human Services/FDA Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children4 and 
Adolescents (Aug. 28, 1996) 1 
Agriculture/Food Safety Critical Control Point (HACCP) Systems and Inspection Service (July 25, 1996)46 
Department of Aircraft Flight Simulator Use in Pilot Transportation/FAA 
TTrraaiinniinngg,CTeenstteinrgs (aJnudlyC2h,e1c9k9i6n)g47and at 
Safety Commission Consumer Product Safety Commission 
CReoqnutaiirnemersenotsf CfohrarLcaobaelli(nMgaoyf 3R, e1t9a9i6l) 48 Large Multiple-Tube Fireworks Devices (May 3, 1996)49 3 million 
These numbers show substantial variations, though less so than even ten years ago.' The variations appear not to have any rationale behind them; agencies with higher or lower numbers have not explained their choices (and this is a significant problem). But the most fundamental question is how agencies generate monetary amounts of this kind. Agencies rely on two kinds of evidence. The first and most important involves real-world markets, producing evidence of compensation levels for actual risks.5 In the workplace and in the market for consumer goods, additional safety has a price; market evidence is investigated to identify that price. 2 The second kind of evidence comes from contingent valuation studies, which ask people how much they are willing to pay to reduce statistical risks.3 The EPA's $6.1 million figure, for example, is a product of studies of actual workplace risks; such studies attempt to determine how much workers are paid to assume mortality hazards. 4 The relevant risks usually are in the general range of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000."5 The calculation of VSL is a product of simple arithmetic. Suppose that workers must be paid $600, on average, to assume a risk of 1/10,000. If so, the VSL would be said to be $6 million. 
For some of the two dozen labor market studies on which agencies currently rely,56 consider the following table:57 
A large advantage of labor market studies of this kind is that they avoid the lively disputes over the use of "willingness to pay" or "willingness to accept" (WTA) in regulatory policy.58 In many contexts, in both experiments and the real world, people demand more to give up a good than they are willing to pay to obtain it in the first instance-a disparity that significantly complicates efforts to assign monetary values to regulatory benefits, including mortality and morbidity. 9 If people are willing to pay $25 to eliminate an existing risk of 1/100,000, but demand $100 to incur a new risk of 1/100,000, then it is difficult to know how to proceed for purposes of monetary valuation of risks. Should agencies use $25, $100, or some intermediate figure? Fortunately, this problem dissipates in the context of labor market studies. If workers who face a risk of 1/10,000 are paid $600 more for doing so, and if workers who refuse to face such a risk are paid $600 less, then it is irrelevant whether agencies speak in terms of WTP or WTA. 
Why do regulators care about market valuations of statistical risks? There are two possible answers. The first and more conventional involves welfare. The second and perhaps more interesting involves autonomy. 
In economic terms, these valuations provide a clue to the welfare consequences, for individuals, of one or another outcome. If people are willing to pay $60, but no more, to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000, then it can be reasonably assumed that their welfare is increased by asking them to pay that amount-and that their welfare is decreased by asking them to pay more. There are many demands on people's budgets, and if they prefer not to spend more than $60 to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000, it may be because they would like to use their money for food, shelter, recreation, education, or any number of other goods. With respect to mortality risks, it is possible that people L. REv. 1227 (2003) (explaining the so-called "endowment effect," by which individuals often demand more to relinquish an item (WITA) than they would pay to obtain that same item (WTP)). 
possess than they would pay for the same good if they did not possess it at present." (footnote omitted)); Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J. LEGAL STUD. 217, 226-27 (1993) ("The range of the disparity appears to vary from slight amounts to a ratio of more than four to one, with WTA usually doubling WTP."). are sometimes inadequately informed, and there might be reason to override their judgments. But so long as information is available, the welfare argument is straightforward. 6° 
Perhaps regulatory policy should not be based on welfare; perhaps it is unclear what "welfare" really means, and WTP might be defended instead on the ground of personal autonomy.6 On this view, people should be sovereign over their own lives, and government should respect personal choices about how to use limited resources (again so long as those choices are informed). When people decline to devote more than $60 to the elimination of a 1/100,000 risk, it is because they would prefer to spend the money in a way that seems to them more desirable. If regulators do not use people's actual judgments, then they are insulting their dignity. The use of WTP therefore can claim a simultaneous defense from both utilitarian and deontological accounts. 
Nonetheless, some questions might be raised about the use of the relevant studies by the EPA and other agencies. 62 Most obviously, the studies show significant variety in the crucial numbers, ranging from $16.3 million in 1988 to $.7 million in 1991. The EPA has adopted the $6.1 million figure on the ground that it represents the median in the relevant studies. 63 But there is a risk of arbitrariness in fastening on that median figure, particularly if there is no reason to believe that the relevant study is the most accurate. In fact a more general look at the VSL data produces further puzzles and wider ranges. Some studies find no compensating differentials at all, indicating a VSL of zero64-implausibly low, to say the least, for purposes of policy. Others find that nonunionized workers receive negative compensating differentials for risk-that is, they appear to be paid less because they 
EQUALITY 122 (2000) (arguing that liberty "is essential to any process in which equality is defined and secured"). 
Analysis and Relative Position,68 U. CHI. L. REV. 323, 323-28 (2001), and Parker, supra note 56, at 1348-57. 

Revisited, 52 INDUS. & LAB. REL. REV. 116, 133 (1998) (finding "statistically significant positive compensation" for only a few categories of workers). face mortality risks.65 Another study finds that African Americans receive no significant compensating wage differential and hence that their particular VSL is zero.6 On the other hand, some studies find VSLs actually above the VSLs presented in Table 1; consider the finding that for people who choose jobs with low level risks, the VSL is as much as $22 million. 7 
The most recent metastudy, far more comprehensive than the EPA's own analysis, finds that most studies produce VSLs ranging from $3.8 million to $9 million.' The range is fairly compressed, in a way that disciplines agency decisions; for many regulations, the "bottom line" of the cost-benefit assessment will not be affected by a choice of $3.8 million or $9 million. But that range still leaves significant room for discretion, in a way that would have significant implications for policy and law. Consider the fact that the monetized value of a program that saves two hundred lives would range from $760 million to $1.8 billion; note also that the EPA's highly publicized arsenic regulation would easily fail cost-benefit analysis with a $3.8 million VSL but easily pass with a $9 million VSL.69 The simple point is that the variety of the outcomes raises questions about the reliability of any particular figure. 
In addition, most of the studies on which the EPA relies are based on data from the 1970s. 70 Since that time, there has been significant growth in national income." This change suggests that any VSL derived from 1970s data is too low. Of course people with more money are expected to be willing to pay more, other things being equal, to reduce statistical risks. One study finds that at the beginning of the twentieth century, VSL was about $150,000 in current dollarsless than one-twentieth of the corresponding amount a century later." On reasonable assumptions, the EPA's use of 1970s data has 
in evaluating the arsenic regulation). The regulation was projected to cost about $200 million, and its monetized benefits, with a $6.1 million VSL, were around $190 million. Id. at 2275. It should be easy to see that a $3.8 million VSL would make the regulation impossible to defendand a $9 million VSL would make it impossible to challenge. 
produced a significant undervaluation of the monetary value of the lives at stake; the $6.1 million figure reflects no adjustment to account for changes in national real income growth.73 In principle, the failure to undertake an adjustment is a serious mistake. The actual mean WTP might be substantially higher.74 
Even more fundamentally, the relevant numbers deserve respect only if they do not result from bounded rationality or an absence of information on the part of the people whose choices generate them. Suppose, for example, that workers do not know the risks that they face or that their decisions are products of the availability heuristic or optimistic bias.7" In either case, regulators should not use, for purposes of policy, a finding that workers are paid $60 to run a risk of 1/100,000; by hypothesis, that number does not reflect a rational tradeoff by informed workers. I return to these points below.76 Current practice is based on an assumption, not that all or even most workers make informed choices, but that market processes ensure the right "price" for various degrees of safety.7 7 Compare pricing for soap, cereals, and telephones: most consumers do not have full information and use heuristics that lead them astray, but market competition produces a sensible structure of prices, at least most of the time. 
adjustments. Sunstein, supra note 54, at 2284. 
ECON. REV. PAPERS & PROC. 227, 229 tbl.1 (2003) (suggesting a likely current value of $12 million); Viscusi, supra note 16, at 252 tbl.5 (finding values as high as $15.1 million for white males). In the context of arsenic regulation, the EPA also noted in its sensitivity analysis that the appropriate adjustment would increase the VSL from $6.1 million to $6.7 million. National Primary Drinking Water Regulations; Arsenic and Clarifications to Compliance and New Source Contaminants Monitoring, 66 Fed. Reg. 6976, 7012 (Jan. 22, 2001) (codified at 40 C.F.R. pts. 9, 141, and 142). Recent evidence suggests that the current VSL is $4.7 million for the entire population, $7 million for blue-collar males, and $8.5 million for blue-collar females. Viscusi, supra note 55, at 39. 
readily "available" to people's minds, and underestimate risks when no such event is available. Timur Kuran & Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascadesand Risk Regulation, 51 STAN. L. REV. 683, 685 (1999). Optimistic bias suggests that people will be excessively optimistic about risks that they themselves face. Cass R. Sunstein, HazardousHeuristics,70 U. CHI. L. REV. 751, 772 (2003). 
has some of the same characteristics as a policy that requires people to buy Volvos. In principle, the government should force exchanges only on terms that people find acceptable, at least if it is genuinely concerned with their welfare. 
Note, once again, that the argument for using WTP does not imply satisfaction with the existing distribution of wealth. The problem with forced exchanges is that they do nothing to alter existing distributions. In fact they make poor people worse off, requiring them to use their limited resources for something that they do not want to buy. 
Does the easy case seem implausibly unrealistic? In many contexts, it certainly is. The costs of air pollution regulation, for example, are not fully borne by its beneficiaries."' But for workers' compensation regulation, for example, the situation is very different: with the enactment of workers' compensation programs, nonunionized workers faced a dollar-for-dollar wage reduction, corresponding almost perfectly to the expected value of the benefits that they received.' For drinking water regulation, something similar is involved. The cost of regulation is passed onto consumers in the form of higher water bills. "2 Hence the easy case finds a number of real-world analogues. 
of WTP to calculate VSL. They point to some important qualifications, but none of them is a convincing refutation of the straightforward argument. 
a. Adaptive Preferences and "Miswanting." The first objection emphasizes the possibility that people's preferences have adapted to existing opportunities, including deprivation.'53 Perhaps people show a (1988) (arguing that occupational health and safety regulations are not an effective method of redistribution). 
2001, at 34, 35-38. 
STATE 69, app. D at 231-38 (2000). 
drinking water quality would have resulted in an annual increase of $30 in the water bills for most households). 
what happens when "people tend to adjust their aspirations to their possibilities"); Adler & low WTP for environmental goods, including health improvements, simply because they have adjusted to environmental bads, including health risks. Perhaps people's WTP reflects an effort to reduce cognitive dissonance through the conclusion that risks are lower than they actually are.5 To generalize, perhaps people suffer from a problem of "miswanting";... they want things that do not promote their welfare, and they do not want things that would promote their welfare. If this is so, then WTP loses much of its underlying justification; people's decisions do not actually promote their welfare," 6 and their autonomy, properly understood, may not require respect for their decisions, which may be nonautonomous. If government can be confident that people are not willing to pay for goods from which they would greatly benefit, perhaps government should abandon WIP. 
In some contexts, this objection raises serious problems for neoclassical economics and for unambivalent enthusiasm for freedom of choice.'57 Autonomy is implicated in addition to welfare. Suppose that people do not want risk reduction because they believe risk to be inevitable, or because their preferences have adapted to dangerous and unfair conditions. If so, people's preferences do not reflect their autonomy. In other words, the idea of autonomy requires not merely Posner, supranote 5, at 1128-30 (hypothesizing, for example, that "people are not willing to pay for parks because they have adapted to a world without parks"). 
Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance, in AN ECONOMIC THEORIST'S BOOK OF TALES 123 (1984) (analyzing the incorporation of the psychological theory of cognitive dissonance into economic models). 
Timothy D. Wilson, Miswanting, in FEELING AND THINKING: THE ROLE OF AFFECr IN SOCIAL COGNITION 178, 179 (Joseph P. Forgas ed., 2000), who explain that: 
Although we tend to think of unhappiness as something that happens to us when we do not get what we want, much unhappiness... has less to do with not getting what we want, and more to do with not wanting what we like. When wanting and liking are uncoordinated in this way we may say that person has miswanted. 
ADVANCES IN EXPERIMENTAL SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY 34 people's ability to accurately predict their own feelings). 
Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility, 112 Q.J. ECON. 375, 379-88 (1997) (arguing that utility's impact on human behavior can be understood better and researched more effectively by analyzing the normative idea of "total utility" as the discrete concepts of "experienced utility" and "decisional utility"). 
PredictingFuture Feelings,in WELL-BEING: THE FOUNDATIONS OF HEDONIC PSYCHOLOGY 85 (Daniel Kahneman et al. eds., 1999). respect for whatever preferences people happen to have, but also social conditions that allow preferences to be developed in a way that does not reflect coercion or injustice. With respect to some risks, the relevant preferences are nonautonomous; consider the fact that many women face a risk of male violence under circumstances in which they believe that little can be done and hence adapt. 
In the context of ordinary regulatory policy, however, this objection has more theoretical than practical interest. Typically regulation involves the reduction of low-level mortality risks (say, 1/50,000). Much of the time, there is no reason to believe that the use of informed WTP (say, $100) is a product of adaptive preferences. When people's WTP does appear to result from adaptive preferences, however, the judgment about the easy cases must be revised. 
b. Inadequate Information and Bounded Rationality. A closely related objection would point to an absence of information and to bounded rationality. As I have stressed throughout, people have difficulty dealing with low-probability events.5 If people are not aware of what they might be gaining by regulation, their WTP can be too low. Perhaps the availability heuristic will lead people to underestimate the risk. If people cannot recall a case in which some activity produced illness or death, they may conclude that the risk is trivial even if it is not. Or perhaps the same heuristic, and probability neglect, will lead people to exaggerate risks, producing a WTP that is wildly inflated in light of reality. And if people are unable to understand the meaning of ideas like "one in fifty thousand," or to respond rationally to such ideas, then there are serious problems with relying on WTP. 
It is also possible that people's WTP reflects excessive discounting of future health benefits. If workers are ignoring the future, or applying an implausibly high discount rate, then there is a good argument for setting aside their WTP. In the context of global warming, for example, the temporally distant nature of the harm might well lead to insufficient concern for a potentially catastrophic risk. The same is true for less dramatic risks that people face in their daily lives. Young smokers, for example, probably give too little attention to the health harms caused by smoking. Those who choose a likelihood of low-probability or low-salience events because these threats simply do not make it onto people's 'radar screens."'). poor diet and little exercise almost certainly fail to consider the longterm effects of their behavior. Self-control problems are an important part of bounded rationality. If a low WTP shows a failure to give adequate attention to the future, then there is reason not to use WTP. 
In many cases, however, WTP is a result of adequate information and bounded rationality is not leading people to err. If so, appropriate adjustments should be made to WTP, and the VSL that emerges from WTP should be corrected. 
c. Rights. A quite different objection would point to people's rights. Perhaps people have a right not to be subjected to risks of a certain magnitude, and the use of WTP will violate this right. It seems fully reasonable to say that whatever their WTP, human beings should have a right not to be subject to risks above a particular level. Imagine, for example, that poor people live in a place where they face a 1/20 annual risk of dying from water pollution; it makes sense to say ttohaptatyheongloyv$e1rntmoeenlitmsihnoautelditreadnductehethpaetrr-ipsekrseovnenc oifstpieso$p1le00a.'r5e9 willing 
As an abstract claim about people's rights, the objection is entirely correct. Something has gone badly wrong if people are exposed to serious risks and their WTP prevents them, and is invoked to prevent their government, from doing anything in response. It would be foolish to suggest that WTP is determinative of the appropriate use of government subsidies; a redistributive policy does not track people's WTP. (Would it make sense to say that government would give poor people a check for $100 only if they were willing to pay $100 for the check?) And in many cases people are subject to risks whose magnitude is indeed a violation of rights. But this point has little force against the particular argument that I am making. 
The initial problem with this objection is that in the cases under discussion, rights of this kind are usually not involved; I am speaking here of statistically small risks. Suppose that this initial response is unconvincing and that rights are indeed involved. If so, there is a still more fundamental response. When rights are involved, the proper response is not to force people to buy protection that they do not want, but to provide a subsidy that will give them the benefit for free or enable them to receive the benefit at what is, for them, an that risks above a certain level should count as violative of rights. acceptable price. 6° Nothing here is meant to deny the possibility that government should provide certain goods via subsidy, or indeed that subjection to risks above a certain level is a violation of rights."' The question instead is one of regulation under the stated assumptions. So long as that is the question, use of WTP does not violate anyone's rights. 
d. Democracy versus Markets. An independent objection would stress that people are citizens, not merely consumers; it would urge that regulatory choices be made after citizens have deliberated with one another about their preferences and values.162 The argument against forced exchanges treats people as consumers; it sees their decisions about safety as the same as their decisions about all other commodities.'63 For some decisions, this approach is badly misconceived." Our constitutional system is a deliberative democracy,"' not a maximization machine, and many social judgments should be made by citizens engaged in deliberative discussion with one another rather than by aggregating the individual choices of consumers. 166 
Consider some examples: 0 In the context of race and societies do not aggregate 
sex discrimination, people's WTP. The sensible level of instead lump sums. 
of harm (as opposed to actual harm) is itself a harm. See Matthew D. Adler, Risk, Death and Harm: The Normative Foundationsof Risk Regulation,87 MINN. L. REV. 1293, 1340-88 (2003) (reviewing arguments supporting and refuting the proposition that the risk of death is itself a harm that affects welfare). 
and exchange, and even political arguments, contribute to the formulation and revision of values"). 
Choice Theory, Value Pluralism,and DemocraticPolitics, 90 COLUM. L. REV,2121, 2176 (1990) ("In the highly differentiated world of the modem liberal state, the same person may have distinct interests in her role as consumer from those in her role as worker, or as citizen, or as a parent, or as member of a religious community."); see generally ELIZABETH ANDERSON, VALUE IN ETHICS AND ECONOMICS (1993). 
approaching many choices not from a unitary, fixed perspective, but from several different perspectives that pull them in different directions."). 
DEMOCRACY AND AMERICAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT (1994). 
permissible discrimination is not set by using market evidence or contingent valuation studies to see how much people would be willing to pay to discriminate (or to be free from discrimination). Even if discriminators would be willing to pay a lot to avoid associating with members of unpopular groups, such discrimination is banned. Through political processes, citizens have decided that certain forms of discrimination are illicit, whatever people's WTP. * The prohibition against sexual harassment does not emerge from a governmental WTP. Many harassers would be willing to pay something, perhaps a great deal, for the privilege of harassing; in imaginable circumstances, the harassers' WTP might exceed their victims' WTP to prevent harassment. 
Nonetheless, harassment is forbidden, and WTP is irrelevant. * The protection of endangered species is not chosen on the basis of aggregated WTP. Whether and when to protect members of endangered species is a moral question to be resolved through democratic discussion, not through exercises in consumer sovereignty. Some people may be willing to pay a significant amount to harm endangered species, at least if that harm is necessary to undertake development activities. Their WTP is not taken to be part of the legal assessment of what they are permitted to do. • Laws that forbid cruelty to animals, and that impose affirmative duties of protection on human beings, stem not from WTP, but from a belief that moral commitments call for such laws. When laws require that animals be protected against suffering, it does not matter that those who are regulated (university laboratories, for example) may be willing to pay a significant amount to avoid the regulation. Of course the cost of the regulatory burden might play a role in deciding whether to impose it. But the underlying moral judgment is rooted in a belief in the avoidance of suffering that does not essentially turn on WTP. 
Emphasizing the limits of any approach that takes "preferences" to be the foundation of regulatory policy, Professor Amartya Sen stresses that "discussions and exchange, and even political arguments, contribute to the formation and revision of values."'67 He urges that in the particular context of environmental protection, solutions require regulators "to go beyond looking only for the best reflection of given individual preferences, or the most acceptable procedures for choices based on those preferences. ' '6 
Professor Sen's claims are both fundamental and correct. They point to some serious limitations on the use of WTP. But it is important not to read such objections for more than they are worth. In trading off safety and health in their private lives, people do not have static values and preferences. Much of the time, human choices are a product of reflection, even if choosers are simply acting as consumers. Reflection and deliberation, including reflection and deliberation with other people, are hardly absent from the market domain. To be sure, moral questions should not be resolved by aggregating private WTP. Sometimes people's preferences, even though backed by WTP, are morally off-limits, and policy should not take account of them. In addition, people are sometimes unwilling to pay a great deal for goods that have strong moral justifications; animal welfare is an example. In these circumstances, the market model is inapplicable and WTP reveals very little. 
But what about the easy case? Do these arguments suggest that government should override individual choices about how much to spend to eliminate low-level risks, even when those choices are adequately informed? For environmental protection generally, it is indeed important to go beyond "the best reflection of given individual preferences.' ' 169 But this point does not mean that people should be required to pay $100 to eliminate mortality risks of 1/100,000 when they are willing to pay only $75. If people's WTP reflects an absence of information or insufficient deliberation, then it is important for other people, in government and elsewhere, to draw attention to that fact. And in some cases, a low WTP might be overridden on the ground that it is rooted in errors, factual or otherwise. But these points should not be taken as a general objection to my conclusion about the easy case, or to suggest that government should force people to reduce statistical risks at an expense that they deem excessive. 
Here is one way to understand the argument that I am making: The American system is a deliberative democracy, to be sure, but in this democracy, it is valuable for regulators to consider more fully individuated VSLs in deciding how to proceed, at least under the stated assumptions. 
e. Very Low Probabilitiesand CatastrophicRisks. Suppose that everyone in the United States faces an annual death risk of 1/10,000,000-and that this risk, if it comes to fruition, will kill every person in the country. The expected number of annual deaths is twenty-six, ' which would produce expected annual costs in excess of $158 million, assuming a VSL of $6.1 million. But if the government attempted to elicit each individual's WTP to avoid a risk of 1/10,000,000, it might well produce a number very close to zero. How much would you be willing to spend to avoid a risk of 1/10,000,000? If you say "nothing," you might well be like most people. And if most people really are like that, the supposed risk of 1/10,000,000, applicable to everyone in the United States, yields both twenty-six expected annual fatalities and expected annual costs very close to zero-an especially odd result in light of the fact that there is a 1/10,000,000 risk not simply that each American will die, but that every American will die.'71 
This result does seem anomalous. For one thing, is it really sensible to conclude that the prevention of twenty-six deaths is worth nothing, or close to it? An affirmative answer is suggested by a perspective that is fully based on people's WTP to avoid very low probability risks. But assigning a value near zero, for the prevention of dozens of deaths, seems quite implausible. In cases of this kind, there is a serious problem with using WTP to calculate the benefit of avoiding that risk. 
This conclusion actually understates the problem. In the case at hand, the risk is potentially catastrophic. As I have said, if the 1/10,000,000 chance is realized, every American will be dead. Even if people show a WTP near zero to avoid a risk of that size, it does not seem right to think that the nation should spend almost nothing to prevent it." 2 The point has a general bearing on precautions against low probability risks of catastrophe: some degree of prevention 
Sunstein, Irreversibleand Catastrophic,CORNELL L. REV. (forthcoming 2006). 
demand a very high price to bear it, however slight it is, in which event the value of life implied by their behavior may be astronomical."). should be undertaken even if WTP numbers do not justify it. Part of the problem with those numbers is that individual behavior will not reflect the "catastrophe premium" or "extermination premium" that would almost certainly emerge if it were possible to test for it. People may be unwilling to pay anything to avoid a risk of 1/100,000,000 that they themselves face; but if they were told that every person in the nation faced this risk, they might come up with a significantly higher figure. It would take the right question to produce the higher numbers. Another the problem is that WTP is not an adequate measure of social responses to catastrophes-in part because people are not familiar with making choices about risks of that sort. 
In my view, this is a sound objection to the use of a low or nearzero VSL in the context of catastrophic risks, even if the WTP calculation would produce that VSL. As Judge Richard Posner shows,173 this is an important point when government is considering how to respond to small risks of catastrophic harm. But notice that the objection has built-in limitations. It does not apply to the overwhelming number of cases in which VSL is used. In those cases, the risks in question are 1/10,000 to 1/100,000, and no large-scale catastrophe is at issue. Here, then, is a limitation on the use of WTP, but the domain of the objection is restricted. 
f Third-Party Effects. A final objection would point to effects on third parties. If outsiders would be adversely affected by the undervaluing of a particular risk, and if their welfare is not being considered, then the WTP calculus is seriously incomplete. This point demonstrates a general and badly neglected problem for WTP as it is currently used: agencies consider people's WTP to eliminate statistical risks, without taking account of the fact that othersespecially family members and close friends-would also be willing to pay something to eliminate those risks. John might be willing to pay $25 to eliminate his own risk of 1/100,000, but his wife, Jane, might be willing to pay $25 to eliminate John's risk also. If regulators add the WTP, on John's behalf, of John's friends and relatives, the total WTP might soon exceed $100. This is a real problem for existing uses of WTP. 
But thus far the discussion has been assuming that there are no third-party effects. The argument for using WTP, on the stated assumptions, is that government should not force people to buy goods that are not worthwhile for them. At least at first glance, this argument seems sound with respect to statistical risks of the kind on which I am focusing. 
There is an obvious artificiality in the assumptions thus far. Most important, people do not always bear the full social costs of the regulatory benefits that they receive. Sometimes they pay only a fraction of those costs-or possibly nothing at all. When this is so, the normative analysis is much more complicated. In the context of air pollution regulation, for example, there is a complex set of distributional effects, and on balance, poor people, and members of minority communities, appear to be net gainers.'75 An efficiency analysis, based on WTP, might not produce an adequate account of the welfare effects of air pollution regulation. And even if it did, an account of welfare effects might not resolve the normative question, because the distributional gains are important to consider.' The difficulty is that a high VSL, one that exceeds what WTP studies show for poor people, may produce outcomes that are in the best interest of poor people, in the sense that the result is a welfare improvement for them.'7" And if poor people do not bear all of the costs of event, people's WTP could not tell the whole story. 
California and finding that, under the Clean Air Act, "poorer, less educated populations have experienced a greater overall improvement in air quality between 1980 and 1998"). 
recent guidelines governing regulatory impact analysis. See Office of Mgmt. & Budget, Draft 2003 Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations, 68 Fed. Reg. 5492, 5517 (Feb. 3, 2003): 
Those who bear the costs of a regulation and those who enjoy its benefits often are not the same people. . . . Your regulatory analysis should provide a separate description of distributional effects (i.e., how both benefits and costs are distributed among sub-populations of particular concern) so that decisionmakers can properly consider them along with the effects on economic efficiency. 
REv. 223, 227-28, 255-61 (2000). Professor Jolls argues that accommodation mandates might produce desired redistributive gains whether or not they are efficient, and she supplies a detailed analysis of when those gains are most likely to occur. See id. at 250 ("Even if the value of the accommodation is less than its cost, the mandate may make disadvantaged workers better off because nondisadvantaged workers will bear some of the associated cost."). At present, there is no parallel discussion for regulation of the sort that I am discussing here. My suggestion is that under imaginable assumptions, some regulation will be defensible on distributive grounds. programs that benefit them, the autonomy argument for WTP is greatly reduced; they are enjoying a benefit (partly) for free, and it does not insult anyone's autonomy to give them a good on terms that they find acceptable. Note that these points do not bear directly on the question of whether VSL should vary across risks. But they do bear on the issue of varying VSL across persons, and in particular across disparities in income and wealth. 
Suppose, for example, that beneficiaries of a proposed drinking water regulation are willing to pay only $80 to eliminate a risk of 1/50,000. Assume, in addition, that the per-person cost of eliminating a 1/50,000 risk is $100-but that for every dollar of that cost, the beneficiaries pay only $.80. The remaining $.20 might be paid by water companies themselves, in the form of reduced profits, or by employees of the water companies, in the form of reduced wages and fewer jobs. In this example, the costs of the regulation exceed the benefits: it is inefficient. But by hypothesis, the regulation makes its beneficiaries better off. If the WTP criterion is used, the fact that the monetized costs exceed the monetized benefits is decisive. But as a normative matter, the analysis here is far harder than in the easy cases. On what assumption should the WTP numbers be decisive? 
The assumption must be that economic efficiency is the goal of government, at least in the context of regulation-that to know what to do, government should aggregate the benefits and costs of regulation, and act if and only if the benefits exceed the costs. When using the WTP numbers, government is acting as a maximization machine, aggregating all benefits and costs as measured by the WTP criterion. But this is a highly contestable understanding of what government should be doing. In fact it represents a shift from the relatively uncontroversial Pareto criterion, exemplified above, to a version of the far more controversial Kaldor-Hicks criterion,' s which assesses policy by asking this question: Are the gainers winning more than the losers are losing? The Kaldor-Hicks criterion is sometimes described as potential Pareto superiority,'79 because it asks whether in principle, the winners could compensate the losers, and a surplus equivalents. A direct assessment of welfare, if it were possible, might justify the regulation in question on Kaldor-Hicks grounds. 
Kaldor-Hicks concept is also and suggestively called potential Pareto superiority: The winners could compensate the losers, whether or not they actually do."). could be left over. The difficulty of course is that Pareto superiority is merely potential. Some people really are losing and others are gaining. 
In these harder cases, the gainers are gaining less (in monetary terms) than the losers are losing-and hence the regulation is said to be unjustified. Under the assumptions that I have given, the regulation is indeed inefficient: its social cost is higher than its social benefit. But is the regulation undesirable? This is not at all clear. The first problem is that WTP is measuring gains and losses in monetary terms, rather than in welfare terms.8 ' It is possible that those who gain, in the harder cases, gain more welfare than the losers lose; WTP is not dispositive on that question. The second problem is distributional. Suppose that in terms of overall welfare, the regulation is not desirable; it makes aggregate welfare lower rather than higher. But suppose too that those who benefit are less advantaged than those who lose. If, for example, those who are willing to pay $80 are disproportionately poor, and those who pay the remainder are disproportionately wealthy, the regulation might plausibly be justified despite the welfare loss. 
It is natural to respond here that, if redistribution is the goal, then it should be produced not through regulation but through the tax system, which is a more efficient way of transferring resources to people who need help.181 I agree. But suppose that redistribution is not possible through the tax system. If so, then regulation in the harder cases cannot be ruled off-limits despite its inefficiency. The fact that a regulation is helpful to the most disadvantaged is not decisive in its favor. If it is trivially helpful, and if it inflicts huge costs on everyone else, little can be said for it. But everything depends on the magnitude of the relevant effects. A program that produced large gains for the least well-off would seem to be justified even if it imposed, in terms of WTP, slightly higher costs than benefits on balance. 
(exploring various methods of measuring the utility of temporally extended outcomes). 
the Income Tax in RedistributingIncome, 23 J. LEGAL STUD. 667, 667 (1994) ("[R]edistribution through legal rules offers no advantage over redistribution through the income tax system and typically is less efficient."); Steven Shavell, A Note on Efficiency vs. DistributionalEquity in Legal Rulemaking: Should DistributionalEquity Matter Given Optimal Income Taxation?, 71 AM. ECON. REV. PAPERS & PROC. 414, 414 (1981) (describing how an income tax can compensate for inefficient liability rules and redistribute income); David A. Weisbach, Should 
Is there a reason to treat the harder cases as identical to the easy ones? Is this absurd? 112 Agencies do not distinguish between them, although recent guidelines, encouraging agency attention to distributional issues, might eventually persuade them to do so.1"3 A possible reason for treating the harder cases the same as the easy ones is the existence of an optimal income tax. If the tax system produced the right level of redistribution, there would be good reason for agencies to rely on individualized VSL and not to concern themselves with whether the beneficiaries of regulation were paying for any or all of the costs. The hard cases would be treated as the easy ones. For people who believe that the hard cases must be treated differently, it is because further redistribution is desirable. 
Another reason for treating the harder cases as the easy ones would be optimism: perhaps everything will balance out in the end. Perhaps no group will be systematically helped or hurt, and the tax system will produce appropriate redistribution. In the real-world cases, regulators might also think that a direct inquiry into welfare, bypassing WTP, would be extremely difficult or perhaps even impossible to operationalize. If distributional considerations are relevant, interest-group warfare may be the consequence, rather than distribution to those who particularly need and deserve help.1" More modestly, it might be concluded that agencies should generally pursue efficiency, using WTP as the foundation for decisions, but should allow distributional findings to cut the other way in cases in which there is compelling reason to do so. In fact this approach is a plausible Legal Rules Be Used to Redistribute Income?, 70 U. CHI. L. REV. 439, 439 (2003) ("[Tjhe tax system is a better tool for redistribution of income than legal rules."). 
(2000) (urging that "there are separate reasons why preferences are an unsatisfactory basis for valuing lives," including that, "in contexts involving risks, people's preferences are generally muddled and incoherent" rather than rational). If preferences are in fact muddled and incoherent, current practice is of course on thin ground. 
(Sept. 17, 2003) (noting that "possible justifications [for regulation] include.., removing distributional unfairness"), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/aOO4/a-4.pdf. 
warfare, how an affluent suburban neighborhood successfully thwarted the development of a nearby landfill, resulting in the landfill's being moved to a "pristine research forest and nature preserve" belonging to Duke University because the university was located in a neighboring county and thus possessed less political clout than the suburban neighborhood). way of reading the Office of Management and Budget's current guidelines on regulatory impact analysis."' 
In the easy cases, the resulting redistribution is almost certainly perverse, because forced exchanges, under the stated assumptions, are highly likely to harm the people who are being coerced. But in the harder cases, it cannot be said that the beneficiaries of regulation will be harmed if government uses a number that exceeds their actual VSLs. Everything depends on the distributional effects of the regulation. If the beneficiaries are well-off, a high VSL might produce perverse redistribution if those who lose are toward the bottom of the economic ladder. It is possible to envision this result, for example, with a pollution program that protects those who visit expensive recreational areas. In contrast, if the beneficiaries are poor, and if the costs are borne by the wealthy or by the general population, a high VSL might be in the interest of those who need help. Air pollution programs, providing special protection for people in cities, appear to be an example. 186 It is therefore reasonable to reject the confident view of economically inclined analysts who believe that accurate VSLs, based on actual WTP (and hence individuated), should always be the basis of regulatory policy. But it is similarly reasonable to reject the confident view of skeptics who believe that a uniform VSL, refusing to make distinctions among persons, is best on distributive grounds. 
What are the implications for individuation of VSL? It remains true that according to the theory that underlies agency valuations, a higher degree of individuation would be desirable. It also remains true that with respect to risks, individuation is appropriate insofar as valuations differ depending on the nature of the risk at stake. The principal qualification is that a uniform VSL, one that gives disadvantaged people regulatory protection in excess of their WTP, might turn out to have fortunate distributional consequences in the harder cases. Regulators should be careful about this point. It will not 
There are justifications for regulations in addition to correcting market failures. A regulation may be appropriate when you have a clearly identified measure that can make government operate more efficiently. In addition, Congress establishes some regulatory programs to redistribute resources to select groups. Such regulations should be examined to ensure that they are both effective and cost-effective. 
basin, where regulation is especially stringent, experienced a larger pollution exposure reduction than [other] California residents"). always hold, and if the goal is to provide more assistance to those in need, a uniform VSL is hardly the best way to achieve that goal. Consider the case of poor areas of the country: a national VSL of $6.1 million would almost certainly be harmful, simply because the resulting levels of regulation would have adverse effects on wages and employment levels. My only point is that in some cases, individuation across persons will produce worse outcomes on distributional grounds and possibly on grounds of welfare as well. 
VALUATIONS 
The analysis thus far has significant implications for global risk regulation and cross-cultural variations in WTP and VSL. In this Part, I turn to those implications. My conclusion is that poor countries should use a lower VSL than wealthy countries, and that people in poor countries are not helped if the United States, or an international body, insists on a high one. But the analysis must be different if the question is the behavior of donors or donor nations. Nations who are most in need deserve help, even if their WTP is low. For purposes of regulation, however, insistence on a high VSL will not provide that help. I begin with the distinction between donor practices and government regulation and then turn to the practical question of cross-national valuations. 
I have suggested that people in poor nations show a lower WTP and hence VSL than people in wealthy nations. ' 8 Because poor people have less money than rich people, this finding should not be at all surprising. Building on evidence of this kind, some assessments of the effects of global warming find far higher monetized costs from deaths of people in rich countries than from deaths of people in poor countries."8 These assessments have been highly controversial; 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: PROSPECTS FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 202, 206-07 (Anil Markandya. & Kirsten Halsnaes, eds., 2002) (calculating a VSL for the European Union of $3.9 million in 1995 prices, compared to VSLs of $315,000 to $1.2 million for the four developing countries in the case study); cf INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE, THIRD ASSESSMENT REPORT: CLIMATE CHANGE 2001: MITIGATION 483 (finding that "[t]he VSL is generally lower in poor countries than in rich countries"), availableat http://grida.no/climate/ipcc-tar/wg3. Professor John Broome, for example, notes that under one approach, an American life is worth ten or twenty Indian lives, a judgment that he deems "absurd., 189 As a result, some analysts, including the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, have opted for a worldwide VSL of $1 million, a choice that seems quite arbitrary and potentially harmful to people in rich and poor nations alike. 
The issue raises important dilemmas. How should global institutions assess the monetary value of human lives? What are the monetized costs of ten thousand worldwide deaths from global warming, deaths that include eight thousand people from poor countries and two thousand from wealthy ones? The discussion thus far suggests that there is no sensible abstract answer to these questions; it is important to know what, in particular, the answer is for. If a general question is asked, outside of any particular context, about the monetary value of a stated number of deaths in 2020, it is best left unanswered (except perhaps with laughter). The appropriate assessments of VSL, and variations across countries, depend on their intended use. If disparate numbers are meant to identify the actual monetary values of human lives, and to suggest that people in Canada are "worth" much more than people in Argentina or that poor people are "worth" less than rich ones, the numbers are ludicrous as well as offensive. 
It is possible to go further. If the disparate numbers are meant to suggest the appropriate amount that donor institutions should spend to reduce mortality risks, they make little sense. The fact that a poor person in a poor nation would be willing to pay $1 to eliminate a risk of 1/10,000, whereas a wealthy person in a wealthy nation would be willing to pay $100, cannot plausibly be used to defend the view that money-metric utility function to represent a person's preferences," an approach that Professor Broome rejects). In the easy cases, I suggest that a money-metric utility function is not absurd, and it is not quite absurd in the hard cases either. See INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE, supra note 188, at 483: 
The VSL is generally lower in poor countries than in rich countries, but it is considered unacceptable by many analysts to impose different values for a policy that has to be international in scope and decided by the international community. In these circumstances, analysts use average VSL and apply it to all countries. Of course, such a value is not what individuals would pay for the reduction in risk, but it is an "equity adjusted" value, in which greater weight is given to the WTP of lower income groups. On the basis of EU and US VSLs and a weighting system that has some broad appeal in terms of government policies towards income distribution, Eyre et al. (1998) estimate the average world VSL at around 1 million Euros (approximately US$1 million at 1999 exchange rates). an international agency should devote its resources to the latter rather than the former. To illustrate this point, imagine choosing between two programs: (A) Program A would eliminate (at a stated cost of $500) a 1/10,000 risk faced by fifty poor people in Costa Rica, each willing to pay $2 to eliminate that risk. (B) Program B would eliminate (also at a stated cost of $500) a 1/10,000 risk faced by fifty wealthy people in Germany, each willing to pay $350 to eliminate that same risk. 
In principle, there is no reason to think that a donor should prefer to save the Germans, even though their WTP is far higher than that of the Costa Ricans. In fact, Program A has much higher priority, because it would help people who were facing extreme deprivation. What is true at the individual level is true across nations as well. 
But now consider a different issue. The government in a poor nation is deciding on appropriate policy to reduce workplace risks; what VSL should it use? At least under the assumptions that I have given thus far, such a government would do well to begin by using the admittedly low WTP of its own citizens. If citizens in that nation show a WTP of $2 to eliminate risks of 1/10,000, then their government does them no favors by requiring them to pay $50 or $10 for that protection. This is the sense in which VSL properly varies across nations, and in which citizens of poor nations have lower VSLs than citizens of wealthy ones. 
The point has strong implications for international labor standards. It is tempting to suggest that workers in poor countries, for example China and India, should receive the same protection as those in the United States; why should a worker in Beijing be subject to significantly higher death risks than a worker in Los Angeles? So long as the distribution of global income has the form that it does, a system that gives Chinese workers the same protection as American workers is not in the interest of Chinese workers-assuming, as I am, that the cost of that protection is borne by workers themselves. Requiring Chinese workers to have the same protection as Americans amounts to a forced exchange on terms that Chinese workers reject. 
In these circumstances it is unsurprising that workers in wealthy nations, not in poor ones, often clamor the loudest for greater protection of workers in poor nations; workers in wealthier nations would be the principal beneficiaries of such regulation, which would protect them against competition from those in poorer nations. The idea that workers in poor nations should have the "same" protection as workers in wealthy nations is an error, rooted in a "moral heuristic" involving the equal worth of all human lives-a heuristic that sometimes works well but that also misfires.' 90 The real question is the effect of different numbers. 
If the Chinese government uses a VSL of $6 million, on the theory that its citizens should not be valued less than those of wealthy nations, social harm will almost inevitably result. In the easy cases, the forced exchanges will be ludicrously harmful to the people whom they are supposed to help. In the hard cases, in which the beneficiaries pay only a fraction of the cost (which is mostly borne by others in the same nation), the nation will be spending far too much of its money on risk reduction (or more precisely, on reducing the risks that happen to get onto the regulatory agenda). The inefficiency of an extremely high VSL will be felt acutely and in many forms, including decreased employment. But if the costs of risk reduction will be paid by third parties-for example, wealthy nations-then people in the poor country will be helped even if risk reduction is based on an excessive VSL. 
Of course the citizens of poor nations would almost certainly be helped more if they were given cash (supposing that it would not be squandered) rather than in-kind benefits. But if cash redistribution is not possible, regulatory benefits, provided for free or for a fraction of their cost, remain a blessing. If, for example, a global institution uses a worldwide VSL of $1 million, and if that amount exceeds the domestic VSL of people in poor nations, it is possible that poor people will gain a great deal if the resources for risk reduction are provided by wealthy nations. In the harder cases, the simple point is that many of the intended beneficiaries of regulation are in fact net gainers. 
How, then, should global institutions, such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, assess the monetary costs of risks faced by people all over the world? As I have suggested, the answer turns on the purpose of the assessment-on what issue the answer is supposed to address. There is no good acontextual way of Framing,88 MINN. L. REV. 1556 (2004). asking some question about the aggregate costs of global climate change by 2050, unless it has some particular point. A far more sensible question is whether it would make sense for any particular nation to accept a particular way of responding to the problem of climate change, such as the Kyoto Protocol. t At the national level, an assessment of the costs and benefits of the Kyoto Protocol is not much different from an assessment of the costs and benefits of any other regulation. 
For the United States, the likely costs of the Kyoto Protocol greatly exceed its likely benefits. The anticipated costs are $325 billion,192 an amount that might be worthwhile if the anticipated benefits for the United States were in the ballpark of that number. But the overall benefits of the Kyoto Protocol are small because the mandatory emissions reduction would make only a slight dent in global warming.9 In the United States, the benefits could not possibly justify the costs.9" The picture for the world as a whole is more mixed, with Europe anticipated to be a net gainer1.9 ' But even for the world, the Kyoto Protocol appears to impose costs in excess of benefits-and this is so even if improbable catastrophic risks are taken into account. The only qualification here is that the science of global warming is disputed; if this is a realm of uncertainty rather than risk, and if worst-case scenarios are emphasized, then the Kyoto Protocol might provide a sensible impetus toward technological innovation and far more dramatic reductions. 
For wealthy nations, of course, the argument for contributing to the reduction of global warming is strengthened by the fact that the harms of global warming will be felt disproportionately in poor nations-and also by the fact that wealthy nations have done by far the most to produce the situation that makes global warming a serious problem. Hence it is reasonable to say that the United States should join international agreements to combat global warming even if it loses more than it gains. The problem with the Kyoto Protocol is MODELS OF GLOBAL WARMING 168 (2000) ("Finally, the Kyoto Protocol has significant distributional consequences .... The lion's share of the[] costs are borne by the United States. Indeed, the United States is a net loser while the rest of the world on balance benefits from the Kyoto Protocol."). 
that it combines extremely high global costs with relatively low global benefits, even if the problem of global warming is taken quite seriously. A sensible approach would control emissions in developing countries, so as to increase the overall benefits, and also would use emissions trading and other strategies to reduce the overall costs. These routes could certainly produce sensible agreements to address climate change.196 To the extent that emissions control in developing countries would impose a significant burden, wealthy nations should help to foot the bill. 
But I am not attempting here to resolve any particular controversy. My major suggestions are that within nations, diverse VSLs are perfectly sensible, and that answers to questions about valuation must be closely attuned to the purposes for which those questions are being asked. 
The theory that animates current valuations of mortality risks argues in favor of far more individuation. Does the risk involve cancer? What kind of cancer? Does it involve air pollution or driving on the highways? If welfare and autonomy are the guides, it is obtuse to adopt an approach that values all statistically equivalent mortality risks in the same way. In addition, individuals display a great deal of heterogeneity in their VSLs-not simply because of different tastes and values, but also because of different levels of income and wealth. WTP depends on ability to pay. Nothing that I have said here is meant to suggest approval of existing distributions of resources. Certainly poor people are not "worth less" than wealthy ones, and it is often appropriate for government to provide resources directly to poor people or subsidize the provision of regulatory benefits. But forced exchanges are not a good way to assist poor people, and a uniform VSL is often a perverse response to inequality. In theory, risk-reduction policies should be more fully individuated, giving all people regulatory protection that corresponds to their WTP for the particular risk in question. 
Of course this is not practicable. Government lacks the necessary information about individual risk preferences; categorical judgments are inevitable. In any case many of the benefits provided by POLICY 38-40, 102-09 (2003). regulation are collective in character. Regulators cannot feasibly provide protection to one person without simultaneously providing protection to many. But it is nonetheless important to see what the current theory counsels in principle, and to understand that the limitations are practical ones, some of which may be overcome as knowledge progresses. Even with the practical limitations, a uniform VSL is increasingly difficult to justify. 
It is clear that some risks produce a higher VSL than others, resulting in significantly different analyses in many cases, above all by producing a higher VSL for cancer risks. A program that protects elderly people should produce a lower VSL than one that protects younger people, and there is no ethical objection to variations on the basis of age.1 7 If a program affects mostly wealthy people, a VSL based on the population-wide median will be too low. It would follow that the FAA should have a relatively high VSL, because people who fly are wealthier than the population median-and when the EPA is engaging in cost-benefit analysis for programs protecting poor people from risks associated with hazardous waste sites, it should have a relatively low VSL. 
The principal qualification is that when the beneficiaries of regulation do not pay all of its cost, a high VSL may actually be in their interests. The easy cases, in which the beneficiaries are forced to pay for regulatory benefits, are not the same as those in which beneficiaries pay only a fraction of the cost. Nonetheless, current practice treats such cases as identical, perhaps because of the great difficulty in untangling the incidence of regulatory benefits and costs. My goal has not been to resolve that difficulty, but to suggest that the theory behind current practice justifies far more individuation of VSL than regulators currently provide. However regulators deal with distributional problems and the hardest cases, the use of a uniform VSL is unacceptably obtuse. 
. about 30-40 percent lower than the market average and between one-third and one-half the size of the VSLs for prime-aged workers."); Sunstein, supra note 8, at 210 ("If thirty-year-olds are willing to pay more (or less) to eliminate a statistical risk than sixty-year-olds, then the difference should be reflected in cost-benefit analyses of regulatory proposals. ... [P]olicymakers should use different values for old people and young people if and only if WTP studies show such a disparity."). I am putting to one side the difficult questions raised by the need to produce a VSL for children. 
