Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 207, 2004). 
The University of Chicago Law School John M. Olin Law & Economics Working Paper Series 
Working Paper No. 207 AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies 
Working Paper No. 04-05 Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives Cass R. Sunstein 
February 2004 
This paper can be downloaded without charge from the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection at: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=506142 Preliminary draft 2/17/04 All rights reserved 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
Each government agency uses a uniform figure to measure the value of a statistical life. This is a serious mistake. The very theory that underlies current practice calls for far more individuation of the relevant values. According to that theory, the value of statistical lives should vary across risks. More controversially, the value of a statistical life should vary across individuals—even or especially if the result would be to produce a lower number for some people than for others. One practical implication is that a higher value should be given to programs that reduce cancer risks. Should government use a higher VSL for programs that disproportionately benefit the wealthy—and a lower VSL for programs that disproportionately benefit the poor? A serious complication here is that sometimes the beneficiaries of regulation pay only a fraction or even none of its cost; when this is so, the appropriate VSL for poor people might be higher, on distributional grounds, than market evidence suggests. An understanding of this point has implications for foundational issues about government regulation, including valuation of persons in poor and wealthy nations. 
I. 
For over two decades, executive orders have required regulatory agencies to engage in cost-benefit analysis of major regulations,1 and Congress has imposed the same requirement in several statutes.2 To conduct cost-benefit analysis, agencies must assign monetary values to human lives. What numbers do they choose? Do some deaths count for more than others? * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am grateful to participants in a work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago Law School and to Matthew Adler, David Strauss, Robert Hahn, Eric Posner, Richard A. Posner, Adrian Vermeule, and W. Kip Viscusi for valuable comments on a previous draft. Sarah Sulkowski provided outstanding research assistance. 1 See Stephen Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 120-35 (5th ed. 2002). 2 See, e.g., 15 USC 2601 et seq. (Toxic Substances Control Act); 7 USC 136 et seq. (Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act); 42 USC 300g-1 (Safe Drinking Water Act). 
The Environmental Protection Agency uses a uniform value for a statistical life (VSL): $6.1million.3 Other agencies use either lower and higher numbers, with a range, in recent years, between $1.5 million (the Federal Aviation Administration in 19904) to the FDA’s current figure of $6.5 million.5 While substantial differences can be found across agencies,6 uniformity is the intended practice within agencies.7 No agency treats cancer risks, or mortality risks that produce unusual fear or involve special suffering, as worthy of more concern than other risks. No agency treats young people as worth more than poor people.8 No agency values the lives of poor people less than the lives of rich 3 See 66 Fed. Reg. at 7012. In its July 2003 regulation governing food labeling of trans fatty acids, the Food and Drug Administration used a VSL of $6.5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 41434, 41488 (July 11, 2003); in its March 13, 2003 proposed rule on dietary ingredients and dietary supplements, the same agency suggested a VSL of $5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 12158, 12229 (using this value to calculate the “value of a statistical life day”). 4 The Department of Transportation now uses a higher figure, but one that is still low in comparison to what most agencies do. See 67 Fed. Reg. 17556, 17559 (April 10, 2002) ($2.7 million). 5 See Table 1 below; Matthew Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, 29 J Legal Stud 146 (2000). 6 These differences appear to be inexplicable. 7 See Adler and Posner, supra note. There are some differences within agencies across contexts and across time, but those differences do not appear to be deliberate. See, e.g., the FDA sources cited in note 1 supra. The most explicit discussions of varying VSL have come from the EPA. In its 2003 discussion of hazardous air pollutants, see 68 Fed. Reg. 1660, 1693 (Jan. 13, 2003), the EPA noted that there “is general agreement that the value to an individual of a reduction is mortality risk can vary based on several factors, including the age of the individual, the type of risk, the level of control the individual has over the risk, the individual’s attitude toward risk, and the health status of the individual.” Nonetheless, the agency announced, without offering reasons, that it “prefers not to draw distinctions in the monetary value assigned to the lives saved even if they differ in age, health status, socioeconomic status, gender or other characteristic of the adult population.” Id. 
An extended discussion of related issues can be found in the EPA’s arsenic proposal, see 65 Fed. Reg. 38888, 38945 (June 22, 2000). There the EPA noted that the “factors which may influence the estimate of economic benefits associated with avoided cancer fatalities include (1) a possible ‘cancer premium’ (i.e., the additional value or sum that people may be willing to pay to avoid the experiences of dread, pain and suffering, and diminished quality of life associated with cancer-related illness and ultimate fatality); (2) the willingness of people to pay more over time to avoid mortality risk as their income rises; (3) a possible premium for accepting involuntary risks as opposed to voluntary [sic] assumed risks; (4) the greater risk aversion of the general population as opposed to workers in the wage-risk valuation studies; (5) ‘altruism’ or the willingness of people to pay more to reduce risk in other sectors of the population and (6) a consideration of health status and life years remaining at the time of premature mortality.” The EPA acknowledged that these factors “may significantly increase the present value estimate,” but said that “there is currently neither a clear consensus among economists about how to simultaneously analyze each of these adjustments nor is there adequate empirical data to support quantitative estimates for all potentially significant adjustment factors.” Id. Hence the EPA solicited comments on these issues and said that it would ask its Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) to conduct a review. Id. As noted below, the comments produced a sensitivity analysis that contains several 7% upward adjustments from the $6.1 million figure, see below, but the SAB’s review suggested that at the present time, upward adjustments were not justified by existing evidence, see below. 8 With the interest in focusing on “life-years,” however, this might change. See Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, Colum L Rev (forthcoming 2004). people. No agency distinguishes between whites and African-Americans or between men and women. For statistical lives, the governing idea is that each life is worth exactly the same. With respect to cost-benefit analysis, much is disputed.9 But on the idea of a uniform value per life saved, there is a solid consensus, at least in terms of regulatory practice.10 
I intend to question that consensus here, and to do so in a way that raises foundational issues about the economic valuation of human lives. I suggest that a uniform value is obtuse. Under the very approach that agencies use to produce the current numbers, the value of a statistical life should vary along two dimensions. First, it should vary across risks. For example, there is reason to think that VSL is higher for cancer deaths than for sudden, unanticipated deaths11; deaths that produce unusual fear,12 or that are accompanied by high levels of pain and suffering, should be expected to produce a higher VSL. Human beings face countless mortality risks, and it would be truly bizarre to maintain that for each of these risks, VSL is identical. Second, VSL should vary across individuals.13 People who are risk averse will show a higher VSL than people who are risk-seeking.14 People who are thirty will show a higher VSL than people who are sixty.15 9 For various perspectives, see Adler and Posner, supra note; W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1994); Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless (2004). 10 An arguable exception, noted below, involves the debate over whether agencies should focus on lives or instead life-years; the latter approach might well value older people less than younger ones. For discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, Colum L Rev (forthcoming 2004). An implicit challenge to the consensus can be found in W. Kip Viscusi, Risk Equity, J Legal Stud. W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph E. Aldy, The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates Throughout the World, 27 J Risk and Uncertainty 5, 7 (2003), notes the existence of heterogeneity by income, union status, and age, and explains that the “existence of such heterogeneity provides a cautionary note for policy.” 11 See James K. Hammitt and Jin-Tau Liu, Effects of Disease Type and Latency on the Value of Mortality Risk, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 73 (2004) (finding that willingness to pay to reduce a cancer death is about one-third larger WTP to reduce risk of a similar chronic, degenerative disease). 12 For evidence of a higher VSL for airline risks than for automotive risks, see Fredrik Carlsson et al., Is Transport Safety More Valuable in the Air?, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 147 (2004). 13 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 18 (“transferring the estimates of a value of a statistical life to nonlabor market contexts, as is the case in benefit-cost analyses of environmental health policies for example, should recognize that different populations have different preferences over risks and different values on life-saving”). 14 See Carlsson et al., supra note, at 158 (finding that those who are scared of flying are willing to pay especially high amounts to reduce the risks of flying). 15 As found in Joseph P. Aldy and W. Kip Viscusi, Age Variations in Workers’ Value of a Statistical Life (2003), forthcoming. Those who are rich will show a higher VSL than those who are poor. It follows that different demographic groups will show diversity in their VSL as well.16 
If we put together these two forms of variability—across risks and across persons—we will find that the unitary $6.1 million figure is far too crude. In theory, each person in society should have a particular VSL for each and every risk, resulting in a fully individuated VSL.17 Such a fully individuated VSL would mean, for example, that the VSL of some racial groups would likely be lower than that for others.18 But these differences 
would not be the result of a governmental decision to take racial characteristics into account; in fact it would not be a product of any kind of group-level discrimination on government’s part, at least not when government is calculating VSL.19 The differences would be the result of aggregating fully individual VSLs, just as ordinary markets do in producing prices for the reduction of the statistical risks associated with smoke alarms, unusually safe cars, and much more.20 16 Such differences are found in W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical Life, 27 J. Risk & Uncertainty 239, 252 tbl.5 (2003) [hereinafter Viscusi, Racial Differences]. To get a bit ahead of the story: I am not arguing that government should assign a higher VSL to white lives than to African-American lives. I am speaking here of demographic differences that would emerge from a fully individuated approach to VSL, in which each person’s WTP were calculated on an individual basis; once these values are aggregated, the white VSL would likely be higher than the African-American VSL, simply because of disparities in wealth and income. Richer people pay more for safe cars and smoke alarms than poor people do. See below for further discussion. 17 I am putting to one side the complication that sometimes values are constructed, rather than elicited, by social situations – an especially serious complication for contingent valuation studies. See John Payne et al., Measuring Constructed Preferences: Toward a Building Code, 19 J. Risk and Uncertainty 243 (1999); Cass R. Sunstein and Richard Thaler, Libertarian Paternalism Is Not An Oxymoron, 70 U Chi L Rev 1159, 1177-1178 (2003). 18 As found in W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical Life, 27 J Risk and Uncertainty 239 (2003); John D. Leeth and John Ruser, Compensating Wage Differentials for Fatal and Nonfatal Injury Risk by Gender and Race, 27 J Risk and Uncertainty 257 (2003). Viscusi finds that the overall white VSL is $15 million, while the overall African-American VSL is $7.2 million. For white females, the overall VSL is $9.4 million, compared to $18.8 million for white males; for African-American females, the overall VSL is $6.9 million, compared to $5.9 million for African-American males. 19 Discrimination might well lay in the background, of course; it almost certainly accounts for the unequal opportunities that produce lower VSL for African-Americans than for whites. See Viscusi, supra note, at 255, for the suggestion that the racial differentials reflect “differences in market opportunities.” Viscusi goes on to suggest that “it is inappropriate to attribute the observed differences to a greater willingness by black workers to bear risk.” Id. In a sense Viscusi is correct; there is no reason to think that AfricanAmerican workers have an intrinsically greater predisposition to take risks. But in the market, one’s willingness to bear risks is a product of “market opportunities,” and hence those with fewer opportunities will show a greater willingness to bear risk. 20 See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1994). 
In practice, of course, a fully individuated VSL is not feasible, for two different reasons. First, government lacks the information that would permit the calculation. Regulators do not know how much each person would be willing to pay to reduce each statistical risk; categories are therefore inevitable. Second, many regulatory programs involve collective goods and therefore must protect many people at once. A clean air program, for example, cannot easily ensure that some people in a geographical region are exposed to no more than 10 parts per billion (ppb) of some pollutant, while others in the same region are subjected to 50 ppb. Because collective goods are typically involved in regulation, the problem is pervasive. 
Notwithstanding issues of feasibility, an understanding of the reasons for individuating VSL is important for two reasons. The first involves conceptual clarity. The theory behind the use of VSL and willingness to pay (WTP) remains poorly understood. An appreciation of the case for individuation will clarify the theory—both its rationale and its limitations, empirical and ethical. The second reason involves the possibility of moving some way in the direction of greater individuation. With respect to cancer risks, for example, there is reason to believe that VSL is significantly higher than the amounts produced by examining studies of workplace accidents. For this reason, the government’s current numbers for cancer risks might well be too low, resulting in widespread underprotection of the public. Similarly, there is reason to think that VSL should be higher for mortality risks from airplanes than for statistically identical risks on the highways.21 More generally, different agencies, dealing with qualitatively different risks, might well use different VSLs, simply because market evidence is likely to show just those differences. Full individuation is not feasible, but greater individuation would be quite easy. 
A far more troublesome point, to which I will devote considerable attention, involves disparities along demographic lines. For now, notice a simple factual point: When risks are faced disproportionately by wealthy people, VSL, based on actual WTP, should be higher than $6.1 million—just as it should be lower when it is faced 21 See Carlsson, supra note (finding that people’s WTP for airline deaths is more than double their WTP for taxi deaths). disproportionately by poor people.22 WTP is dependent on ability to pay, and those with little income and wealth will show little WTP. It follows that people in poor nations will have a lower VSL than people in rich nations, a point with implications for valuation of the harms from global warming23—and that people in poor areas will have a lower VSL than those in wealthy areas, a point with implications for valuation of multiple risks in the domestic setting. If variations across risks and persons are significant, the question of individuation should be a central part of the second generation of cost-benefit analysis—a step beyond the first generation debate about whether to do such analysis at all, and a step toward doing such analysis in a way that is more refined and more closely attuned to the consequences of regulations in terms of both welfare and distributional equity. 
Of course it is offensive and wrong to suggest that in principle, poor people are “worth less” than rich people. If poor people are subject to a risk of 1/10,000, they do not have less of a claim to public attention than if wealthy people are subject to the same risk; in fact they have a greater claim, if only because they lack the resources to reduce that risk on their own. But the topic here is regulation rather than subsidy, and the two ought not to be confused. In principle, government should not force people to buy protection against statistical risks at a price that seems to them excessive.24 Someone should not be required to pay $70 to reduce a risk of 1/100,000 if she is willing to pay no more than $50. The point bears on international issues as well as domestic ones. If a uniform VSL would benefit the poor, there is an argument for a uniform VSL. But regulation based on a uniform VSL may or may not produce a better distribution of income; in fact any redistribution may be perverse, and a single VSL might not promote equality at all. If wealthy people are the principal beneficiaries of a particular regulation chosen on the basis of a uniform VSL, and if the public as a whole pays for it, then any redistribution will benefit the wealthy, not the poor. And if poor people are forced to pay an amount for risk reduction that exceeds their WTP, desirable redistribution will hardly result; forced exchanges, on terms that people reject, are not a good way of redistributing wealth to the disadvantaged. On the other hand, it is possible that some regulatory programs, based on 22 With this qualification: If poor people would be disproportionately benefited by assigning them a higher VSL, then there is a good argument for assigning them a higher VSL. I explore this issue below. 23 See below. 24 I offer a number of qualifications below. See TAN infra. a uniform VSL, will help those in need, if their beneficiaries receive risk reduction for which they pay little or nothing—an issue to which I will devote considerable attention. 
A larger lesson follows. For purposes of law and politics, there is no sensible answer to the abstract question about the correct monetary value of human life. Any judgment about the appropriate VSL, and about individuation, must be heavily pragmatic; it must rest on the consequences of one or another choice. Whether government should use a higher or lower VSL across demographic lines cannot be answered simply. An important implication involves the assessment of VSL across nations. A poor nation would do well to adopt a lower VSL than a wealthy nation; for China or India, it would be disastrous to use a VSL equivalent to that of the United States or Canada. But this point should not be taken to support the ludicrous proposition that for donor institutions, both public and private, risk reduction in a wealthy nation deserves more attention than equivalent risk reduction in a poor nation. 
This Article is organized as follows. Part II clarifies the theory behind the valuation of statistical lives. The major point here is that regulators do not really use a VSL; instead they use a mean WTP to eliminate a statistical risk. For example, agencies might say that they are using a VSL of $6 million, but if so, they are relying on evidence more or less establishing that the average person pays, or is paid, $60 to eliminate a risk of 1/10,000. Part III, in some ways the heart of the essay, explores the need for individuation across both risks and persons. Part IV offers a more ambitious discussion of the uses and limits of willingness to pay in regulatory policy. It distinguishes between easy and hard cases for using WTP. The central claim here is that the argument for using WTP is strongest when the beneficiaries of regulation must pay all of its cost—though even in that event, the argument is subject to important qualifications, above involving bounded rationality. The argument for using WTP is weaker when the beneficiaries of regulation pay only a fraction of that cost. In the latter circumstances, some people will benefit from regulation even if it is inefficient in economic terms. I discuss the implications of this point for a uniform or fully individuated VSL. 
It has now become standard for regulatory agencies to assign monetary values to human lives. Consider the following table, which captures agency practices from 1996 through 2003: 
Value of Statistical Life Findings of Significant Contribution and Rulemaking on Section 125 Petitions for Purposes of Reducing Interstate Ozone 
Transport January 18, 2000 65 FR 2674-01 Final Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for 
Hazardous Waste Combustors 
September 30, 1999 
64 FR 52828-01 National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: 
Disinfectants and Disinfection Byproducts 
December 16, 1998 
63 FR 69390-01 Financial Responsibility Requirements for 
Licensed Launch Activities 
August 26, 1998 63 FR 45592-01 Quality Mammography Standards 
October 28, 1997 62 FR 55852-01 
Regulations Restricting the Sale and 
Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children and Adolescents 
August 28, 1996 61 FR 44396-01 Pathogen Reduction; Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) Systems 
July 25, 1996 61 FR 38806-01 Aircraft Flight Simulator Use in Pilot Training, Testing and Checking and at Training Centers 
July 2, 1996 61 FR 34508-01 Requirements for Labeling of Retail Containers of Charcoal 
May 3, 1996 61 FR 19818-01 Large Multiple-Tube Fireworks Devices 
March 26, 1996 61 FR 13084-01 
These number show substantial variations, though less so than even ten years ago.25 The variations appear not to have any rationale behind them; agencies with higher or lower numbers have not explained their choices. The prior question is how agencies 25 See Adler and Posner, supra note, for a slightly dated report that shows larger disparities. generate monetary amounts of this kind. The answer comes from two kinds of evidence. The first and most important involves real-world markets, producing evidence of compensation levels for actual risks.26 In the workplace and for consumer goods, additional safety has a price; market evidence is investigated to identify that price.27 The second kind of evidence comes from contingent valuation studies, asking people how much they are willing to pay to reduce statistical risks.28 The EPA’s $6.1 million is a product of studies of actual workplace risks, attempting to determine how much workers are paid to assume mortality hazards.29 The relevant risks usually are in the general range of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000.30 The calculation of VSL is a product of simple arithmetic. Suppose that workers must be paid $600, on average, to eliminate a risk of 1/10,000. If so, the value of a statistical life would be said to be $6 million. 
For some of the two dozen studies on which agencies currently rely,31 consider the following table:32 26 See W. Kip Viscusi, supra note. 27 A valuable and comprehensive overview can be found in Viscusi and Aldy, supra note. 28 See, e.g., James Hammitt and Jin-Tau Liu, Effects of Disease Type and Latency on the Value of Mortality Risk, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 73 (2004). 29 See Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs, supra note, for discussion. 30 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 33 (2004) (showing fatality risks ranging from about 1/100,000 to 45/100,000). 31 For an accessible outline, see Richard W. Parker, Grading the Government, 70 U Chi L Rev 1345, 148586 (2003). 32 See EPA, Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses 89 (2000). 
A large advantage of labor market studies of this kind is that they avoid the lively disputes over the use of “willingness to pay” or “willingness to accept” in regulatory policy.33 In many contexts, people demand more to give up a good than they are willing to pay to obtain it in the first instance—a disparity that much complicates efforts to assign monetary values to regulatory benefits, including mortality and morbidity.34 If people are willing to pay $25 to eliminate an existing risk of 1/100,000, but demand $100 to incur a new risk of 1/100,000, then it is difficult to know how to proceed for purposes of monetary valuation of risks. Fortunately, this problem dissipates in the context of labor market studies. If workers who face a risk of 1/10,000 are paid $600 more for doing so, and if workers who refuse to face such a risk are being paid $600 less, then it is irrelevant whether we speak in terms of WTP or WTA. 
Nonetheless, some questions might be raised about the use of these studies by EPA and other agencies.35 Most obviously, the studies show significant variety in the crucial numbers, ranging from $0.7 million, in 1997 dollars, to $16.3 million. The EPA has adopted the $6.1 million figure on the ground that it represents the median in the relevant studies. But there is a risk of arbitrariness in fastening on that median figure, certainly if we lack reason to believe that the relevant study is the most accurate. In fact a more general look at the VSL data produces further puzzles and wider ranges. Some studies find no compensating differentials at all, indicating a VSL of zero36—implausibly low, to say the least, for purposes of policy. Others find that non-unionized workers receive negative compensating differentials for risk, that is, they appear to be paid less because they face mortality risks.37 Another study finds that African-Americans receive no significant compensating wage differential and hence that their particular VSL is zero.38 On the other hand, it is possible to find studies finding a VSL not below the range 33 See Russell Korobkin, The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis, 97 Nw. U.L. Rev. 1227 (2003). 34 See id.; Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law, 22 J. Legal Stud. 217, 246-47 (1993). 35 See Parker, supra note, and Robert Frank & Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position, 68 U. CHI. L. REV. 323 (2001), for several such questions. 36See Peter Dorman and P. Hagstrom, Wage Compensation for Dangerous Work Revisited, 52 Industrial and Labor Relations Review 116 (1998). 37 Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 44. 38 Leeth and Ruser, supra note. in Table 1 but above it; consider the finding that for people who choose jobs with low level risks, the VSL is as much as $22 million.39 
The most recent meta-study, far more comprehensive than EPA’s own analysis, finds that most studies produce a range of between $3.8 million and $9 million.40 The range is fairly compressed, in a way that disciplines agency decisions; for many regulations, the “bottom line” of the cost-benefit assessment will not be affected by a choice of $3.8 million or $9 million for VSL. But that range still leaves significant room for discretion, in a way that would have significant implications for policy and law. Consider the fact that the monetized value of a program that saves 200 lives would range from $760 million to $1.8 billion; consider also the fact that the EPA’s highly publicized arsenic regulation would easily fail cost-benefit analysis with a $3.8 million VSL but easily pass with a $9 million VSL.41 The simple point is that the variety of the outcomes raises questions about the reliability of any particular figure. 
In addition, most of these studies on which EPA relies are based on data from the 1970s. Since that time, there has been significant growth in national income, in a way that suggests that any VSL derived from 1970s data is too low. Of course people with more money are expected to be willing to pay more, other things being equal, to reduce statistical risks. One study finds that at the beginning of the twentieth century, VSL was about $150,000 in current dollars—less than one-twentieth of the corresponding amount a century later.42 On reasonable assumptions, the EPA’s use of 1970s data has produced a significant undervaluation of the monetary value of the lives at stake, for the $6.1 million figure reflects no adjustment to account for changes in national real income growth.43 In principle, the failure to undertake an adjustment is a serious mistake. The actual amount might be substantially higher.44 40 See id. at 18. 39 Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 23. 41 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. The regulation was projected to cost about $200 million, and its monetized benefits, with a $6.1 million VSL, were around $190 million. See id. It should be easy to see that a $3.8 million VSL would make the regulation impossible to defend – and a $9 million VSL would make it impossible to challenge. 42 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 22. 43 EPA has updated the relevant numbers for inflation, but it has not otherwise made adjustments. 44See Dora L. Costa & Matthew E. Kahn, The Rising Price of Nonmarket Goods, 93 Am. Econ. Rev. (Papers & Proc.) 227, 229 tbl.1 (2003) (suggesting likely current value of $12 million). For recent evidence that the current numbers are indeed too low, see W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical Life, 27 J. Risk & Uncertainty 239, 252 tbl.5 (2003) [hereinafter Viscusi, Racial 
Let us suppose that these problems can be solved and that we can identify a number, call it $6 million, that really represents people’s valuations. It should be clear that even if this were so, it is grossly misleading to offer the following suggestion: The value of a statistical life is $6 million. It would be much more accurate to say that for risks of 1/10,000, the median WTP, in the relevant population, is $600—or that for risks of 1/100,000, the median WTP is $60. If true, these statements would, on assumptions to be explored, be extremely helpful for purposes of policy. But even at first glance, we can see that these numbers need not be taken to support a VSL that is independent of probability.45 Suppose that people would be willing to pay $60 to reduce a risk of 1/100,000. From this it does not follow that people would be willing to pay $6 to eliminate a risk of 1/1 million, or $6000 to reduce a risk of /1000, or $60,000 to reduce a risk of 1/100. It is plausible to think that people’s WTP to reduce statistical risks is nonlinear.46 As the probability approaches 100%, people become willing to pay an amount for risk reduction that arises nonlinearly to 100% of their income; as the risk approaches 0%, WTP nonlinearly approaches nothing. For a risk of 1 in 1million, for example, many reasonable people would be willing to pay zero, treating that risk as inconsequential. 
Hence the claim that VSL is $6.1 million is merely a shorthand way of saying that people are willing to pay from $600 to $60 to eliminate risks of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000. Since this is the range for risks with which most agencies deal, the relevant data is highly informative. For current purposes, this point is the crucial one. 
My basic claim is that VSL will inevitably vary across both risks and persons. If people’s WTP is higher to avoid cancer risks than risks of unanticipated, sudden deaths, then the use of a VSL, drawn from studies of the latter risks, will ensure insufficient Differences], finding values as high as $15.1 million in the case of white males. In the context of arsenic regulation, the EPA also noted in its sensitivity analysis that the appropriate adjustment would increase the VSL from $6.1 million to $6.7 million. 66 Fed. Reg. at 7012. For recent evidence, suggesting that the current VSL is $4.7 for a full sample, $7 million for blue-collar males, and $8.5 for blue-collar females. See W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29 (2004). 45 See Richard Posner, forthcoming book. 46 See id. protection of the exposed population. If people in different occupations are paid different amounts to incur a risk, then use of an uniform VSL will not track actual behavior, which is what it is supposed to do.47 If wealthy people show a higher WTP than poor people, then a uniform WTP, based on a population-wide median, will ensure insufficient protection of wealthy people and excessive protection of poor people—in a way that might well prove harmful to both groups.48 
To test these issues in a highly preliminary way, I conducted a small contingent valuation study. Eighty-four University of Chicago law students were asked about their WTP to eliminate each of five risks of 1/100,000. The simplest of these risks involved dying from an automobile accident as a result of a defective brake. The four other risks might be expected to occasion greater concern; they involved deaths from lung cancer, AIDS, Alzheimer’s disease, and dying in an airplane crash as a result of a terrorist attack. The 1/100,000 risk of dying in an automobile accident produced a mean WTP of $156, whereas the four other accidents produced significantly higher amounts (ranging from $184 for the AIDS risk to $193 for Alzheimer’s disease). In addition, there was substantial heterogeneity across individuals. For each of the questions, about ten respondents were willing to pay nothing to eliminate the 1/100,000 risk, producing a VSL of 0. And for each of them, about fifteen people were willing to pay at least $500 to eliminate the 1/100,000 risk, producing a VSL of $50 million. Let us now turn to the possibility of substantial diversity across both risks and persons. 
I have emphasized that the data that underlies the $6.1 million figure comes from risks of accidents in the workplace—and that even if this data can be generalized, it would not justify a probability-independent VSL. But there is a point of greater practical importance. A 1/100,000 risk of dying in a workplace accident might well produce a different WTP from a 1/100,000 risk of dying of cancer from air pollution, which might in turn be different from a 1/100,000 risk of dying in an airplane as a result of a terrorist 47 W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 33, 39-41 (2004) 48 On the “might well,” see below. attack, and that number might in turn by different from a 1/100,000 risk of dying as a result of a defective snowmobile. The very theory that lies behind the government’s current use of VSL justifies a simple conclusion: VSL should be risk-specific; it should not be the same across statistically equivalent risks. The use of a single number almost certainly produces significant blunders. 
relevant differences. The American economy contains a wide range of occupations and industries, and a uniform VSL should not be expected to emerge from each of them. Indeed, a recent study finds significant differences across both occupations and industries,49 with blue collar workers showing a higher VSL than others.50 It is inevitable that a wide range of values would emerge from studies that looked separately at machine operators, executive positions, sales, dental technicians, equipment cleaners, security guards, and secretaries51—and undoubtedly diverse values could be found within each category. 
In addition, many risks controlled by the EPA are qualitatively different from the workplace risks that EPA has used to generate its VSL. Two differences are particularly important. First, the workplace studies do not involve cancer, and cancer risks are often involved in environmental decisions. There is considerable evidence that the risks associated with cancer produce a higher WTP than other kinds of risk.52 For example, Hammit and Liu find that in Taiwan, willingness to pay to eliminate a cancer risk is about one-third larger than WTP to avoid a risk of a similar, chronic degenerative disease.53 Some contingent valuation studies suggest that people are willing to pay twice as much to prevent a cancer death as an instantaneous death.54 People seem to have a special fear of cancer, and they seem to be willing to pay more to prevent a cancer death than a sudden unanticipated death, or a death from heart disease.55 The “cancer premium” might be 49 W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 39-41 (2004) 50 Id. 51 See id. at 33. Viscusi does not produce separate numbers for the different occupation groups, but his data clearly indicate that separate numbers would emerge. 52 See Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives, 99 Colum. L. Rev. 941, 962–74 (1999). 53 See Hammitt and Liu, supra note. 54 See Id. 55 See GEORGE TOLLEY ET AL., STATE OF THE ART HEALTH VALUES 339-40 (1993). produced by the “dread” nature of cancer; it seems well-established that dreaded risks produce special social concern, holding the statistical risk constant.56 
To be sure, existing evidence on this count is not unambiguous. One study of occupational exposures does not find a significantly higher VSL for cancer risks.57 But that study assumes that occupational cancers account for 10-20 percent of all cancer deaths—an amount that is almost certainly too high. If occupational exposures account for 5% of all cancers—a far more realistic number—then the VSL for cancer risks may be as high as $12 million, about double the amount that EPA now uses. The current findings conflict58; but in principle, the VSL figures should be risk-specific, and we know enough to suspect that cancer risks produce an unusually high VSL. 
The second difference between workplace risks and the risks that concern EPA is that the latter risks seem peculiarly involuntary and uncontrollable.59 Unlike the risks of workplace accidents, pollution risks are not assumed voluntarily in return for compensation.60 
A 
great deal of literature suggests that involuntary, dread, uncontrollable, and potentially catastrophic risks produce unusually high levels of public concern.61 If so, the numbers that derive from workplace accidents will substantially understate willingness to pay for regulatory benefits provided by the EPA and many other agencies as well.62 
The implications go well beyond the distinction between workplace accidents and environmental risks. For example, people appear to be willing to pay far more to produce safety in the air than to produce safety on the highways63; it follows that VSL should be higher for the Federal Aviation Administration than for the National Highway Traffic 56 See Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (2000). 57 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 22. In the same vein, see W. Magat et al., A Reference Lottery Metric for Valuing Health, 42 Management Science 1118 (1996) (finding no difference between valuations of cancer death and auto accident death). 58 Id. at 57. 59 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value of Nothing (2003). 60 Of course it is possible to question the idea that workplace risks are assumed voluntarily and in return for compensation. For example, many workers probably do not know the risks that they face. The distinction I am drawing here is one of kind rather than degree. See Cass R. Sunstein, Bad Deaths, 14 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 259 (1997). 61 See SLOVIC, The Perception of Risk, supra note. 62 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value of Nothing (2003). 63 See Carlsson et al., supra note. Safety Administration. Oddly, the former agency has an unusually low rather than an unusually high VSL.64 Some diseases would produce a higher VSL than others. A 1/100,000 risk of death from Alzheimer's disease, for example, would almost certainly produce a higher VSL than 1/100,000 risk of death from a heart attack; 1/50,000 risk of an AIDS death would not produce the same VSL as a 1/50,000 risk of death from a defective brake system on an automobile; most people would pay more to reduce a risk of dying from slow-acting strokes than from strokes that kill outright. There should be a distinctive population-wide median VSL for mortality risks of airplane accidents, of cancer from air pollution, of motor vehicle accidents, of defective toys, of cancer from water pollution. 
In fact studies have been done for seatbelt use, automobile safety, home fire detectors, and more, and they find a wide variety of numbers, with a VSL ranging from $770,000 (smoke detectors, based on data in the 1970s) to $9.9 million (fatality risks associated with safety belts and motorcycle helmets).65 And within each of these categories, further distinctions would undoubtedly emerge. All cancer fatalities are not the same; informed people would surely make distinctions between those that involve long periods of suffering and those that do not. If we are really interested in basing VSL on WTP, a uniform number, treating all statistically identical mortality risks as the same, is fatally obtuse. 
the context of arsenic regulation, the EPA was alert to some of them.66 Hence its own sensitivity analysis for arsenic suggested the need for an upward revision of 7%, because of the involuntariness and uncontrollability of the risk.67 With this revision, along with the revision for income growth, the value of a statistical life would rise from $6.1 million to $7.2 million.68 In fact there are reasons to suggest that this amount might be far too low. Dean Revesz suggests that “the value of avoiding a death from an involuntary, carcinogenic risk should be estimated as four times as large as the value of avoiding an 64 See Table I supra. 65 Viscusi and Aldy, at 25. 66 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 67 66 Fed. Reg. at 7014. 68 Id. instantaneous workplace fatality.”69 If we take this approach, the VSL, in the context of arsenic, jumps from $6.1 million to $24.3 million. I am not arguing that $24.3 million is the correct number; I am suggesting only that VSL is almost certainly risk-specific. 
about heightened public concern70 may not translate into higher WTP. Social scientists might be able to show that certain qualitative factors make people especially concerned about certain risks, but it is an independent question whether and how much WTP increase as a result. Fortunately, a number of studies of WTP contain at least suggestive answers to that question, demonstrating that VSL does vary significantly across areas.71 
Second, it is important not to think that there is a rigid dichotomy between the involuntary/uncontrollable and the voluntary/controllable.72 This is a continuum, without sharp divisions among various points, and hence it is a mistake to believe that risks can be neatly separated into the two categories. Are the risks from air pollution in Los Angeles involuntarily incurred? The answer might seem to be affirmative, but people have a choice whether or not to live in Los Angeles. Are the risks of airplane travel uncontrollable? Many people think so, but the decision to fly is itself under human control. Death from an asteroid seems to be a model case of involuntariness, at an opposite pole from hang-gliding. But why? In deciding whether a risk is faced involuntarily, or whether it is within personal control, the underlying issues seem to be whether those exposed to the risk are exposed knowingly and whether it is costly or otherwise difficult for people to avoid the risk.73 When risks are approached in these terms, it is clear that some risks are worse than others, even if the probability of harm is identical. This point is enough to suggest that VSL cannot be uniform across risks. 
Third, it is possible that extreme aversion to certain risks reflects a form of bounded rationality74—and hence it is possible to doubt whether that extreme aversion should be allowed to play a role in regulatory policy. Suppose, for example, that people really are willing to pay twice as much to avoid a cancer risk as to avoid a sudden, 69 See Revesz, supra note 7, at 982. 70 See Slovic, supra note. 71 See Hammitt and Liu, supra note, and the meta-analysis in Viscusi and Aldy, supra note. 72 See Cass R. Sunstein, Bad Deaths, 14 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 259 (1997). 73 See id. 74 See Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, supra note. (e) Very low probabilities and catastrophic risks. Suppose that everyone in the United States faces an annual death risk of 1/10,000,000—and that the risk, if it comes to fruition, will kill every person in the country. The expected number of annual deaths is 26, which would produce expected annual costs in excess of $158 million, assuming a VSL of $6.1 million. But if we attempt to elicit each individual’s WTP to avoid a risk of 1/10,000,000, we might well produce a number very close to zero—yielding both 26 expected annual fatalities and expected annual costs very close to zero. This seems to be an anomaly; is it really sensible to conclude that the prevention of 26 deaths is worth nothing? A fully ex ante perspective, based on people’s WTP to avoid very low probability risks, suggests an affirmative answer. But assigning a value near zero, for the prevention of dozens of deaths, seems quite implausible. In cases of this kind, we seem to find a serious problem with the ex ante perspective on VSL. 
This conclusion understates the problem. In the case at hand, the risk is potentially catastrophic; if the 1/10,000,000 chance comes through, every American will be dead. Even if people show a WTP near zero to avoid a risk of that size, it does not seem right to think that the nation should spend almost nothing to prevent it.128 The point has a general bearing on precautions against low probability risks of catastrophe: Some degree of prevention is justified even if WTP numbers do not justify them. Part of the problem with those numbers is that if individual behavior is consulted, it will not reflect a “catastrophe premium” or “extermination premium” that would almost certainly emerge if it were possible to test for it. But part of the problem may be that WTP is not an adequate measure of social responses to catastrophes, perhaps because people are not familiar with making choices about risks of that sort. 
I believe that this is a sound objection to the use of a (low or near-zero) VSL in the context of catastrophic risks, even if the WTP numbers justify that VSL. But this is an extremely limited objection; it does not apply to the overwhelming number of cases in which VSL is used. 
(f) Third party effects. A final objection would point to effects on third parties. If outsiders would be adversely affected, and if their welfare is not being considered, then the WTP calculus is seriously incomplete. This point creates a general and badly 128 See Richard Posner, supra note. neglected problem for WTP as it is currently used: Agencies consider people’s WTP to eliminate statistical risks, without taking account of the fact that others—especially family members and close friends—would also be willing to pay something to eliminate those risks. John might be willing to pay $25 to eliminate his own risk of 1/100,000, but his wife Jane might be willing to pay $25 to eliminate John’s risk too; if we add the WTP, on John’s behalf, of John’s friends and relatives, the total WTP might soon exceed $100. This point is a real problem for existing uses of WTP. 
But we are stipulating that there are no third party effects here. The argument for using WTP, on the stated assumptions, is that government should not force people to buy goods that are not worthwhile for them. At least at first glance, this argument seems sound with respect to statistical risks of the kind on which I am focusing here.129 B. WTP and Easy Cases: Demographic Differences, International Differences eliminate a statistical risk of 1/100,000, but that wealthy people are willing to pay $60. It would follow that the VSL would be lower for poor people than for wealthy people—and that a regulatory policy that focuses on WTP would provide a higher VSL for wealthy people ($6 million) than for poor people ($2 million). Is this unjust or unfair to poor people? On the current assumptions, it is not. Government should not force poor people to buy more than their WTP to eliminate statistical risks; forced exchanges of this kind do poor people no good and some harm. It is tempting to justify a uniform VSL, one that does not distinguish between rich and poor, on the ground that it embodies a form of risk equity, treating every person as no more and no less than one130 and redistributing resources in the direction of poor people. But this is an error. A uniform WTP, taken (let us suppose) from a population-wide median, does not produce redistribution toward the poor, any more than any other kind of forced exchange. Government does not require people to buy Volvos, even though Volvos would reduce statistical risks. If government 129 Note that the argument would not apply to risks faced by nonhuman animals; in that event, people’s WTP could not tell the whole story. 130 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value of Nothing (2003). required everyone to buy Volvos, it would not be producing desirable redistribution.131 A uniform VSL has some of the same characteristics as a policy that requires people to buy Volvos. 
risk regulation. I have suggested that people in poor nations show a lower VSL than people in wealthy nations.132 Building on evidence of this kind, some assessments of the effects of global warming find far higher monetized costs from deaths of people in rich countries than from deaths of people in poor countries.133 In its Second Report in 1995, the International Panel on Climate Change calculated that a life in an industrialized country was worth $1.5 million, while a life in a developing country was worth only $150,000.134 These assessments have been highly controversial; John Broome, for example, notes that under this approach, an American life is worth 10 or 20 Indian lives, a judgment that he deems “absurd.”135 Hence some analysts, including the International Panel, have opted for a world-wide VSL of $1 million, a choice that seems quite arbitrary and potentially harmful to people in rich nations and poor ones alike. The problem raises important dilemmas. 
a. Abstract values? How should global institutions assess the monetary value of human lives? What are the monetized costs of (say) 10,000 worldwide deaths from global warming, deaths that include (say) 8000 people from poor countries and 2000 from 131 Of course it is sometimes desirable for government to create “safety floors,” for automobiles and other consumer goods, in part as a response to an absence of adequate information in the market. But such floors should not be seen as a redistributive tool, simply because they are not likely to produce good redistribution. See Susan Rose-Ackerman, Progressive Law and Economics, 97 Yale LJ 1083 (1989). 132 See note supra. 133 See http://www.ipcc.ch/pub/reports.htm 134 See id. 135 See John Broome, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Population, 29 J Legal Stud 953, 957 (2000), noting that that this conclusion is a product of what Broome rejects, “a money-metric utility function to represent a person’s preferences. “ Id. (In the easy cases, I suggest that a money-metric utility function is not absurd, and it is not quite that in the hard cases either; see below.) See also the discussion of the International Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2001, available at http://www.grida.no/climate/ipcc_tar/wg3/302.htm: “The VSL is generally lower in poor countries than in rich countries, but it is considered unacceptable by many analysts to impose different values for a policy that has to be international in scope and decided by the international community. In these circumstances, analysts use average VSL and apply it to all countries. Of course, such a value is not what individuals would pay for the reduction in risk, but it is an ‘equity adjusted’ value, in which greater weight is given to the WTP of lower income groups. On the basis of EU and US VSLs and a weighting system that has some broad appeal in terms of government policies towards income distribution, Eyre et al. (1998) estimate the average world VSL at around 1 million Euros (approximately US$1 million at 1999 exchange rates).” wealthy ones? The discussion thus far suggests that there is no sensible abstract answer to these questions; we have to know what, in particular, the answer is for. If a general question is asked, outside of any particular context, about the monetary value of a stated number of deaths in 2020, it is best unanswered (except perhaps with laughter). The appropriate assessments of VSL, and variations across countries, depends on their intended use. If disparate numbers are meant to identify the actual monetary values of human lives, and to suggest that people in Canada are “worth” much more than people in Argentina or that poor people are “worth” less than rich ones, they are ludicrous as well as offensive. 
We can go further. If the disparate numbers are meant to suggest the appropriate amount that donor institutions should spend to reduce mortality risks, they make little sense. The fact that a poor person in a poor nation would be willing to pay $1 to eliminate a risk of 1/10,000, whereas a wealthy person in a wealthy nation would be willing to pay $100, cannot plausibly be used to defend the view that an international agency should devote its resources to the latter rather than the former. To see the point, suppose that you are asked to choose between two programs: (A) Program A would eliminate (at a stated cost to you of $500) a 1/10,000 risk faced by fifty poor people in Costa Rica, each willing to pay $2 to eliminate that risk. (B) Program B would eliminate (also at a stated cost of $500) a 1/10,000 risk faced by fifty wealthy people in Berlin, each willing to pay $350 to eliminate that same risk. 
In principle, there is no reason to think that you should prefer to save the Berliners, even those their VSL is far higher. In fact Program A has much higher priority, because it would help people who are facing extreme deprivation. What is true at the individual level is true across nations as well. 
(b) VSL in poor countries. But imagine that the government in a poor nation is deciding on appropriate policy to reduce workplace risks. At least under the assumptions I have given thus far, such a government would do well to begin by using the admittedly low WTP of its own citizens. If citizens in that nation show a WTP of $2 to eliminate risks of 1/10,000, then their government does them no favors by requiring them to pay $50 or $10. This is the sense in which VSL properly varies across nations, and in which citizens of poor nations have a lower VSL than citizens of wealthy ones. The point has strong implications for international labor standards. It is tempting to suggest that workers in poor countries, for example China and India, should receive the same protection as those in the United States; why should a worker in Beijing be subject to significantly higher death risks than a worker in Los Angeles? 
As a matter of basic principle, there is no good answer to this question. But as a matter of regulatory policy, the answer is straightforward. So long as the distribution of global income has the form that it does, a system that gives Chinese workers the same protection as American workers is not in the interest of Chinese workers—assuming, as we are, that the cost of that protection is borne by workers themselves. Requiring Chinese workers to have the same protection as Americans amounts to a forced exchange on terms that Chinese workers reject. The idea that workers in poor nations should have the “same” protection as workers in wealthy nations is an error, rooted in a moral heuristic involving the equal worth of all human lives—a heuristic that sometimes works well but that also misfires.136 
Note, once again, that the argument for using WTP does not imply satisfaction with the existing distribution of wealth. We might believe that the existing distribution is unjust and that it should be dramatically changed. The problem with forced exchanges is that they do nothing to alter existing distributions. In fact they make poor people worse off, requiring them to use their limited resources for something that they do not want to buy. 
There is an obvious artificiality in the assumptions thus far. Most important, people do not always bear the full social costs of the regulatory benefits they receive. Sometimes they pay only a fraction of those costs—or possibly even nothing at all. When this is so, the normative analysis is much more complicated. In the context of air pollution regulation, for example, there is a complex set of distributional effects, and on balance, poor people, and members of minority communities, appear to be net gainers.137 136 On moral heuristics in general, see Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics, Minn L Rev (forthcoming 2004). 137 See Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air Act Regulation, 24 Regulation 34 (2001). An efficiency analysis, based on WTP, might not produce an adequate account of the welfare effects of air pollution regulation. And even if it does, an account of welfare effects might not end the normative question, because the distributional gains are important to consider.138 The difficulty is that a high VSL, one that exceeds what WTP studies show for poor people, might produce outcomes that are in the best interest of poor people, in the sense that the result is a welfare improvement for them.139 Note that these points do not bear directly on the question whether VSL should vary across risks. But they do bear on the issue of varying VSL across persons, and in particular across differences that result from disparities in income and wealth. 
Suppose, for example, that beneficiaries of a proposed drinking water regulation are willing to pay only $80 to eliminate a risk of 1/80,000 in drinking water; that the perperson cost of eliminating a 1/50,000 risk is $100; but that for every dollar of that cost, the beneficiaries pay only 80 cents. The remaining 20 cents might be paid by water companies themselves, in the form of reduced profits, or by employees of the water companies, in the form of reduced wages and fewer jobs. In this example, the costs of the regulation exceed the benefits; it is inefficient. But by hypothesis, the regulation makes its beneficiaries of the regulation better off. If the WTP criterion is used, the fact that the monetized costs exceed the monetized benefits is decisive. But as a normative matter, the analysis here is far harder than in the easy cases. On what assumption should the WTP numbers be decisive? 
The assumption must be that economic efficiency is the goal of government, at least in the context of regulation—that in order to know what to do, we should aggregate the benefits and costs of regulation, and act if and only if the benefits exceed the costs. When using the WTP numbers, government is acting as a maximization machine, 138 The Office of Management and Budget has expressly recognized this point in its most recent guidelines governing regulatory impact analysis. See 2003 Report to Congress at 131: “Those who bear the costs of a regulation and those who enjoy its benefits often are not the same people. . . . Your regulatory impact analysis should provide a separate description of distributional effects (i.e., how both benefits and costs are distributed among sub-populations of particular concern) so that decision makers can properly consider them along with the effects on economic efficiency.” 139 For relevant discussion, see Christine Jolls, Accommodation Mandates, 53 Stan. L. Rev. 223 (2000). Jolls argues that accommodation mandates might produce desired redistributive gains whether or not they are efficient, and she supplies a detailed analysis of when those gains are most likely to occur. At present, there is no parallel discussion for regulation of the sort I am discussing here. My suggestion is that under imaginable assumptions, some such regulation will be defensible on distributive grounds. aggregating all benefits and costs as measured by the WTP criterion. But this is a highly contestable understanding of what government should be doing. In fact it represents a shift from the relatively uncontroversial Pareto criterion, exemplified above, to a version of the far more controversial Kaldor-Hicks criterion,140 which assesses policy by asking this question: Are the gainers winning more than the losers are losing? The Kaldor-Hicks criterion is sometimes described as potential Pareto superiority,141 because it asks whether in principle, the winners could compensate the losers, and a surplus could be left over. The difficulty of course is that Pareto superiority is merely potential. Some people really are losing and others are gaining. 
In the harder cases, the gainers are gaining less (in monetary terms) than the losers are losing—and hence the regulation is said to be unjustified. Under the assumptions I have given, the regulation is indeed inefficient: Its social cost is higher than its social benefit. But is the regulation undesirable? This is not at all clear. The first problem is that WTP is measuring gains and loses in monetary terms, rather than in welfare terms.142 It is possible that those who gain, in the harder cases, gain more welfare than the losers lose; WTP is not dispositive on that question. The second problem is distributional. Suppose that in terms of overall welfare, the regulation is not desirable; it makes aggregate welfare lower rather than higher. But suppose too that those who benefit are more advantaged than those who lose. If, for example, those who are willing to pay $80 are disproportionately poor, and those who pay the remainder are disproportionately wealthy, the regulation might be plausibly justified despite the welfare loss. 
It is natural to respond here that if redistribution is what is sought, then it should be produced not through regulation but through the tax system, which is a more efficient way of transferring resources to those who need help.143 I agree. But suppose that 140 It is only a version of that criterion, because it is measuring welfare in monetary equivalents. A direct assessment of welfare, if it were possible, might show that the regulation in question is justified on KaldorHicks grounds. 141 See, e.g., Richard Posner. Economic Analysis of Law 14 (4th ed. 1992) (“The Kaldor-Hicks concept is also and suggestively called potential Pareto superiority: The winners could compensate the losers, whether or not they actually do.”). 142 On the direct measurement of welfare, see Daniel Kahneman, forthcoming. 143 See, e.g., Louis Kaplow & Steven Shavell, Why the Legal System is Less Efficient Than the Income Tax in Redistributing Income, 23 J. Legal Stud. 667, 667 (1994) (“[R]edistribution through legal rules offers no advantage over redistribution through the income tax and typically is less efficient.”); Steven Shavell, A Note on Efficiency vs. Distributional Equity in Legal Rulemaking, 71 Am. Econ. Rev. (Papers & Proc.) 414, 414 (1981) (describing how income tax can compensate for inefficient liability rules and redistribution is not going to happen through the tax system. If so, then the regulation in the harder cases cannot be ruled off-limits despite its inefficiency. 
Return finally to the use of VSL in poor nations in the regulatory context that is my principal focus here. Suppose that in such nations, VSL turns out to be $100,000. If relevant governments use a VSL of $6 million, on the theory that their citizens should not be valued less than those of wealthy nations, social harm will almost inevitably result. In the easy cases, the forced exchanges will be ludicrously harmful to the people they are supposed to help. In the hard cases, where the beneficiaries pay only a fraction of the cost, such a nation will be spending far too much of its money on risk reduction (or more precisely, on reducing the risks that happen to get onto the regulatory agenda). The inefficiency of an extremely high VSL will be felt acutely and in many forms, including decreased employment. But if the costs of risk reduction will be paid by third parties— for example, wealthy nations—then the people in that poor country will be helped even if risk reduction is based on an excessive VSL. 
Of course they would almost certainly be helped more if they were given cash (supposing that it would not be squandered) rather than in-kind benefits. But if cash redistribution is not possible, regulatory benefits, provided for free or for a fraction of their cost, remain a blessing. If, for example, a global institution uses a world-wide VSL of $1 million, and if that amount exceeds the domestic VSL of people in poor nations, it is possible that poor people will gain a greater deal if the resources for risk-reduction are provided by wealthy nations. In the harder cases, the simple point is that many of the intended beneficiaries of regulation are in fact net gainers. 
Is there a reason to treat the harder cases as identical to the easy ones? Is this absurd144? Agencies do not distinguish between them, although recent guidelines, calling redistribute income); David A. Weisbach, Should Legal Rules Be Used to Redistribute Income?, 70 U. Chi. L. Rev. 439, 439–40 (2003) (“[T]he tax system is a better tool for redistribution of income than legal rules.”). 144 See Broome, supra note, at 121. Broome urges that “there are separate reasons why preferences are an unsatisfactory basis for valuing lives,” including the fact that “in contexts involving risks, people’s preferences are generally muddled and incoherent” rather than rational. Id. at 122. If preferences are in fact muddled and incoherent, current practice is of course on thin ground. agencies to attend to distributional issues, might eventually encourage them to do so.145 A possible reason for treating the harder cases as the easy ones is optimistic: Perhaps everything will balance out in the end. Perhaps no group will be systematically helped or hurt, and the tax system will be used to produce appropriate redistribution. In the realworld domestic cases, we might also think that a direct inquiry into welfare, bypassing WTP, would be extremely difficult or perhaps even impossible to operationalize. If distributional considerations are deemed relevant, interest-group warfare might be the consequence, rather than distribution to those who particularly need and deserve help.146 More modestly, we might conclude that agencies should generally pursue efficiency, using VSL as the foundation for decisions, but should allow distributional findings to cut the other way in cases in which there is compelling reason to allow them to do so. In fact this approach is a plausible way of reading OMB’s current guidelines on regulatory impact analysis.147 
Let us return in this light to VSL. In the easy cases, the resulting redistribution is almost certainly perverse, because forced exchanges, under the stated assumptions, are highly likely to harm the people who are being coerced. But in the harder cases, it cannot be said that the beneficiaries of regulation will be harmed if government uses a number that exceeds their actual VSL. Everything depends on the distributional effects of the regulation. If the beneficiaries are well-off, a high VSL might produce perverse redistribution if those who lose are toward the bottom of the economic ladder. We could imagine this result, for example, with a pollution program that protects those who visit expensive recreational areas. If the beneficiaries are poor, and if the costs are born by the wealthy or more generally, a high VSL might be in the interest of those who need help. Air pollution programs, providing special protection for those in cities, appear to be an example.148 We can therefore reject the confident view of economically inclined analysts who believe that accurate VSLs, based on actual WTP (and hence individuated), should always be the basis of regulatory policy. But we can also reject the confident view of 145 See note supra. 146 See Viscusi, supra note. 147 See note supra. 148 See Kahn, supra note. skeptics who believe that a uniform WTP, refusing to make distinctions among persons, is best on distributive grounds. 
What are the implications for individuation of VSL? It remains true that according to the theory that underlies agency valuations, a higher degree of individuation would be desirable. It also remains true that with respect to risks, individuation is appropriate insofar as valuations differ depending on the nature of the risk at stake. The principal qualification is that a uniform VSL, one that gives disadvantaged people regulatory protection in excess of their WTP, might turn out to have fortunate distributional consequences in the harder cases. We should be careful about this point. It will not always hold, and if the goal is to provide more assistance to those in need, a uniform VSL is hardly the best way to achieve that goal. Consider the case of poor nations: a worldwide VSL, adopted by each nation, of $6.1 million would almost certainly be harmful, simply because the resulting levels of regulation would have such adverse effects on wages and employment levels. (In these circumstances it is unsurprising that workers in wealthy nations, not in poor ones, often clamor the loudest for greater protection of workers in poor nations; workers in wealthier nations would be the principal beneficiaries of such regulation, which would protect them against competition from those in poorer nations.) My only point is that in some cases, individuation across persons will produce worse outcomes on distributional grounds and possibly on grounds of welfare as well. 
How, then, should global institutions, like the International Panel on Climate Change, assess the monetary costs of risks faced by people all over the world? As I have suggested, the answer turns on the purpose of the assessment—on what issue the answer is supposed to be addressing. There is no good acontextual way of deciding on the aggregate costs of global climate change by 2050; actually that is a ludicrous question, because it does not (as stated) have any point. A far more sensible question is whether it would make sense for any particular nation to accept a particular way of responding to the problem, such as the Kyoto Protocol.149 At the national level, an assessment of the 149 See William Nordhaus and Joseph Boyer, Warming the World: Economic Models of Global Warming 168 (2000): “Finally, the Kyoto Protocol has significant distributional consequences. . . . The lion’s share of the costs are borne by the United States. Indeed, the United States is a net loser while the rest of the world on balance benefits from the Kyoto Protocol.” costs and benefits of the Kyoto Protocol is not much different from an assessment of the costs and benefits of any other regulation. If the risk of death, as a result of climate change, is in the neighborhood of 1 in 100,000, then the ordinary framework applies, with appropriate individuation across both risks and persons.150 For wealthy nations, the argument for signing the Kyoto Protocol is strengthened by the fact that the harms of global warming will be felt disproportionately in poor nations,151 and also by the fact that wealthy nations have done by far the most to produce the situation that makes global warming a serious problem. An analysis of these questions would make it necessary to go far beyond the present topic. My goal here has been to suggest that within nations, diverse VSL are perfectly sensible, and that answers to questions about valuation must be closely attuned to the purposes for which those questions are being asked. 
The theory that animates current valuations of mortality risks argues in favor of far more individuation. A uniform VSL cannot possibly cut across all risks and all individuals. Does the risk involve cancer? What kind of cancer? Does it involve air pollution or driving on the highways? It is obtuse to adopt an approach that values all statistically equivalent mortality risks in the same way. In addition, individuals display a great deal of heterogeneity in their VSL—not simply because of different tastes and values, but also because of different levels of income and wealth. Willingness to pay depends on ability to pay. Nothing I have said here is meant to suggest approval of existing distributions of resources. Of course poor people are not “worth less” than wealthy ones, and it is often appropriate for government to provide resources directly to poor people or instead to subsidize the provision of regulatory benefits. But forced exchanges are not a good way to assist poor people, and a uniform VSL is often a perverse response to inequality. In theory, risk reduction policies should be more fully individuated, giving each person regulatory protection that corresponds to his WTP for the particular risk in question. 150 See generally id. 151 See id. 
Of course this is not practicable. Government lacks the necessary information about individual risk preferences; categorical judgments are inevitable. In any case many of the benefits provided by regulation are collective in character. Regulators cannot feasibly provide protection to one person without simultaneously providing protection to many. But it is nonetheless important to see what the current theory counsels in principle, and to understand that the limitations are practical ones, some of which might be overcome as knowledge progresses. And even with the practical limitations, a uniform VSL is increasingly difficult to justify. 
We know enough to know that some risks produce a higher VSL than others—a judgment that would produce significantly different analyses in many cases, above all by producing a higher VSL for cancer risks. A program that protects old people will produce a lower VSL than one that protects younger people, and there is no ethical objection to variations on the basis of age.152 And if a program affects mostly wealthy people, a VSL based on the population-wide median will be too low. It would follow that the Federal Aviation Administration should have a relatively high VSL, because people who fly are wealthier than the population median—and when the EPA is engaging in cost-benefit analysis for programs protecting poor people from risks associated with hazardous waste sites, it should have a relatively low VSL. 
The principal qualification here is that when the beneficiaries of regulation do not pay all of its cost, a high VSL may actually be in their interests. The easy cases, in which the beneficiaries are forced to pay for regulatory benefits, are not the same as those in which they pay only a fraction of the cost. Nonetheless, current practice treats them as identical, perhaps because of the great difficulty in untangling the incidence of regulatory benefits and costs. My goal has not been to resolve that difficulty, but to suggest that the theory behind current practice justifies far more individuation of VSL than regulators currently provide. However we deal with distributional problems and the hardest cases, the use of a uniform VSL is unacceptably obtuse. 152 See Aldy and Viscusi, supra; Sunstein, supra. I am putting to one side the difficult questions raised by the need to produce a VSL for children. Readers with comments should address them to: 
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law (March 1998) Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998) Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics (May 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of Government? (September 1998) Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” (January 1999) Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999) 2000) 2000) 2000, revised May 2002) 
Position (August 2000) 
Internet (November 2000) 
System (November 2000) 
Relations: A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 2000) 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
Economic Approach (December 2000) (January 2001) 
Finance (February 2001) (March 2001) 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Age (April 2001) the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades: Success or Failure (March 2002) Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy: The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The Antitrust Bulletin) David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture February 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002; revised March 2003) Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as Insurer? (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis (November 2002) 
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage (September 2003) Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September 2003) Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003) Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure Time (October 2003) Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003) Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003) David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) Cass R. Sunstein, Fear and Liberty (January 2004) Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives (February 2004) 
