Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Recommended Citation 
  
Debiasing through Law  Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein  
T H E   L A W   S C H O O L   T H E   U N I V E R S I T Y   O F   C H I C A G O   
September 2004, revised March 2005  
This paper can be downloaded without charge at:  The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html  and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection:  
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=590929  
Debiasing Through Law 
Human beings are often boundedly rational. In the face of bounded rationality, the legal system might attempt either to “debias law,” by insulating legal outcomes from the effects of boundedly rational behavior, or instead to “debias through law,” by steering legal actors in more rational directions. Legal analysts have focused most heavily on insulating outcomes from the effects of bounded rationality. In fact, however, a large number of actual and imaginable legal strategies are efforts to engage in debiasing through law – to help people reduce or even eliminate boundedly rational behavior. In important contexts, these efforts promise to avoid the costs and inefficiencies associated with regulatory approaches that take bounded rationality as a given and respond by attempting to insulate outcomes from its effects. This paper offers both a general description of debiasing through law and an account of how such debiasing does or could work to address central legal questions across a range of areas, from consumer safety law to corporate law to property law. Discussion is also devoted to the risk of government manipulation that is sometimes created when debiasing through law is employed.. * Professor of Law, Harvard Law School. ** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago. For helpful comments, we are very grateful to Bruce Ackerman, Ian Ayres, Lucian Bebchuk, Cary Coglianese, Richard Craswell, Barbara Fried, Bert Huang, Louis Kaplow, Jerry Mashaw, Paul Oyer, Eric Posner, Jeffrey Rachlinski, Roberta Romano, Frederick Schauer, Reva Siegel, Peter Siegelman, Matthew Stephenson, Adrian Vermeule, and participants in workshops at Boston University Law School, Columbia Law School, Fordham Law School, Harvard Law School, the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, Stanford Law School, and Yale Law School. For outstanding research assistance, we thank Michael Fertik, Audrey Lee, Pat Robertson, and Daniel Schwarcz. 
Introduction 
A growing body of legal analysis focuses on how human behavior deviates systematically from what would be predicted by the traditional economic assumption of unbounded rationality.1 To the extent that legal rules are designed on the basis of their anticipated effects on behavior, bounded rationality is obviously relevant to the formulation of legal policy. But an important and little addressed question is precisely how it is relevant to the formulation of legal policy. The most obvious possibility is that, given a demonstration of the existence and importance of a particular aspect of bounded rationality, the law should be structured to presume the existence of that particular shortcoming in human behavior. 
Most existing work in behavioral law and economics is of this character. Consider, for instance, the large literature examining the belief by boundedly rational consumers that potentially risky products are substantially safer than they in fact are. In the presence of such beliefs, the law might – and to some degree does – respond by adopting heightened standards of manufacturer liability for consumer products (e.g., Hanson and Kysar 1999a:1511-12). Or consider the argument that “Monday morning quarterbacking” by judges or juries adversely affects judgments reached by these decision makers on matters of corporate law, so that corporations are held liable for bad events even if preventing those events would have been extremely difficult (Rachlinski 1998:620-21). If so, then the law could respond, as indeed it has with the “business judgment rule,” by largely vitiating the liability of corporate law actors, who would otherwise be vulnerable to such second-guessing on the part of adjudicators. More generally, rules and institutions might be, and frequently are, designed so that legal outcomes do not fall prey to problems of bounded rationality. 
Boundedly rational behavior thus might be taken to justify a strategy of insulation, attempting to protect legal outcomes from falling victim to bounded rationality. To date, most treatments of bounded rationality in law have been of this character. Strategies for insulation can be characterized as a method for “debiasing law.” 1 See, for example, Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998), Korobkin and Ulen (2000), Parisi and Smith (2004), Sunstein (2000), and law review symposia in Northwestern University Law Review (2003) and Vanderbilt Law Review (1998). 
A quite different possibility – one that has received much less attention in law and elsewhere – is that legal policy may respond best to problems of bounded rationality not by insulating legal outcomes from its effects, but instead by operating directly on the boundedly rational behavior and attempting to help people either to reduce or to eliminate it. We describe legal policy in this category as “debiasing through law.” Debiasing through law will often be a less intrusive, more direct, and more democratic response to the problem of bounded rationality. 
In fact there exists a substantial, empirically-oriented social science literature on prospects for debiasing of individuals after a demonstration of a given form of bounded rationality.2 But empirical findings on these forms of debiasing have made only limited appearances in the legal literature,3 and equally important, social scientists interested in such forms of debiasing have generally not investigated the possibility of achieving them through law. In many important settings, empirical evidence suggests the substantial potential of these sorts of debiasing strategies, and from a legal policy perspective it is obviously important to ask about the role that law can play in facilitating such debiasing. That is our major focus in this paper. 
When debiasing through law has been discussed in the legal literature, the treatment has focused on existing or proposed steps taken in procedural rules governing adjudication by judges or juries. A well-known example stems from the work by Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff and Colin Camerer (1995) on the tendency of litigants to evaluate likely outcomes, as well as questions of fairness, in ways that systematically serve their own interests. Thus, for instance, these authors find that individuals assigned to the role of the plaintiff and presented with exactly the same information as is presented to individuals assigned to the role of the defendant offer far higher estimates of the likelihood of a plaintiff victory in a lawsuit. Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff (1997) find, however, that in an experimental setting, this self-serving bias may be eradicated by requiring litigants to consider the weaknesses in their case or reasons that the judge 2 Leading examples include Fischhoff (1982), Sanna, Schwarz and Stocker (2002), and Weinstein and Klein (2002). Many other illustrations appear in the body of the paper. 3 As noted in the text just below, where debiasing of boundedly rational actors has been examined in the legal literature, the focus has been on achieving debiasing through procedural rules governing adjudication by judges or juries. We discuss several examples below. might rule against them. In these circumstances, individuals in the plaintiff’s and defendant’s roles have similar views on likely trial outcomes and fair settlements.4 The present paper, by contrast, gives primary emphasis to a different and broader form of debiasing through law – a category we call “debiasing through substantive law.” 
The central idea of debiasing through substantive law is that in some cases it may be desirable to structure the substance of law – not merely the procedures by which the law is applied in an adjudicative setting – with an eye toward debiasing those who suffer from bounded rationality. Through a series of examples from areas of law outside of adjudicative procedure, we hope to show that the prospect of reducing bounded rationality through substantive law holds previously unrecognized promise for both understanding and improving the legal system. 
Section 1 below begins by offering a general description of debiasing through law. Our analysis emphasizes the basic distinction between debiasing of boundedly rational actors and the provision of incentives – another important instrument for affecting actors’ behavior. 
Section 2 focuses on debiasing through substantive law. It illustrates the general scope and power of this form of debiasing by describing the role it does or could play in addressing important questions across a range of legal domains, from consumer safety law to corporate law to property law. Our analysis of debiasing through substantive law contrasts with the almost reflexive focus in the existing legal literature in these domains on “debiasing law” solutions to problems of bounded rationality. 
Section 3 explores some of the normative questions raised by debiasing through law (whether achieved through procedural rules or through substantive law). Compared to the usual approach of “debiasing law,” an important advantage of strategies for debiasing through law is that they aim to correct errors while still preserving some opportunity to make choices. Under Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff’s approach of debiasing through procedural rules in response to litigants’ self-serving bias, for instance, no decision making power or information is removed from litigants’ hands; by contrast, a “debiasing law” approach to litigants’ self-serving bias suggests keeping information out of their hands entirely (Issacharoff and 4 It is possible that “real” self-serving bias – outside of the lab – is more resilient (Farnsworth 2003:582-85). Loewenstein 1995). An important corollary of this attribute of debiasing through law is that, unlike “debiasing law” strategies, the approach of debiasing through law will frequently make it possible for government to improve outcomes for individuals who exhibit bounded rationality while leaving unrestricted the choices of those who would not otherwise err. An emerging theme in the legal literature on bounded rationality is that it is preferable, when possible, to avoid imposing significant costs on those who do not exhibit boundedly rational behavior (Camerer, Issacharoff, Loewenstein, O’Donoghue and Rabin 2003:1212; Mitchell 2002:132); below we describe specific strategies for debiasing through law that achieve this goal. In this sense, debiasing through law provides real advantages over “debiasing law” strategies. 
Still, at bottom, debiasing through law in either of its two varieties (substantive or procedural) involves the government in a self-conscious process of changing the behavior of at least some people by altering their perceptions of the reality around them. In some respects such government action is entirely routine, as government frequently and uncontroversially regulates in response to individuals’ misinformation; many strategies for debiasing through law are of just this character. But in some contexts debiasing through law could come to resemble a system of government propaganda in violation of widely-shared normative commitments; as our examples below will illustrate, however, many actual and conceivable forms of debiasing through law do not have this problem. 
A General Description of Debiasing Through Law 
If debiasing through law is a response to bounded rationality, then an obvious first step is to understand the basic idea of bounded rationality. As is now well known in the legal literature and beyond, researchers in psychology and behavioral economics have uncovered a wide range of departures from unboundedly rational behavior. These departures take one of two general forms. First, individuals may exhibit “judgment errors.” Second, human behavior may deviate from the precepts of expected utility theory. We briefly describe these two basic categories. 
Judgment errors stem from “heuristics” and “biases” that often shape human decision making. Begin with a familiar example of a heuristic. Asked how many words in a 2,000-word section of a novel end in “ing,” people give much larger estimates than those asked how many words have “n” as the second-to-last letter in the same material, notwithstanding the obvious fact that more words must satisfy the latter criterion than the former (Tversky and Kahneman 1983:295). According to the “availability heuristic” at work in cases of this sort, the probability of an event is estimated after an assessment of how easily examples of the event can be called to mind. The availability heuristic often produces sensible judgments and behavior for people who lack detailed statistical information, but it can lead to significant and severe errors. The prospect of errors in some cases does not suggest that the behavior in question is “irrational” in the sense of being arbitrary or lacking plausible justification. The point instead is that the behavior, even if sensible in many cases, leads to systematic error in some of them. Bounded rationality is hardly the same as “irrationality.”5 
The use of heuristics has also been shown to lead people to misestimate probabilities by committing the “conjunction fallacy” (concluding that characteristics X and Y are more likely to be present than characteristic X alone) – errors produced by the so-called representativeness heuristic. For instance, after reading a paragraph about a thirty-one year old woman, Linda, who was concerned with issues of social justice and discrimination in college, most people erroneously tend to say that Linda is more likely to be “a bank teller and active in the feminist movement” than to be “a bank teller” (Tversky and Kahneman 1982:92-94). Heuristics, then, are not themselves biases, but they can produce biases. Thus “availability bias” might be said to arise when the availability heuristic leads people to make predictable errors in assessing probabilities. 
A related set of findings by psychologists and behavioral economists emphasizes not mental short-cuts, but more direct biases that lead to inaccurate judgments. An example is hindsight bias, in which decision makers attach excessively high probabilities to events that ended up occurring; we referred to this bias above in discussing corporate law’s business judgment rule. We also referred above to self-serving bias – in which individuals interpret information in directions that serve their own 5 For further discussion, see Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998:1594). interests – in illustrating prospects for successful debiasing through procedural rules. 
Another bias that has received significant attention in the legal literature – and that we suggest in section 2 creates important opportunities for debiasing through substantive law – is optimism bias. Optimism bias refers to the tendency of people to believe that their own probability of facing a bad outcome is lower than it actually is. People typically think that their chances of having an auto accident, contracting a particular disease, or getting fired from a job are significantly lower than the average person’s chances of suffering these misfortunes – although of course this cannot be true for everyone. Estimates offered by individuals for their own probabilities range from twenty to eighty percent below the average person’s probability.6 
While this “above average” effect is well established, it does not by itself establish that people optimistically underestimate their statistical risk (Viscusi 2002:162-66). People could believe, for example, that they are less likely than most people to contract cancer, while also having an accurate sense of the probability that they will contract cancer. But substantial evidence suggests that people sometimes exhibit optimism bias in the estimation of actual probabilities, not simply relative risk. For example, professional financial experts consistently overestimate likely earnings, and business school students overestimate their likely starting salary and the number of offers that they will receive (Armour and Taylor 2002:334-35). People also underestimate their own likelihood of being involved in a serious automobile accident, and their frequent failure to buy insurance for floods and earthquakes is consistent with the view that people are excessively optimistic.7 It is also noteworthy that these data pointing to optimism bias come from individuals making judgments that they make regularly in their everyday lives, rather than judgments far removed from those they would ordinarily make. 1.1.2 
Departures from Expected Utility Theory 
Along with the category of judgment errors, the idea of bounded rationality includes ways in which actual choices depart from the predictions of expected utility theory – a foundational feature of standard rational-choice 6 See Jolls (1998:1659-62) for a discussion of the relevant studies. 7 Jolls (1998:1660-61) describes the relevant studies. analysis. While departures from expected utility theory have received only modest attention in the existing social science literature on debiasing of boundedly rational actors (for reasons we shall explain), below we suggest their relevance to debiasing through law. 
A leading alternative to expected utility theory is Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky’s (1979) prospect theory. According to this theory, people evaluate outcomes based on the change they represent from an initial reference point, rather than based on the nature of the outcome itself. For example, discovering that one will receive a bonus of $2500 is often experienced differently if the previous year’s bonus was $0 than if the previous year’s bonus was $5000, wholly apart from any tangible financial obligations the individual faces. Prospect theory also posits that people weigh losses more heavily than gains, thus showing “loss aversion.” 
Related to loss aversion is the “endowment effect,” according to which an individual’s valuation of an entitlement depends on whether the individual is given initial ownership of that entitlement (Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler 1990). Thus, for example, individuals endowed with university mugs demand substantially more to sell these mugs than unendowed individuals are willing to pay to buy them. 
Also related to loss aversion are framing effects. Losses matter more than gains, and thus framing outcomes as losses rather than gains will greatly affect how people respond. Many studies support this idea8 – as does a widely-publicized dispute over the content of a government advertising campaign in the United States (Peterson 2003). The advertising campaign in question involved the effects of breastfeeding of newborns. In the approach favored by breastfeeding advocates, the advertisements would refer to the risks to the child of leukemia and other diseases from not consuming breast milk – whereas infant formula manufacturers favored an approach that stressed the benefits to the child from breastfeeding. Showing an intuitive understanding of prospect theory, the infant formula manufacturers fought to have the government emphasize the advantages of breastfeeding rather than the affirmative harms (losses) of not breastfeeding. 
1.2 
Debiasing Versus Incentives 
What does it mean, in general, to “debias” boundedly rational actors? The general question of what counts as “debiasing” of boundedly rational actors is important because there are many channels by which boundedly rational behavior may be made to “go away” or diminish in degree. Some but not all of these qualify as debiasing of boundedly rational actors under the general definition we develop here. 
Consider the following examples: (1) People are prone to social influences, so much so that many people will ignore the clear evidence of their own senses, and hence provide incorrect answers, if they are confronted with the unanimous views of others (Asch 1955). This kind of “conformity bias,” in which the views of others are used as a kind of heuristic for the proper answer, is significantly reduced when financial incentives are provided. When people stand to gain economically from a correct answer and when they have confidence in their own judgment, they are far more likely to ignore the crowd, to say what they think, and to answer correctly (Baron 1996). 
(2) Recall from the introduction that individuals in the role of litigants have a tendency to see cases in the light most favorable to their own side. But imagine that they are required to consider weaknesses in their side or reasons that the judge might rule against them. In that case, the “self-serving bias” bias they had previously exhibited vanishes (Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff 1997). 
(3) We have already mentioned thirty-one year old Linda, who was concerned with issues of social justice and discrimination in college. Recall from section 1.1.1 above that most people tend to say that Linda is more likely to be “a bank teller and active in the feminist movement” than to be “a bank teller.” This is a familiar example of the conjunction fallacy, produced by the representativeness heuristic. But as Gerd Gigerenzer has demonstrated, people are less likely to commit the conjunction fallacy when asked about frequencies rather than probabilities. If asked, “of 100 people who fit the description” of Linda, how many are bank tellers and how many are bank tellers and active in the feminist movement, the level of conjunction violations drops from 80 percent or more to 20 percent or less (Gigerenzer 2000:250). 
The first of these examples is one in which boundedly rational behavior is eliminated by the provision of financial incentives. A broad definition of debiasing of boundedly rational actors might embrace this sort of technique, but we think it is preferable to exclude the underlying form of behavior here from the category of boundedly rational behavior (so that the removal of the behavior by the provision of incentives does not count as “debiasing” of boundedly rational actors in the sense that we use that term). For some purposes, it might be useful to understand incentives as a way of overcoming boundedly rational behavior by increasing the stakes. Baruch Fischhoff, for instance, describes “rais[ing] stakes” as a possible strategy for debiasing of boundedly rational actors (Fischhoff 1982:424; Fischhoff 2003:732). 
But it seems most conservative, and most consistent with existing conventions in analyses of bounded rationality, to limit the category of boundedly rational behavior to that which survives even in the presence of financial or other consequences for exhibiting the behavior.9 If an apparent departure from unbounded rationality is eliminated with the provision of financial incentives, then many would conclude that it was not a departure from unbounded rationality at all, but instead a mere result of lazy or careless decision making by an actor who had no reason to be other than lazy or careless. Under our definition, therefore, the technique used in the first example above is not a strategy for debiasing of boundedly rational actors. And the same goes for techniques that eliminate boundedly rational behavior by improving a previously faulty aspect of an experimental design – although here again Fischhoff’s broad conception of debiasing of boundedly rational actors embraces such manipulations. 
The second and third examples above are standard cases of debiasing of individuals exhibiting bounded rationality. Subjects are asked to consider arguments or information of a particular sort, and the consideration of such arguments or information reduces or eliminates the boundedly rational behavior they previously exhibited. It is important to emphasize how the technique here differs from incentives. Actors are not asked to repeat the very same task with the very same structure, with the sole difference that they now have greater reason to take care in making their choices (which in the legal domain would correspond to some, although not all, “debiasing law” 9 Camerer and Hogarth (1999) make this implicit claim, and offer a great deal of evidence that many cases of boundedly rational behavior are not eliminated by the provision of incentives. strategies – for instance, those that increase punishments for certain types of behavior); instead the environment is restructured in a way that alters not actors’ motivation but the actual process by which they perceive the reality around them. Thus, we define debiasing of boundedly rational actors as using techniques that intervene in and alter the situation that produces the boundedly rational behavior, without operating on the degree of motivation or effort an actor brings to the task. Debiasing through law is then the use of legal rules to achieve such debiasing of boundedly rational actors. 
Debiasing Through Substantive Law 
This section fills out the general description offered in section 1 by developing a set of organizing examples of debiasing through substantive law. (The introduction and the appendix refer to existing examples of debiasing through procedural rules.) We show how the idea of debiasing through substantive law can or does address important choices the legal system must make across a range of legal domains. Our discussion follows the division in section 1.1 between bounded rationality in the form of judgment errors and bounded rationality in the form of departures from expected utility theory. 
The domain of our analysis in this section is forms of bounded rationality that the existing social science literature has shown to be responsive to strategies for debiasing of boundedly rational actors. This point is important because not all types of bounded rationality respond well to such strategies. Many manipulations fail to reduce hindsight bias, for instance; and, even worse, some seemingly sensible strategies for reducing this bias have actually increased it (Sanna, Schwarz and Stocker 2002). To be sure, studies that have required subjects to “rethink the inferences that they have made upon learning [an] outcome” and have then “demonstrated to them that other inferences remained plausible” have shown some success in reducing hindsight bias (Rachlinski 1998:586-88).10 However, in most cases strategies – even fairly aggressive ones – for debiasing boundedly rational actors have enjoyed limited, if any, success in combating hindsight bias (Fischhoff 1982:427-31; Hastie and Viscusi 1998:917; Kamin and Rachlinski 1995:9798; Rachlinski 1999:824). But in other contexts, techniques for debiasing of boundedly rational actors have shown substantial promise. One example is 10 Stallard and Worthington (1998:680-81) is an example of successful debiasing of hindsight-biased behavior. the case of self-serving bias; as noted, having subjects consider the weaknesses in their case or reasons that the judge might rule against them appears effective in eliminating self-serving bias in litigation – a form of debiasing through procedural rules (Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff 1997). We focus below on cases in which debiasing of boundedly rational actors has shown a strong likelihood of success in the existing social science literature. 2.1 
Debiasing Through Substantive Law in Response to Judgment Errors 2.1.1 
Debiasing Through Consumer Safety Law 
A vast number of federal and state laws regulate the safety of products used by consumers.11 A major impetus for these laws is the belief that consumers often do not adequately understand the potential risks of such products. Consumers may not adequately understand such risks because they are imperfectly informed, because they suffer from bounded rationality – most familiarly because of the phenomenon of optimism bias described in section 1.1 above – or both. 
The traditional law and economics view of the consumer safety context is that the problem (if there is one at all) merely involves imperfect information, and thus is appropriately corrected by the straightforward provision of additional information (Stiglitz 1986:90-91). However, as the earlier discussion of optimism bias suggested and as Jon Hanson and Douglas Kysar (1999a:1511-12; 1999b:729-30), among others, have emphasized, optimism bias will lead many consumers to underestimate their personal risks even if they receive accurate information about average risks. To be sure, optimism bias is context-dependent (Armour and Taylor 2002:338-41). But the factors that tend to reduce the extent of the bias – deliberation, close temporal proximity between the decision and the outcome of the decision, 11 See, for example, 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601-2692 (2000) (Toxic Substances Control Act); 15 U.S.C. §§ 2051-2084 (2000) (Consumer Product Safety Act); Restatement (Third) of Torts: Products Liability (state tort law). and severe consequences of error – are likely to be absent in the consumer safety context, with the possible exception of the severity of consequences.12 
It would not be unreasonable to conclude that optimism bias justifies heightened standards of products liability as an alternative to the provision of additional statistical facts about the product in question. Hanson and Kysar (1999a:1560), for instance, argue in favor of enterprise liability on the basis of (among other factors) optimism bias. However, such an approach – seeking to “debias law” by insulating outcomes from the effects of boundedly rational behavior – imposes large costs of its own (Priest 1987). A still more aggressive “debiasing law” approach, available under existing law in the case of some products, is an across-the-board ban on the product’s use. A number of federal statutes give agencies a choice among disclosure requirements and partial or complete bans.13 In response to evidence of inadequate information, optimism bias, and other consumer errors, some regulators might well be tempted to impose a ban even if the statute reflects a preference for disclosure.14 
An alternative to these “debiasing law” strategies is to use the law to reduce the occurrence of boundedly rational behavior in the first instance. At the broadest level, strategies for debiasing through consumer safety law provide a sort of middle ground between inaction or the economists’ spare prescription of “more information,” on the one hand, and the aggressive “debiasing law” strategies of heightened products liability standards or outright bans, on the other. Strategies for debiasing through consumer safety law may be far more successful than the mere provision of statistical facts, and also far more protective of consumer prerogatives than the strategy of an across-the-board ban. Our analysis shares a starting point with traditional proposals for better “informing” consumers, but comes to a quite different end point given our empirically-based appreciation of the limits of some forms of information provision, such as those that simply offer general statistical facts. 12 Hanson and Kysar (1999a:1511-12) provide further discussion of the role of contextual factors in determining optimism bias in the consumer safety context. 13 See sources cited in note 11 above. 14 See Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1991) (interpreting Toxic Substances Control Act to require the least restrictive regulatory alternative). 
In our discussion below of debiasing through consumer safety law, we will focus on scenarios in which optimism bias is likely to produce an overall underestimation by consumers of the risk associated with a given product. In some circumstances, a competing form of bounded rationality could lead consumers to overestimate rather than underestimate the risk associated with a product. For instance, highly available instances of accident or injury can lead to excessive pessimism – a distortion opposite to the one produced by optimism bias (Schwartz and Wilde 1983:1437). Alternatively, likelihoods of very low probability events may be overestimated, although the empirical evidence here is mixed, with some studies suggesting overestimation of the likelihood of very low probability events (Viscusi 1988:287-88) and other studies suggesting underestimation of the likelihood of such events (Kunreuther 1976:231-39). A general countervailing factor in the consumer product context – suggesting overall underestimation of risk in many cases – is that market pressures will tend to lead manufacturers of such products to present their products in ways that minimize consumers’ perceptions of risk (Hanson and Kysar 1999a:1425-26). Our focus in this section is on cases in which optimism bias leads to underestimation of the risks associated with a given product. 2.1.1.1 Evidence on Debiasing in Response to Optimism Bias 
Straightforward potential strategies in the social science literature for debiasing in response to optimism bias include suggesting reasons that negative outcomes might occur and considering risk factors related to negative outcomes. However, such approaches usually fail to reduce optimism bias (Weinstein and Klein 2002:322-23). The social science evidence thus suggests that successful strategies for debiasing in response to optimism bias will typically require harnessing separate aspects of boundedly rational behavior. Consider two distinct possibilities. 
Debiasing through the availability heuristic. One potential response to the risk that optimistically biased individuals believe “it won’t happen to them” is the availability heuristic described in section 1.1.1 above. Recall our earlier example of this heuristic: individuals asked how many words in a 2,000-word section of a novel end in “ing” give much larger estimates than individuals asked how many words have “n” as the second-to-last letter (Tversky and Kahneman 1983:295). Use of the availability heuristic often produces a form of judgment error; as with optimism bias, availability can lead to systematic mistakes in the assessment of probabilities. (Thus “availability bias,” in the form of excessively high estimates, and “unavailability bias,” in the form of excessively low estimates, involve complementary errors stemming from the use of this heuristic.) But because making an occurrence “available” increases individuals’ estimates of the likelihood of the occurrence (Sherman, Cialdini, Schwartzman and Reynolds 2002), availability has been found to be a promising strategy for debiasing of boundedly rational actors suffering from excessive optimism. 
In fact a recent series of studies of smoking behavior finds a phenomenon of this kind. A notable theme of the book-length treatment by Sloan, Taylor and Smith (2003) is that smokers are more likely to believe that smoking will harm their health if they are aware of specific instances of such harm. 
As an example of the basic idea of debiasing through the availability heuristic, consider the finding of Neil Weinstein (1980:810) that many people substantially underestimate their risk of cancer. Imagine that women asked to estimate their risk of breast cancer are told, before giving their estimates, a poignant and detailed story about a woman their age with similar family and other circumstances who was diagnosed with breast cancer. If so, then the empirical results noted above (Sherman, Cialdini, Schwartzman and Reynolds 2002) suggest that their estimated probabilities will typically be higher. (Of course, they may be too much higher or not enough higher – points we discuss at some length in our normative analysis in section 3 below). 
Debiasing through framing. A second possible mechanism for debiasing in response to optimism bias involves framing effects of the sort discussed in section 1.1.2 above. As we noted, the social science evidence shows that many people weigh losses more heavily than gains in evaluating potential outcomes. This evidence suggests that framing the presentation of information to exploit the extra weight attached to losses may counteract bounded rationality in the form of optimism bias. 
Consider one well-known illustration of the effects of framing. In a study involving breast cancer risk and breast self-examination, material that describes the positive effects of self-examination – such as a higher chance of discovering a tumor at an earlier stage – is ineffective. By contrast, significant behavioral changes result from material that stresses the negative consequences of failing to undertake self-examination – such as a decreased chance of discovering a tumor when it remains treatable (Meyerowitz and Chaiken 1987:505). Thus, if women are optimistically biased about the prospects that they will suffer from breast cancer and hence underestimate the value of engaging in recommended self-examinations, then framing the recommendation to self-examine in terms of losses rather than gains should increase the probability they attach to benefiting from a self-examination. 
Debiasing through the availability heuristic. In the consumer safety context, debiasing through the availability heuristic would focus on putting at consumers’ cognitive disposal the prospect of negative outcomes from use, or at least unsafe use, of a particular product. Specifically, the law could impose a set of requirements on the way that information about the product would be presented to consumers. Firms might be required – on pain of administrative penalties or tort liability – to provide a truthful account of consequences that resulted from a particular harm-producing use of the product, rather than simply providing a generalized warning that fails to harness availability. To enhance the efficacy of this proposed strategy, the law could further require that the real-life story of accident or injury be printed in large type and displayed prominently, so that consumers would be likely to see and read it before using the product. Mandatory warnings could conceivably raise first amendment issues, but so long as there is no political or ideological disagreement with the content of the message such warnings are likely to be constitutional.15 
The evidence suggests that the approach of requiring the specific account as opposed to the generalized warning would help to reduce optimism bias (Sherman, Cialdini, Schwartzman and Reynolds 2002). Our point here is similar in spirit to Chris Guthrie’s suggestion that legal policy makers bring “vivid information about plaintiff losses in frivolous litigation” to bear in reducing plaintiffs’ overestimation of the probability of success in 15 Glickman v. Wileman Brothers & Elliott, 512 U.S. 1145 (1997). The Supreme Court will consider a related set of issues this Term in Veneman v. Livestock Marketing Ass’n, cert. granted 124 S.Ct. 2389 (mem.) (No. 031164). such litigation – an illustration of debiasing through procedural rules (Guthrie 2000:210). More generally, the guiding idea is that the way information is provided may be just as important as (or more important than) that information is provided. 
It bears noting that an effort to use availability to counteract optimism bias would improve not only the decision making of consumers suffering from optimism bias but also that of consumers suffering from simple information failures. A conspicuous, prominent account of injury from a product may help to correct the estimated probability of harm attached to the product by an optimistically biased consumer. At the same time, it should improve the behavior of imperfectly informed but not necessarily biased consumers. 
Our earlier mention of the prospects for manufacturers’ influence over how consumers perceive their products (Hanson and Kysar 1999a:1425-26) suggests the importance of legal control over the nature of the accounts manufacturers are required to provide. It is possible – and commentators such as Hanson and Kysar might well fear – that manufacturers, influenced by market pressures, would manage to subvert attempts to achieve debiasing through consumer safety law. Ultimately the question is an empirical one, but in our view the costs that Priest and others have noted of “debiasing law” alternatives suggest the value of investigating the efficacy of alternative strategies involving debiasing through law. 
The effort to achieve debiasing through law in the way described here should be modest along two separate dimensions. First, a successful strategy would need to target a limited number of discrete products for which the problem of consumer optimism bias was most important. Consumers would begin to suffer from “information overload” if every time they went to buy any product – from a lawnmower to a candy bar to a fast food hamburger – they were hit with a real-life story of an individual harmed by use or consumption of the product. Their natural response might be to tune out all of the accounts provided by firms, even assuming these accounts were prominently displayed (Viscusi 1996:665-66).16 16 Elsewhere Professor Viscusi discusses ways of implementing multi-tiered systems, where high-risk products contain warnings on their labels while stores offer binders with risk information for low-risk products. 
Second, the law would need to avoid overreaching in the severity of the featured outcomes. Firms should not be required to provide anecdotes reflecting highly unusual consequences of using their products; only if an outcome occurs with some frequency should the law seek to induce firms to make consumers aware of the prospect. An emphasis on worst-case scenarios might produce excessive responses (Sunstein 2002). If requirements of anecdote-based warnings sweep in extremely unusual or unlikely scenarios, consumers might overreact – or alternatively they might lose faith and fail to attach any weight at all to the accounts. Of course there are line-drawing problems here, but the basic point is straightforward. 
Note in addition that worst-case scenarios are likely to be much more easily avoided with our suggestion of a legal requirement that firms provide truthful anecdotes about genuine harms than with the alternative strategy – frequently used by government – of public information campaigns concerning risky consumer products. Such campaigns have often resulted in the use of extremely vivid and salient images, to the point of seriously risking overreaction or even backlash as a result of citizens’ perceptions of government “manipulation.” In the smoking context, for instance, the European Union has experimented with requirements that a percentage of cigarette packages sold have their fronts covered with vivid pictures of rotting teeth and blackened lungs.17 We think the approach suggested here is sounder because it is more restrained. Similar to the European Union, the Canadian Health Ministry has required not only clear warnings (“Cigarettes cause strokes,” “Tobacco smoke hurts babies,” “Don't poison us,” and “Tobacco can make you impotent”) but also graphic pictures such as bleeding gums and two lungs with cancerous tumors.18 Likewise, in the United States a well-known anti-drug advertisement from the 1980s featured a picture of an egg frying in a pan with the voiceover, “This is your brain on drugs” (Dawan 2004). Again, we think it is often valuable to avoid such extreme messages. 
In sum, our suggestion of requiring, on pain of administrative sanctions or tort liability, truthful narratives of harm is a more modest and measured response to optimism bias than the approaches just described – approaches that harness availability by aggressively exploiting highly salient, 17 See http://lists.essential.org/pipermail/intl-tobacco/2001q1/000426.html (visited 9/3/04). 18 See http://www.abc.net.au/news/science/health/2000/12/ item20001224133940_1.htm (visited 9/3/04). costs on those who are unlikely to err. Colin Camerer, Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin (2003:1212), for instance, have argued on behalf of “asymmetrical paternalism,” that is, a strategy that counteracts forms of bounded rationality that reduce welfare, but that does not significantly affect people who did not previously exhibit boundedly rational behavior. Strategies of this kind are desirable because some people, intuitively or reflectively alert to the risk of such behavior, can be expected to take responsive action on their own (Rachlinski 2003:121119). 
To the extent that debiasing through law has no significant effects on those whose behavior did not initially exhibit bounded rationality, the approach greatly contrasts with the alternative approach of “debiasing law.” Suppose, for instance, that one responds to optimism bias on the part of consumers not by trying to reduce biased judgments but by insulating legal outcomes from the effects of such judgments through a mandatory rule expanding manufacturer liability for consumer products. If so, then one will have altered some legal outcomes that were not in any need of reform at all. The potential contrast with strategies for debiasing through law is clear.30 
In all of our examples of debiasing through law, the government intervention is unlikely to be entirely cost-free for those who did not previously show bounded rationality. But any provision of information by government – often a wholly uncontroversial strategy – will impose costs on those who did not err prior to the intervention simply because of the burden of processing the information. If the intervention produces important benefits for those who are prone to bounded rationality, then the intervention may be desirable even if it imposes modest costs on others. Here, as in other contexts, the only option is to weigh the effects of the different possible strategies. Of course efforts to debias people through law should be undertaken, whenever possible, in ways that do not produce confusion or misperception, as we discuss more fully in the next subsection. 3.4 
Overshooting and Autonomy 30 As Jeffrey Rachlinski (2003:1224) has written (in the course of discussing forms of debiasing different from the approach emphasized in this paper), “[G]overnments can adopt measures that restructure decisions as a less intrusive alternative to paternalistic restrictions on choice.” 
Strategies for debiasing through law that harness other departures from bounded rationality raise two additional concerns that require separate analysis. The first is the risk of overshooting. If truthful narratives are used in the context of consumer safety law, individuals who previously showed optimism bias might be led to exaggerate the risks of consumer products. The effort to debias through law would then be producing biases and errors of its own. 
Experimentation would be required to calibrate the degree to which availability or another form of bounded rationality would need to be brought to bear in engaging in debiasing through law – just as, in a conventional “debiasing law” approach, experimentation is necessary to determine the appropriate level or scope of the legal response. The problem of the scope of a legal corrective is ubiquitous in the law, not specific to strategies for debiasing through law. 
A second and more fundamental concern, however, involves individual autonomy. The point is most obvious with respect to debiasing through law in response to the endowment effect, for any determination that the excess of individuals’ willingness to accept over their willingness to pay is an “error” requiring correction is likely to be controversial to some. Thus, debiasing through law in this setting inevitably raises important issues of autonomy, as people’s preferences are, in a fundamental sense, indeterminate in the presence of the endowment effect. 
But even debiasing through law in response to judgment errors raises important issues of individual autonomy. In some such cases of debiasing through law, government seems to be correcting bounded rationality by exploiting it, in a way that might give rise to fears of manipulation. In the applications discussed in section 2.1, this occurs most obviously with respect to harnessing availability and framing in response to optimism bias. Is this a legitimate form of government action? Under what circumstances? 
If heuristics and biases are pervasive, then an informed government is likely to have little trouble in manipulating people in its preferred directions. The problem here is that government should respect its citizens, as emphasized, for instance, by the publicity condition in John Rawls’s A Theory of Justice (1971). Government should not engage in acts that it could not defend in public to those who are subject to those acts. If a public defense could not be made, the acts are an insult to the autonomy of citizens. In our applications in section 2.1, however, there is no reason to think government would have to conceal or ambiguate its efforts to correct individuals’ judgment errors. 
Indeed, government efforts to correct such mistakes are widespread and largely uncontroversial; the worry about government “manipulation,” if there is a worry, arises even with the widely accepted approach under which the government corrects simple information failures (where people are mistaken because they lack information entirely, rather than because they process information in a biased way) among citizens. As framing effects as well as other departures from unbounded rationality reveal, there is usually no neutral way to present information. Whenever the government is presenting even accurate information, it is making choices about presentation, choices that will affect how citizens perceive the reality around them (Benartzi and Thaler 1999). Thus, it is far too simple, and behaviorally naive, to draw a sharp line between acceptable “provision of information” and unacceptable “mind control.” Unless the concern with government manipulation is strong enough to suggest that the government should never provide information to its citizens (an implausible suggestion), there must be some willingness to tolerate the prospect of government influence over citizens’ perceptions of reality and the attendant risk of government manipulation. 
Thus, for instance, if smokers were determined to discount the risks that accompany smoking, in part because of optimism bias, it is not obvious that government would violate their autonomy by giving a more accurate sense of those risks, even if the best way of giving that accurate sense were through concrete accounts of suffering. And it is far from clear in such a case that the government could not publicly defend its strategy to citizens as required by the publicity condition; recall in this connection the American Legacy Foundation letters campaign described in section 2.1.1 above. 
This is not to say, of course, that no form of debiasing through law in response to judgment errors of the sort discussed in section 2.1 could be objectionable on autonomy grounds. Some forms might resemble systems of propaganda in clear violation of the publicity condition. If so, there is a real risk that the one-sidedness and aggressiveness of the government’s effort will be exposed. If this happens, public trust will unquestionably be reduced. And if trust is reduced, government strategies are much less likely to succeed. These instrumental concerns are aggravated by strong moral ones: At least when minors are not involved, the law should treat citizens with respect, and extreme marketing strategies (going well beyond what we have suggested in discussing strategies for debiasing through law in response to judgment errors) violate that principle. 
With respect to autonomy, no general conclusion is likely to make sense; the nature and force of the objections discussed above will generally depend on the setting. However, these objections seem weakest when government is responding to a form of bounded rationality that unquestionably qualifies as an “error” and is using methods that do not distort the facts. “Behavioral Bureaucrats” 
Nothing said thus far denies the important fact that legal policymakers and administrators, including those who seek to engage in debiasing through law, will often suffer from both inadequate information and bounded rationality themselves. No less than ordinary people, bureaucrats use heuristics and are subject to predictable biases31; they are also susceptible to the influence of powerful private groups with stakes in the outcome. The combination of informational failures, cognitive biases, and interest-group power can lead government in extremely unfortunate directions (Noll and Krier 1990; Kuran and Sunstein 1999). In this light we do not make the naive and implausible suggestion that in the real world, strategies for debiasing through law will always be well-motivated and well-designed. (Nor will their “debiasing law” counterpart strategies.) Our claim is only that if people exhibit bounded rationality, debiasing through law may often be a promising response – one that it would be foolish to eliminate from the government’s repertoire. 
Conclusion 
The central goal of this paper has been to draw attention to the broad importance of debiasing through law. The social science literature has devoted a great deal of effort to the study of debiasing of boundedly rational actors, but with little effort to see how law and legal institutions might accomplish it. Those interested in bounded rationality and law have argued mostly that legal institutions should be insulated from the effects of 31 For a general discussion of “behavioral bureaucrats,” see Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998:1543-44). boundedly rational behavior, and in some cases that debiasing of boundedly rational actors should be pursued through changes in procedural rules governing the adjudicative process. In our view, debiasing through law – especially debiasing through substantive law – is a distinctive and sometimes far preferable alternative to the strategy of insulating legal outcomes from the effects of bounded rationality. Such debiasing – distinct from the more familiar approach of attempting to control behavior through incentives – often promises to be both more successful and less invasive than the more standard alternatives. 
From the normative point of view, we have emphasized that many forms of debiasing through law may be seen as a distinctive kind of informational regulation. In many cases, the major questions are standard: whether such efforts are effective and whether their benefits justify their costs. 
Nothing in our analysis is inconsistent with the claim that in some contexts unfettered markets are the best response to bounded rationality. Such markets might reduce the effects of bounded rationality by raising the stakes, as noted above32; it is also possible that the costs of boundedly rational behavior are, in some contexts, lower than the costs of any effort to counteract it. We also do not disagree with the now-familiar suggestion that in the face of bounded rationality, aggressive regulation – some form of “debiasing law” – might sometimes be justified.33 Instead our aim in this paper has been to chart the possibility of a middle course, one that asks legal institutions not to ignore people, but instead to reduce their bounded rationality. In some contexts, debiasing through law is likely to be effective, cost-justified, and minimally intrusive. We believe that some areas of the law reveal an appreciation of these points and hence an implicit behavioral rationality, using legal strategies as a mechanism for debiasing of boundedly rational actors. Our principal goal has been to understand those strategies in these terms and to explore the possibility of building on them to do more. 32 But for an entertaining demonstration of the persistence of bounded rationality amidst high stakes, see Lewis (2003). 33 Jolls, Sunstein and Thaler (1998) provide various examples. Arlen, Jennifer, Matthew Spitzer and Eric Talley. 2002. Endowment Effects Within Corporate Agency Relationships, Journal of Legal Studies 31:1-37. Armour, David and Shelley E. Taylor. 2002. When Predictions Fail: The Dilemma of Unrealistic Optimism. In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Asch, Solomon. 1955. Opinions and Social Pressure. Scientific American 193(5):31-40. 
Ayres, Ian. 1998. Protecting Property with Puts. Valparaiso University Law Review 32:793-831. 
Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff and Colin Camerer. 1995. Biased Judgments of Fairness in Bargaining. American Economic Review 85:1337-43. _____, George Loewenstein and Samuel Issacharoff. 1997. Creating Convergence: Debiasing Biased Litigants. Law and Social Inquiry 22:913925. 
Baron, Robert. 1996. The Forgotten Variable in Conformity Research: Impact of Task Importance on Social Influence. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 71:915-927. 
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler. 1999. Risk Aversion or Myopia? Choices in Repeated Gambles and Retirement Investments. Management Science 45:364-381. 
Besharov, Gregory. 2004. Second-Best Considerations in Connecting Cognitive Biases (mimeo). 
Calabresi, Guido and A. Douglas Melamed. 1972. Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inalienability: One View of the Cathedral. Harvard Law Review 85:1089-1128. 
Camerer, Colin and Robin Hogarth. 1999. The Effects of Financial Incentives in Experiments: A Review and Capital-Labor-Production Framework. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 19:7-42. _____, Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue and Matthew Rabin. 2003. Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case for “Asymmetric Paternalism.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 151:1211-44. 
Dawan, Shaila K. The New Public Service Ad: Just Say “Deal with It,” N.Y. Times, Jan. 11, 2004, §3, at 5. Easterbrook, Frank H. and Daniel R. Fischel. 1982. Corporate Control Transactions. Yale Law Journal 91:698-737. 
Farnsworth, Ward. 2003. The Legal Regulation of Self-Serving Bias. University of California Davis Law Review 37:567-603. 
Fischhoff, Baruch. 1982. Debiasing. In Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, edited by Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky. New York: Cambridge University Press. _____. 2002. Heuristics and Biases in Application. In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press. Gigerenzer, Gerd. 2000. Adaptive Thinking. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Gilson, Ronald J. and Reinier Kraakman. 1991. Reinventing the Outside Director: An Agenda For Institutional Investors. Stanford Law Review 43:863-906. 
Guthrie, Chris. 2000. Framing Frivolous Litigation: A Psychological Theory. University of Chicago Law Review 67:163-216. 
Hanson, Jon D. and Douglas A. Kysar. 1999a. Taking Behavioralism Seriously: Some Evidence of Market Manipulation. Harvard Law Review 112:1420-1572. _____ and Douglas A. Kysar. 1999b. Taking Behavioralism Seriously: The Problem of Market Manipulation. New York University Law Review 74:630749. 
Hastie, Reid and W. Kip Viscusi. 1998. What Juries Can’t Do Well: The Jury’s Performance as a Risk Manager. Arizona Law Review 40:901-921. Jolls, Christine, Cass R. Sunstein and Richard Thaler. 1998. A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics. Stanford Law Review 50:1471-1550. _____, Cass R. Sunstein and Richard Thaler. 1998. Theories and Tropes: A Reply to Posner and Kelman, Stanford Law Review 50:1593-1608. _____. 1998. Behavioral Economic Analysis of Redistributive Legal Rules. In Symposium: The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Behavior, Behavioral Economics, and the Law. Vanderbilt Law Review. 51:1653-1677. Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch and Richard Thaler. 1990. Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem. Journal of Political Economy 98:1325-1348. _____ and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk. Econometrica 47:263-292. 
Kamin, Kim A. and Jeffrey J. Rachlinski. 1995. Ex Post ≠ Ex Ante: Determining Liability in Hindsight. Law and Human Behavior 19:89-104. Kaplow, Louis and Steven Shavell. 1996. Property Rules Versus Liability Rules: An Economic Analysis. Harvard Law Review 109:713-790 . Karkkainen, Bradley. 2001. Information As Environmental Regulation. Georgetown Law Journal 89:257-370. 
Korobkin, Russell. 2003. The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis. In Symposium: Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human Behavior. Northwestern University Law Review 97:12271293. _____ and Thomas Ulen. 2000. Law and Behavioral Science: Removing the Rationality Assumption from Law and Economics. California Law Review 88:1051-1144. 
Kunreuther, Howard. 1976. Limited Knowledge and Insurance Protection. Public Policy 24:283-294. 
Kuran, Timur and Cass R. Sunstein. 1999. Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation. Stanford Law Review 51:683-768. 
Kysar, Douglas A. 2003. The Expectations of Consumers. Columbia Law Review 103:1700-1790. 
Langevoort, Donald C. 2001. The Human Nature of Corporate Boards: Law, Norms, and the Unintended Consequences of Independence and Accountability. Georgetown Law Journal 89:797-832. _____. 1997. Organized Illusions: A Behavioral Theory of Why Corporations Mislead Stock Market Investors (And Cause Other Social Harms). University of Pennsylvania Law Review 146:101-172. 
LeDoux, Joseph. 1996. The Emotional Brain. New York: Simon & Schuster. Lewinsohn-Zamir, Daphna. 2001. The Choice Between Property Rules and Liability Rules Revisited: Critical Observations from Behavioral Studies. Texas Law Review 80:219-260. 
Lewis, Michael. 2003. Moneyball. New York: W.W. Norton. 
Mellers, Barbara A. 2004. Pleasure, Utility, and Choice. In Feelings and Emotions: The Amsterdam Symposium, edited by Antony S.R. Manstead, Nico Frijda, and Agneta Fischer. New York: Cambridge University Press. Meyerowitz, Beth E. and Shelly Chaiken. 1987. The Effect of Message Framing on Breast Self-Examination: Attitudes, Intentions, and Behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 52:500-510. 
Mitchell, Gregory. 2002. Why Law and Economics’ Perfect Rationality Should Not Be Traded for Behavioral Law and Economics’ Equal Incompetence. Georgetown Law Journal 91:67-167. 
Noll, Roger G. and James E. Krier. 1990. Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation. Journal of Legal Studies 19:747-779. Parisi, Francesco and Vernon Smith eds. 2004. The Law and Economics of Irrational Behavior. Stanford University Press. 
Peters, Philip G., Jr. 1999. Hindsight Bias and Tort Liability: Avoiding Premature Conclusions, Arizona State Law Journal 31:1277-1314. Petersen, Melody. Breastfeeding Ads Delayed By a Dispute Over Content, N.Y. Times, Dec. 4, 2003, at C1. 
Priest, George L. 1987. The Current Insurance Crisis and Modern Tort Law. Yale Law Journal 96:1521-1590. 
Pozen, Robert C. 1994. Institutional Investors: The Reluctant Activists. Harvard Business Review, Jan.-Feb. 72(1):140-149. 
Rachlinski, Jeffrey. 2003. The Uncertain Psychological Case for Paternalism. In Symposium: Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human Behavior. Northwestern University Law Review 97:1165-1225. _____. 1999. Regulating in Foresight Versus Judging Liability in Hindsight: The Case of Tobacco. Georgia Law Review 33:813-845. _____. 1998. A Positive Psychological Theory of Judging in Hindsight. University of Chicago Law Review 65:571-625. _____ and Forest Jourden. 1998. Remedies and the Psychology of Ownership. In Symposium: The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Behavior, Behavioral Economics, and the Law. Vanderbilt Law Review 51:1541-1582. 
John Rawls. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 
Sale, Hillary. 2004. Delaware’s Good Faith. In Symposium: Enron and the Future of U.S. Corporate Law. Cornell Law Review 89:456-495. Sanna, Lawrence, Norbert Schwarz and Shavaun L. Stocker. 2002. When Debiasing Backfires: Accessible Content and Accessibility Experiences in Debiasing Hindsight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 28:497-502. 
Schwartz, Alan and Louis L. Wilde. 1983. Imperfect Information in Markets for Contract Terms: The Examples of Warranties and Security Interests. Virginia Law Review 69:1387-1485. 
Sherman, Steven J., Robert B. Cialdini, Donna F. Schwartzman and Kim D. Reynolds. 2002. Imagining Can Heighten or Lower the Perceived Likelihood of Contracting a Disease: The Mediating Effect of Ease of Imagery in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Sloan, Frank A., Donald H. Taylor and V. Kerry Smith. 2003. The Smoking Puzzle: Information, Risk Perception, and Choice. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 
Stallard, Merrie Jo and Debra L. Worthington. 1998. Reducing the Hindsight Bias Utilizing Attorney Closing Arguments. Law and Human Behavior 22:671-683. 
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1986. Economics of the Public Sector. New York: W.W. Norton. 
Sunstein, Cass R. 2003. Why Societies Need Dissent. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. _____. 2002. Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law. Yale Law Journal 112:61-107. _____. 2000. Behavioral Law and Economics. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Symposium, Empirical Legal Realism: A New Social Scientific Assessment of Law and Human Behavior. 2003. Northwestern University Law Review 97:1075-1392. 
Symposium, The Legal Implications of Psychology: Human Behavior, Behavioral Economics, and the Law. 1998. Vanderbilt Law Review 51:14971795. 
Tor, Avishalom. 2002. The Fable of Entry: Bounded Rationality, Market Discipline and Legal Policy. Michigan Law Review 101:482-568. Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1983. Extensional Versus Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy in Probability Judgment. Psychological Review 90:293-315. _____ and Daniel Kahneman. 1982. Judgments of and by Representativeness. In Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, edited by Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tversky. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Viscusi, W. Kip. 2002. Smoke-Filled Rooms. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. _____. 1996. Individual Rationality, Hazard Warnings, and the Foundations of Tort Law. Rutgers Law Review 48:625-671. _____. 1988. Predicting the Effects of Food Cancer Risk Warnings on Consumers, Food Drug Cosmetic Law Journal 43:283-314. _____ and Wesley A. Magat. 1987. Learning About Risk: Consumer and Worker Response to Hazard Information. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Weinstein, Neil D. and William M. Klein. 2002. Resistance of Personal Risk Perceptions to Debiasing Interventions. In Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, edited by Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University Press. _____. 1980. Unrealistic Optimism About Future Life Events. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39:806-820. Appendix: Debiasing of Boundedly Rational Actors Through 
Procedural Rules and Substantive Law 
This appendix briefly summarizes some leading empirical research on debiasing of boundedly rational actors and its implications for debiasing through law. 
debiasing debiasing through through procedural substantive rules? law? 
ERRORS bias bias bias Almost all approaches Source: Fischhoff (1982). 
Alerting people to existence of the bias Source: Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff (1997). 
Almost all approaches that directly target optimism bias. Source: Weinstein and Klein (2002). Telling people not to be “Monday morning quarterbacks.” Source: Stallard and Worthington (1998). 
Asking people to make other side’s argument. 
Source: Babcock, Loewenstein and Issacharoff (1997). 
Giving people a vivid sense of the relevant harms Source: Sloan, Taylor and Smith (2003). 
THEORY 
Endowment effect Almost all approaches. 
Source: Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1990). Protecting entitlements by liability rule rather than property rule; having agents make decisions. 
Sources: Rachlinski and Jourden (1998); Arlen, Spitzer and Talley (2002). 
University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@uchicago.edu Property law governing remedies (section 2.2.1); agency law (section 2.2.2). 2.  William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished  Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991)  Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom  in the Law of Tort (August 1991)  Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991)  Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992)  Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February  1992)  Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992)  Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992)  William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July  1992)  William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A  Quantitative Study (August 1992)  Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey  With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992)  Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992)  Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning  Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993)  Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993)  Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing  Everyone Else Does) (April 1993)  Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial  Entrenchment, and Firm‐Specific Human Capital (August 1993)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the  Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993)  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory  Adjudication (September 1993)  Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993)  Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993)  Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994)  Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994)  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994)  J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan  (August 1994)  Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994)  Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property  Protection of Software (August 1994)  Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994)  David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December  1994)  29.  160.  161  
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories:  What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in  Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality,  and Marriage (September 2003)  Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content  (September 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on  Federal Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)   Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with  Variable Leisure Time (October 2003)  Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003)  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003)  David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004)  David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004)  Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright  Law (April 2004)  Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004)  Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February  2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the  Value of Statistical Lives (February 2004)  Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A  Critique of the Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004)  Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for  Pharmaceutical Patents: Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004)  Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004)  Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004)  Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute  (May 2004)  Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The  Division of Labor within and between Law Firms (April 2004)  Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the  Utilization of Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry  (April 2004)  James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the  Market for Underwriting Business (July 2004)  Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004)  Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable  (July 2004)  Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein,  Company Stock, Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information  Markets (August 2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross‐ Cultural Risk Perceptions (August 2004)  
