University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2004

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People?
Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives
Cass R. Sunstein

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives" ( John M. Olin
Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 207, 2004).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

The University of Chicago Law School
John M. Olin Law & Economics Working Paper Series

Working Paper No. 207

AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies
Working Paper No. 04-05

 

Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People?

Disaggregating the Value of Statistical Lives

Cass R. Sunstein

February 2004

This paper can be downloaded without charge from the

Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection at:

http://ssrn.com/abstract=506142

Preliminary draft 2/17/04 
All rights reserved 
 

Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of 
Statistical Lives 

Cass R. Sunstein* 
 

Abstract 

 
 
Each  government  agency  uses  a  uniform  figure  to  measure  the  value  of  a 
statistical life. This is a serious mistake. The very theory that underlies current practice 
calls for far more individuation of the relevant values. According to that theory, the value 
of statistical lives should vary across risks. More controversially, the value of a statistical 
life should vary across individuals—even or especially if the result would be to produce a 
lower number for some people than for others. One practical implication is that a higher 
value  should  be  given  to  programs  that  reduce  cancer  risks.  Should  government  use  a 
higher VSL for programs that disproportionately benefit the wealthy—and a lower VSL 
for  programs  that  disproportionately  benefit  the  poor?  A  serious  complication  here  is 
that sometimes the beneficiaries of regulation pay only a fraction or even none of its cost; 
when this is so, the appropriate VSL for poor people might be higher, on distributional 
grounds, than market evidence suggests. An understanding of this point has implications 
for  foundational  issues  about  government  regulation,  including  valuation  of  persons  in 
poor and wealthy nations. 
 
 

I. 

Introduction 

 

 
For  over  two  decades,  executive  orders  have  required  regulatory  agencies  to 
engage in cost-benefit analysis of major regulations,1 and Congress has imposed the same 
requirement  in  several  statutes.2  To  conduct  cost-benefit  analysis,  agencies  must  assign 

monetary values to human lives. What numbers do they choose? Do some deaths count 

for more than others? 

                                                 

* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law School and Department 
of Political Science. I am grateful to participants in a work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago 
Law School and to Matthew Adler, David Strauss, Robert Hahn, Eric Posner, Richard A. Posner, Adrian 
Vermeule,  and  W.  Kip  Viscusi  for  valuable  comments  on  a  previous  draft.  Sarah  Sulkowski  provided 
outstanding research assistance. 
1
 See Stephen Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 120-35 (5  ed. 2002). 
2 See, e.g., 15 USC 2601 et seq. (Toxic Substances Control Act); 7 USC 136 et seq. (Federal Insecticide, 
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act); 42 USC 300g-1 (Safe Drinking Water Act). 

th

 
 

 

 

1 

(VSL): $6.1million.

The  Environmental  Protection  Agency  uses  a  uniform  value  for  a  statistical  life 
3 Other agencies use either lower and higher numbers, with a range, 
ecent years, between $1.5 million (the Federal Aviation Administration in 19904) to 
illion.5  While  su
th
e  FDA’s  current  figure  of  $6.5  m
bstantial  differences  can  be  found 
cross  agencies,6 uniformity is the intended practice  within agencies.7 No agency treats 

in r

a

cancer risks, or mortality risks that

u
 produce  nusual fe

ar or involve special suffering, as 

w

th

orthy of more concern than other risks. No agency treats young people as worth more 
an poor people.8 No agency values the lives of poor people less than the lives of rich 

                                                 

he  l
ac
te

3 See 66 Fed. Reg. at 7012. In its July 2003 regulation governing food labeling of trans fatty acids, the Food 
and Drug Administration used a VSL of $6.5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 41434, 41488 (July 11, 2003); in its 
March 13, 2003 proposed rule on dietary ingredients and dietary supplements, the same agency suggested a 
VSL of $5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 12158, 12229 (using this value to calculate the “value of a statistical 
life day”). 
4  The  Department  of  Transportation  now  uses  a  higher  figure,  but  one  that  is  still  low  in  comparison  to 
what most agencies do. See 67 Fed. Reg. 17556, 17559 (April 10, 2002) ($2.7 million). 
5  See  Table  1  below;  Matthew  Adler  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  Implementing  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  When 
Preferences Are Distorted, 29 J Legal Stud 146 (2000). 
6 These differences appear to be inexplicable. 
7 See Adler and Posner, supra note. There are some differences within agencies across contexts and across 
time, but those differences  do not appear to be deliberate. See, e.g., the FDA sources cited in note 1 supra. 
The  most  explicit  discussions  of  varying  VSL  have  come  from  the  EPA.  In  its  2003  discussion  of 
hazardous air pollutants, see 68 Fed. Reg. 1660, 1693 (Jan. 13, 2003), the EPA noted that there “is general 
agreement that the value to an individual of a reduction is mortality risk can vary based on several factors, 
in
cluding the age of the individual, the type of risk, the level of control the individual has over the risk, the 
in
dividual’s  attitude  toward  risk,  and  the  health  status  of  the  individual.”  Nonetheless,  the  agency 
announced, without offering reasons, that i
in the monetary value assigned 
ives  saved  even  if  they  differ  i
to  t
omic  status,  gender  or  other 
ristic  of the adult population.” Id.  
ch
ar
An extended discussion of related issues can be found in the EPA’s arsenic proposal, see 65 Fed. 
Reg.  38888,  38945  (June  22,  2000).  There  the  EPA  noted  that  the  “factors  which  may  influence  the 
estimate  of  economic  benefits  associated  with  avoided  cancer  fatalities  include  (1)  a  possible  ‘cancer  
premium’ (i.e., the additional value or sum that people may be willing to pay to avoid the experiences of 
dread, pain and suffering, and diminished quality of life associated with cancer-related illness and ultimate 
fatality); (2) the willingness of people to pay more over time to avoid mortality risk as their income rises; 
(3) a possible premium for accepting involuntary risks as opposed to voluntary [sic] assumed risks; (4) the 
greater risk aversion of  th
e general population as opposed to workers in the wage-risk valuation studies; 
(5) ‘altruism’ or the willingness of people to pay more to reduce risk in other sectors of the population and 
(6
) a consideration of health status and life years remaining at the time of premature mortality.” The EPA 
acknowledged that these factors “may significantly increase the present value estimate,” but said that “there 
is currently neither a clear consensus among economists about how to simultaneously analyze each of these 
adjustments  nor  is  there  adequate  empirical  data  to  support  quantitative  estimates  for  all  potentially 
significant  adjustment  factors.”    Id.  Hence  the  EPA  solicited  comments  on  these  issues  and  said  that  it 
would  ask  its  Scientific  Advisory  Board  (SAB)  to  conduct  a  review.  Id.  As  noted  below,  the  comments 
produced a sensitivity analysis that contains several 7% upward adjustments from the $6.1 million figure, 
see below, but the SAB’s review
 suggested that at the present time, upward adjustments were not justified 
by existing evidence, see below. 
8 With the interest in focusing on “life-years,” however, this might change. See Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, 
Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, Colum L Rev (forthcoming 2004).   

t “prefers not to draw distinctions 
n  age,  health  status,  socioecon

2 

 

people

. No agency distinguishes between whites and African-Americans or between men 

and women. For statistical lives, the governing idea is that each life is worth exactly the 
same.  With  respect  to  cost-benefit  analysis,  much  is  disputed.9  But  on  the  idea  of  a 

uniform  value  per  life  saved,  there  is  a  solid  consensus,  at  least  in  terms  of  regulatory 
practice.10 

 

I  intend  to  question  that  consensus  here,  and  to  do  so  in  a  way  that  raises 

foundational issues about the economic valuation of human lives. I suggest that a uniform 

value  is  obtuse.  Under  the  very  approach  that  agencies  use  to  produce  the  current 

numbers, the value of a statistical life should vary along two dimensions. First, it should 

vary  across  risks.  For  example,  there  is  reason  to  think  that  VSL  is  higher  for  cancer 
deaths than for sudden, unanticipated deaths11; deaths that produce unusual fear,12 or that 

are accompanied  by  high  levels of  pain  and suffering, should be expected to produce a 

higher VSL. Human beings face countless mortality risks, and it would be truly bizarre to 

maintain that for each of these risks, VSL is identical. Second, VSL should vary across 
individuals.13  People  who  are  risk  ave
rse  will  show  a  higher  VSL  than  people  who  are 
risk-seeking.14 People who are thirty will show a higher VSL than people who are sixty.15 

                                                 

9 For various perspectives, see Adler and Posner, supra note; W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1994); Frank 
Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless (2004). 
10 An arguable exception, noted below, involves the debate over whether agencies should focus on lives or 
instead l
ife-years; the latter approach might well value older people less than younger ones. For discussion, 
see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Lives,  Life-Years,  and  Willingness  to  Pay,  Colum  L  Rev  (forthcoming  2004).  An 
implicit  challenge  to  the  consensus  can  be  found  in  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Risk  Equity,  J  Legal  Stud.  W.  Kip 
Viscusi  and  Joseph  E.  Aldy,  The  Value  of  a  Statistical  Life:  A  Critical  Review  of  Market  Estimates 
Throughout  the  World,  27  J  Risk  and  Uncertainty  5,  7  (2003),  notes  the  existence  of  heterogeneity  by 
income, union status, and age, and explains that the “existence of such heterogeneity provides a cautionary 
note for policy.” 
11 See James K. Hammitt and Jin-Tau Liu, Effects of Disease Type and Latency on the Value of Mortality 
Risk, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 73 (2004) (finding that willingness to pay to reduce a cancer death is about 
one-third larger WTP to reduce risk of a similar chronic, degenerative disease). 
12 For evidence of a higher VSL for airline risks than for automotive risks, see Fredrik Carlsson et al., Is 
Transport Safety More Valuable in the Air?, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 147 (2004). 
13 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 18 (“transferring the estimates of a value of a statistical life to non-
labor market contexts, as is the case in benefit-cost analyses of environmental health policies for example, 
should  recognize  that  different  populations  have  different  preferences  over  risks  and  different  values  on 
life-saving”). 
14  See  Carlsson  et  al.,  supra  note,  at  158  (finding that those who are scared  of flying are willing to pay 
especially high amounts to reduce
15 As found in Joseph P. Aldy and W. Kip Viscusi, Age Variations in Workers’ Value of a Statistical Life 
(2003), forthcoming. 

 the risks of flying). 

3 

 

Those  who  are  rich  will  show  a  higher  VSL  than  those  who  are  poor.  It  follows  that 
different demographic groups will show diversity in their VSL as well.16 

If  we  put  together  these  two  forms  of  variability—across  risks  and  across 

persons—we will find that the unitary $6.1 million figure is far too crude. In theory, each 

person  in  society  should  have  a  particular  VSL  for  each  and  every  risk,  resulting  in  a 
fully individuated VSL.17 Such a fully individuated VSL would mean, for example, that 
the  VSL  of  some  racial  groups  would  likely  be  lower  than  that  for  others.18  But  these 

differences  would  not  be  the  result  of  a  governmental  decision  to  take  racial 

characteristics into account; in fact it would not be a product of any kind of group-level 
discrimination on government’s part, at least not when government is calculating VSL.19 

The differences would be the result of aggregating fully individual VSLs, just as ordinary 

markets  do  in  producing  prices  for  the  reduction  of  the  statistical  risks  associated  with 
smoke alarms, unusually safe cars, and much more.20  

 

                                                 

16 Such differences are found in W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical 
Life, 27 J. Risk & Uncertainty 239, 252 tbl.5 (2003) [hereinafter Viscusi, Racial Differences]. To get a bit 
ahead  of  the  story:  I  am  not  arguing  that  government  should  assign  a  higher  VSL  to  white  lives  than  to 
African-American lives.  I am speaking here of demographic differences that would emerge from a fully 
individuated approach to VSL, in which each person’s WTP were calculated on an individual basis; once 
these values are aggregated, the white VSL would likely be higher than the African-American VSL, simply 
because of disparities in wealth and income. Riche
r people pay more for safe cars and smoke alarms than 
poor people do. See below for further discussion. 
17 I am putting to one side the complication that sometimes values are constructed,  rather than elicited, by 
social situations – an especially serious complication for contingent valuation studies. See John Payne et 
al., Measuring Constructed Preferences: Toward a Building Code, 19 J. Risk and Uncertainty 243 (1999); 
Cass R. Sunstein and Richard Thaler, Libertarian Paternalism Is Not An Oxymoron, 70 U Chi L Rev 1159, 
1177-1178 (2003). 
18 As found in W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical Life, 27 J Risk 
and Uncertainty 2
39 (2003); John D. Leeth and John Ruser, Compensating Wage Differentials for Fatal and 
Nonfatal  Injury  Risk  by  Gender  and  Race,  27  J  Risk  and  Uncertainty  257  (2003).  Viscusi  finds  that  the 
overall  white  VSL  is  $15  million,  while  the  overall  African-American  VSL  is  $7.2  million.  For  white 
females, the overall VSL is $9.4 million, compared to $18.8 million for white m
ales; for African-American 
females, the overall VSL is $6.9 million, compared to $5.9 million for African-American males. 
19 Discrimination might well lay in the background, of course; it almost certainly ac
counts for the unequal 
opportunities that produce lower VSL for African-Americans than for whites. See Viscusi, supra note, at 
255,  for  the  suggestion  that  the  racial  differentials  reflect  “differences  in  market  opportunities.”  Viscusi 
goes on to suggest that “it is inappropriate to attribute the observed differences to a greater willingness by 
black  workers
  to  bear  risk.”  Id.  In  a  sense  Viscusi  is  correct;  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  African-
American  workers  have  an  intrinsically  greater  predisposition  to  take  risks.  But  in  the  market,  one’s 
willingness to bear risks is a product of “market oppo
rtunities,” and hence those with fewer opportunities 
will show a greater willingness to bear risk. 
20 See W. Kip Viscusi

, Fatal Tradeoffs (1994). 

4 

 

 

In practice, of course, a fully individuated VSL is not feasible, for two different 

reasons.  First,  government  lacks  the  information  that  would  permit  the  calculation. 

Regula

tors do not know how much each person would be willing to pay to reduce each 

statistical  risk;  categories  are  therefore  inevitable.  Second,  many  regulatory  programs 

involve  collective  goods  and  therefore  must  protect  many  people  at  once.  A  clean  air 

program, for example, cannot easily ensure that some people in a geographical region are 

exposed to no more than 10 parts per billion (ppb) of some pollutant, while others in the 

same region are subjected to 50 ppb. Because collective goods are typically involved in 

regulation, the problem is pervasive.  

Notwithstanding  issues  of  feasibility,  an  understanding  of  the  reasons  for 

individuating VSL is important for two reasons. The first involves conceptual clarity. The 

theory behind the use of VSL and willingness to pay (WTP) remains poorly understood. 

An  appreciation  of  the  case  for  individuation  will  cla

rify  the  theory—both  its  rationale 

a

nd  its  limitations,  empirical  and  ethical.  The  second  reason  involves  the  possibility  of 

moving some way in the direction of greater individuation. With respect to cancer risks, 

for example, there is reason to believe that VSL is significantly higher than the amounts 

produced by examining studies of workplace accidents. For this reason, the government’s 

current  numbers  for  cancer  risks  might  well  be  too  low,  resulting  in  widespread 

underprotection  of  the  public.  Similarly,  there  is  reason  to  think  that  VSL  should  be 

higher  for  mortality  risks  from  airplanes  than  for  statistically  identical  risks  on  the 

highways.

 More generally, different agencies, dealing with qualitatively different risks, 

21

might  well  use  different  VSLs,  simply  because  market  evidence  is  likely  to  show  just 

those  differences.  Full  individuation  is  not  feasible,  but  greater  individuation  would  be 

quite easy. 

A  far  more  troublesome  point,  to  which  I  will  devote  considerable  attention, 

involves  disparities  along  demographic  lines.  For  now,  notice  a  simple  factual  point: 

When risks are faced disproportionately by wealthy people, VSL, based on actual WTP, 

should  be  higher  than  $6.1  million—just  as  it  should  be  lower  when  it  is  faced 

                                                 

21 See Carlsson, supra note (finding that people’s WTP for airline deaths is more than double their WTP for 
taxi deaths). 

5 

 

disproportionately by poor people.22 WTP is dependent on ability to pay, and those with 

little income and wealth will show little WTP. It follows that people in poor nations will 

have a lower VSL than people in rich nations, a point with implications for valuation of 
the harms from global warming23—and that people in poor areas will have a lower VSL 

than those in wealthy areas, a point with implications for valuation of multiple risks in the 

domestic  setting.  If  variations  across  risks  and  persons  are  significant,  the  question  of 

individuation should be a central part of the second generation of cost-benefit analysis—a 

step beyond the first generation debate about whether to do such analysis at all, and a step 

toward doing such analysis in a way that is more refined and more closely attuned to the 

conseq

uences of regulations in terms of both welfare and distributional equity. 

Of course it is offensive and wrong to suggest that in principle, poor people are 

“worth less” than rich people. If poor people are subject to a risk of 1/10,000, they do not 

have less of a claim to public attention than if wealthy people are subject to the same risk; 

in fact they have a greater claim, if only because they lack the resources to reduce that 

risk on their own. But the topic here is regulation rather than subsidy, and the two ought 

not  to  be  confused.  In  principle,  government  should  not  force  people  to  buy  protection 
against statistical risks at a price that seems to them excessive.24 Someone should not be 

required to pay $70 to reduce a risk of 1/100,000 if she is willing to pay no more than 

$50. The point bears on international issues as well as domestic ones. If a uniform VSL 

would benefit the poor, there is an argument for a uniform VSL. But regulation based on 

a  uniform  VSL  may  or  may  not  produce  a  better  distribution  of  income;  in  fact  any 

redistribution  may  be  perverse,  and  a  single  VSL  might  not  promote  equality  at  all.  If 

wealthy  people  are  the  principal  beneficiaries  of  a  particular  regulation  chosen  on  the 

basis of a u

niform VSL, and if the public as a whole pays for it, then any redistribution 

will be

nefit the wealthy, not the poor. And if poor people are forced to pay an amount for 

risk reduction that exceeds their WTP, desirable redistribution will hardly result; forced 

exchanges, on terms that people reject, are not a good way of redistributing wealth to the 

disadvantaged. On the other hand, it is possible that some regulatory programs, based on 

                                                

 

22 With this qualification: If poor people would be disproportionately benefited by assigning them a higher 
VSL, then there is a good argument for assigning them a higher VSL. I explore this issue below. 
23 See below. 
24 I offer a nu

mber of qualifications below. See TAN infra. 

6 

 

a  uniform  VSL,  will  help  those  in  need,  if  their  beneficiaries  receive  risk  reduction  for 

which they pay little or nothing—an issue to which I will devote considerable attention.  

A  larger  lesson  follows.  For  purposes  of  law  and  politics,  there  is  no  sensible 

answer  to  the  abstract  question  about  the  correct  monetary  value  of  human  life.  Any 

judgment  about  the  appropriate  VSL,  and  about  individuation,  must  be  heavily 

pragmatic;  it  must  rest  on  the  consequences  of  one  or  another  choice.  Whether 

government  should  use  a  higher  or  lower  VSL  across  demographic  lines  cannot  be 

answered  simply.  An  important  implication  involves  the  assessment  of  VSL  across 

nations.  A  poor  nation  would  do  well  to  adopt  a  lower  VSL  than  a  wealthy  nation;  for 

China or India, it would be disastrous to use a VSL equivalent to that of the United States 

or Can

ada. But this point should not be taken to support the ludicrous proposition that for 

donor  institutions,  both  public  and  private,  risk  reduction  in  a  wealthy  nation  deserves 

more attention than equivalent risk reduction in a poor nation. 

 

This  Article  is  organized  as  follows.  Part  II  clarifies  the  theory  behind  the 

valuation  of  statistical  lives.  The  major  point  here  is  that  regulators  do  not  really  use  a 

VSL; instead they use a mean WTP to eliminate a statistical risk. For example, agencies 

might say that they are using a VSL of $6 million, but if so, they are relying on evidence 

more or less establishing that the average person pays, or is paid, $60 to eliminate a risk 

of  1/10,000.  Part  III,  in  some  ways  the  heart  of  the  essay,  explores  the  need  for 

individuation across both risks and persons. Part IV offers a more ambitious discussion of 

the  uses  and  limits  of  willingness  to  pay  in  regulatory  policy.  It  distinguishes  between 

easy and hard cases for using WTP. The central claim here is that the argument for using 

WTP  is  strongest  when  the  beneficiaries  of  regulation  must  pay  all  of  its  cost—though 

even  in  that  event,  the  argument  is  subject  to  important  qualifications,  above  involving 

bounded  rationality.  The  argument  for  using  WTP  is  weaker  when  the  beneficiaries  of 

regulation pay only a fraction of that cost. In the latter circumstances, some people will 

benefit  from  regulation  even  if  it  is  inefficient  in  economic  terms.  I  discuss  the 

implications of this point for a uniform or fully individuated VSL.  

 

7 

 

II.  WTP: Theory and Practice 

It has now become standard for regulatory agencies to assign monetary values to 

human

  lives.  Consider  the  following  table,  which  captures  agency  practices  from  1996 

 

through 2003: 

Table 1: Agency Values of Life, 1996–2003 

Agency 

Regulation and Date 

Value of Statistical L

ife 

Dept of Transportation/Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety 
Administration 

Dept. of Health & Human 
Services/FDA 

Dept. of Agriculture Food 
Safet and Inspection Service 

y 

Dept. of Health & Human 
Services/FDA 

Office of Management and 
Budget 

EPA 

EPA 

EPA 

EPA 

Safety Requirements for Operators of Small 
Passenger-Carrying Commercial Motor 
Vehicles Used in Interstate Commerce 
August 12, 2003 
68 FR 47860-01 
Food Labeling: Trans Fatty Acids in Nutrition 
Labeling, Nutrient Content Claims, and Health 
Claims 
July 11, 2003 
68 FR 41434-01 

 Ready-
s 

Control of 1Listeria Monocytogenes in
to-Eat Meat and Poultry Product
June 6, 2003 
68 FR 34208-01 
Labeling Requirements for Systemic 
Antibacterial Drug Products Intended for 
Human Use  
February 6, 2003 
68 FR 6062-01 
Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of 
Federal Regulations 
February 3, 2003 
68 FR 5492-01 
Control of Emissions from Nonroad Large 
Spark-Ignition Engines, and Recreational 
Engines (Marine & Land-Based) 
November 8, 2002 
67 FR 68242-01  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: 
Arsenic and Clarifications to Compliance and 
New Source Contaminants Monitoring 
January 22, 2001 
66 FR 6976-01 
Control of Air Pollution from New Motor 
Vehicles: Heavy-Duty Engine and Vehicle 
Standards and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur 
Control Requirements 
January 18, 2001 
66 FR 5002-01 
Control of Air Pollution from New Motor 
Vehicles: Tier 2 Motor Vehicle Emissions 
Standards and Gasoline Sulfur Control 

$3 million 

$6.5 million 

$4.8 million 

$5 million 

$5 million 

$6 million 

$6.1 million 

$6 million 

$5.9 million 

8 

 

vities 

Licens

egulations: 

Byproducts 

National Prima
Disinfectants

Requirements 
February 10, 2000 
65 FR 6698-01 
Findings of Significant Contribution and 
Rulemaking on Section 125 Petitions for 
Purposes of Reducing Interstate Ozone 
Transport 
January 18, 2000 
65 FR 2674-01 
Final Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for 
Hazardous Waste Combustors 
September 30, 1999 
64 FR 52828-01 
ry Drinking Water R
 and Disinfection 
December 16, 1998 
63 FR 69390-01 
Financial Responsibility Requirements for 
ed Launch Acti
August 26, 1998 
63 FR 45592-01 
Quality Mammography Standards 
O
ctober 28, 199
7 
62 FR 55852-01 
Regulations Restricting the Sale and 
Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless 
Tobacco to Protect Children and Adolescents 
August 28, 1996 
61 FR 44396-01 
Pathogen Reduction; Hazard Analysis and 
ntrol Point (HACCP)
Critical Co
 Systems 
July 25, 1996 
61 FR 38806-01 
ircraft Flight Simulator Use in Pilot Training
, 
A
s 
Te
sting and Checking and at Training Center
July 2, 1996 
61 FR 34508-01 
or Labeling of Reta
of Charcoal 
May 3, 1996 
61 FR 19818-01 
le-Tube Firewo
ip
March 26, 1996 
61 FR 13084-01 

Requirements f

il Containers 

Large Mult

s Devices 

rk

EPA

 

EPA 

EPA 

Dept. of Transportation/FAA 

Dept. of Health & Human 
Services/FDA 

Dept. of Health & Human 
Services/FDA 

Dept. of Agriculture/Food 
Safety & Inspection Service 

Dept. of Transportation/FAA 

Consumer Product Safety 
Commission 

Consumer Product Safety 
Commission 

$5.9 million 

$5.6 million 

$5.6 million 

$3 million 

$2 - 3 million 

$

2.5 million 

$

1.6 million 

$

2.7 million 

$5 million 

$3 - $7 million 

 
These  number  show  substantial

  variations,  though 

less  so  than  even

  ten  years

 

ago.25 The variations appear not to have a

n

y rationale be

h

ind them; agencies with higher 

or lower  numbers  have  not  exp

lained  their choices. The prior ques

tion is how agencies 

                                                
 

25 See Adler and Posner, supra note, for a slightly dated report that shows larger disparities. 

9 

 

generate monetary amounts of this kind. Th

e answer com

es from two kinds of evidence. 

The  first  and  most  important  involves 

arkets,  producing  evidence  of 

compensation  levels  for  actual

or  consumer  goods, 

additional safety has a price; mar

ket evidence is investigated to ide

ntify that p

rice.

 The

 

27

real-world  m
  risks.26  In  the  workplace  and  f

second  kind  of  evidence  comes  from  contingent  valuation  studies,  asking  people  how 
much  they  are  willing  to  pay  to  reduce  statistical  risks.28  The  EPA’s  $6.1  million  is  a 

studie

s of actual workplac

ch workers
product of 
 
are paid to assume mortality hazards.29 The relevant risks usually are in the general range 
of  1/10,000  to  1/100,000.30  The  calculation  of  VSL  is  a  product  of  simple  arithmetic. 

e risks, attempting to dete

rmine how mu

Suppose that workers must be paid $600

, on average, to e

liminate a risk of 1/10,000. If 

so, the value of a statistical life w

ould be said to be $6 million.  

For  some  of  the  tw

o  dozen  st

udies

  on  which  age

ncie

s  currently  rely,3

1  consider

 

the following table:32  

 

Study 

arin and Psacharopoulo

Kniesner and Leith (1991) 
Smith and Gilbert (1984) 
Dillingham (1985) 
M
V.K. Smith (1976) 
Viscusi (1981) 
L
Leigh (1987) 
Garen (1988) 
 

eigh and Folsom (1984) 

s (1982

) 

Table 2: Value of Life Studies 

Method 
Labor market 
L
abor market 
Labor market 
Labor market 
L
abor market 
Labor market 
Lab
or market 
L
abor market 
Labor market 

Valu

e of Statistical Life 
ill

$0.7 m ion 
$0.8 million 
1.1 million 
3.4 milli
on 
5.7 million 
7.9 m
illion 
1
1.7 mill
ion 
12.6 million 
.3 million 
16

                                                 

ab
.g.,  James  Hammitt  and  Jin-Tau  Liu,  Effects  of  Disease  Type  and  Latency  on  the  Value  of 

26 See W. Kip Viscusi, supra note. 
27 A valu le and comprehensive overview can be found in Viscusi and Aldy, supra note. 
28  See,  e
Mortality Risk, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 73 (2004). 
29 See Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs, supra note, for discussion. 
30

 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. 

Inquiry 29, 33 (2004) (showing fatality risks ranging from about 1/100,000 to 45/100,000). 
31 For an accessible outline, see Richard W. Parker, Grading the Government, 70 U Chi L Rev 1345, 1485-
86 (2003). 
32 See EPA, Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses 89 (2000). 

10 

 

A large advantage of labor market studies of this kind is that they avoid the lively 

disputes  over  the  use  of  “willingness  to  pay”  or  “willingness  to  accept”  in  regulatory 
policy.33 In many contexts, people demand more to give up a good than they are willing 

to  pay  to  obtain  it  in  the  first  instance—a  disparity  that  much  complicates  efforts  to 
assign  monetary  values  to  regulatory  benefits,  including  mortality  and  morbidity.34  If 

people are willing to pay $25 to eliminate an existing risk of 1/100,000, but demand $100 

to incur a new risk of 1/100,000, then it is difficult to know how to proceed for purposes 

of monetary valuation of risks. Fortunately, this problem dissipates in the context of labor 

market studies. If workers who face a risk of 1/10,000 are paid $600 more for doing so, 

and if workers who refuse to face such a risk are being paid $600 less, then it is irrelevant 

whether we speak in terms of WTP or WTA.  

 

Nonetheless,  some  questions  might  be  raised  about  the  use  of  these  studies  by 
PA  and  other  agencies.35  Most  obviously,  the  studies  show  significant  variety  in  the 

E

crucial numbers, ranging fro

m $0.7 million, in 1997 dollars, 

to $16.3 million. The EPA 

has  adopted  the  $6.1  million  figure  on  the

  ground  t

hat  it  rep

resents  the  median  in  the

 

relevant  studies.  But  there

  is  a  risk  of  a

rbitrariness  in 

fastening  on

  that  median 

figure, 

certainly if we lack 

reason to believe that

 the relevant stu

dy is the mo

st accurate. I

n fact a 

more  general  look  at  the  VSL  da

ta  pro

duces  further  p

uzzles  and  w

studies find no com

pensating differential

s at all, indicati

ng a VSL of 

ider  ranges
.  Some 
zero36—implausibly 

low,  to  say  the

  least,  for  purposes  of  policy.  Others  find  that  non-unionized  workers 

receive  negati

because they f

  compensating  differenti
ve
ace mortality risks.37 Ano

als  for  risk,  th

at  is,  they  ap

pear  to  be  pa

id  less 

ther study finds

 that Africa

n-Americans 

receive 

no  significant  compensating  wage  differential  and  hence  that  their  particular  VSL  is 
zero.38 On the other hand, it is possible to find studies finding a VSL not below the range 

                                          

      

 

33 See Russell Korobkin, The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis, 97 Nw. U.L. Rev. 12
34 See id.; Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences,  Environmental  Law, 22 J. Legal Stud. 217, 246-47 
(1993). 
35  See  Parker,  supra  note,  and  Robert  Frank  &  Cass  R.
Position, 68 U. CHI. L. REV. 323 (2001), for several such questions.  
36See Peter Dorman and P. Hagstrom, Wage Compensation for Dangerous Work Revisited, 52 Indust
and Labor Relations Review 116 (1998). 
37 Viscusi a
38 Leeth and Ruser, supra note. 

  Sunstein,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  and  Relative 

nd Aldy, supra note, at 44.  

27 (2003). 

rial 

11 

 

le  1  but  above  it;  consider  the  finding that for  people who  choose  jobs  with  low 

in  Tab
level risks, the VSL is as much as $22 million.39  

The  most  recent  meta-study,  far  more  comprehensive  than  EPA’s  own  analysis, 
finds  that  most  studies  produce  a  range  of  between  $3.8  million  and  $9  million.40  The 

range  is  fairly  compressed,  in  a  way  that  disciplines  agency  decisions;  for  many 

regulations,  the  “bottom  line”  of  the  cost-benefit  assessment  will  not  be  affected  by  a 

choice of $3.8 million or $9 million for VSL. But that range still leaves significant room 

for  discretion,  in  a  way  that  would  have  significant  implications  for  policy  and  law. 

Consider the fact that the monetized value of a program that saves 200 lives would range 

from $760 million to $1.8 billion; consider also the fact that the EPA’s highly publicized 

arsenic  regulation  would  easily  fail  cost-bene
fit  analysis  with  a  $3.8  million  VSL  but 
easily pass with a $9 million VSL.41 The simple point is that the variety of the outcomes 

raises q

uestions about the reliability of any particular figure. 

In addition, most of these studies on which EPA relies are based on data from the 

1970s. Since that time, there has been significant growth in national income, in a way that 

suggests that any VSL derived from 1970s data is too low. Of course people with more 

money  are  expected  to  be  willing  to  pay  more,  other  things  being  equal,  to  reduce 

statistical risks. One study finds that at the beginning of the twentieth century, VSL was 

about $150,000 in current dollars—less than one-twentieth of the corresponding amount a 
century later.42 On reasonable assumptions, the EPA’s use of 1970s data has produced a 

significant undervaluation of the monetary value of the lives at stake, for the $6.1 million 
figure reflects no adjustment to account for changes in national real income growth.43 In 

principle, the failure to undertake an adjustment is a serious mistake. The actual amount 
might be substantially higher.44 

                                                 

39 Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 23. 
40 See id. at 18. 
41

 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. The regulation was projected  to cost about 

$200 
million, and its monetized benefits, with a $6.1 million VSL, were around $190 million. See id. It should be 
easy  to  see  that  a  $3.8  million  VSL  would  make  the  regulation  impossible  to  defend  –  and  a  $9  million 
VSL would make it impossible to challenge. 
42
 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 22.  
43 EPA has updated the relevant numbers for inflation, but it has not otherwise made adjustments. 
44

See  Dora  L.  Costa  &  Matthew  E.  Kahn,  The  Rising  Price  of  Nonmarket  Goods,  93  Am.  Econ.  Rev. 
ggesting likely current value of $12 million). For recent evidence 
o  low,  see  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Racial  Differences  in  Labor  Market 
  J.  Risk  &  Uncertainty  239,  252  tbl.5  (2003)  [hereinafter  Viscusi,  Racial 

(Papers & Proc.) 227, 229 tbl.1 (2003) (su
th
at  the  current  numbers  are  indeed  to
Values  of  a  Statistical  Life,  27

12 

 

Let  us  suppose  that  these  problems  can  be  solved  and  that  we  can  identify  a 

number,  call  it  $6  million,  that  really  represents  people’s  valuations.  It  should  be  clear 

that even if this were so, it is grossly misleading to offer the following suggestion: The 

value  of  a  statistical  life  is  $6  million.  It  would  be  much  more  accurate  to  say  that  for 

risks of 1/10,000, the median WTP, in the relevant population, is $600—or that for risks 

of 1/100,000, the median WTP is $60. If true, these statements would, on assumptions to 

be explored, be extremely helpful for purposes of policy. But even at first glance, we can 

see  that  these  numbers  need  not  be  taken  to  support  a  VSL  that  is  independent  of 
probability.45  Suppose  that  people  would  be  willing  to  pay  $60  to  reduce  a  risk  of 

1/100,000.  From  this  it  does  not  follow  that  people  would  be  willing  to  pay  $6  to 

eliminate a risk of 1/1 million, or $6000 to reduce a risk of /1000, or $60,000 to reduce a 

risk  of  1/100.  It  is  plausible  to  think  that  people’s  WTP  to  reduce  statistical  risks  is 
nonlinear.46  As  the  probability  approaches  100%,  people  become  willing  to  pay  an 

amount

  for  risk  reduction  that  arises  nonlinearly  to  100%  of  their  income;  as  the  risk 

approaches  0%,  WTP  nonlinearly  approaches  nothing.  For  a  risk  of  1  in  1million,  for 

example,  many  reasonable  people  would  be  willing  to  pay  zero,  treating  that  risk  as 

inconsequential.  

Hence the claim that VSL is $6.1 million is merely a shorthand way of saying that 

people are willing to pay from $600 to $60 to eliminate risks of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000. 

Since this is the range for risks with which most agencies deal, the relevant data is highly 

informative. For current purposes, this point is the crucial one.  

 

 

III. 

Individuation 

My basic claim is that V

  SL will inevitably vary across both risks and persons. If 

people’s WTP is higher to avoid cancer risks than risks of unanticipated, sudden deaths, 

then  the  use 

of  a  VSL,  drawn  from  studies  of  the  latter  risks,  will  ensure  insufficient 

                                                                                                                                                 
Differences], finding values as high as $15.1 million in the case of white males.  In the context of arsenic 
regulation, the EPA also noted in its sensitivity analysis that the appropriate adjustment would increase the 
VSL  from  $6.1  million  to  $6.7  million.  66
  Fed.  Reg.  at  7012.  For  recent  evidence,  suggesting  that  the 
current VSL is $4.7 for a full sample, $7 million for blue-collar males, and $8.5 for blue-collar fem
ales. See 
W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29 
(2004). 
45 See Richard Posner, forthcoming book. 
46 See id. 

13 

 

protect

ion of the exposed population. If people in different occupations are paid different 

amounts to incur a risk, then use of an uniform VSL will not track actual behavior, which 
is what it is supposed to do.47 If wealthy people show a higher WTP than poor people, 

then  a  uniform  WTP,  based  on  a  population-wide  median,  will  ensure  insufficient 

protection  of  wealthy  people  and  excessive  protection  of  poor  people—in  a  way  that 
might well prove harmful to both groups.48 

To test these issues in a highly preliminary way, I conducted a small contingent 

valuation study. Eighty-four University of Chicago law students were asked about their 

WTP  to  eliminate  each  of  five  risks  of 1/100,000.  The  simplest  of  these  risks  involved 

dying from an automobile accident as a result of a defective brake. The four other risks 

might  be  expected  to  occasion  greater  concern;  they  involved  deaths  from  lung  cancer, 

AIDS, Alzheimer’s disease, and dying in an airplane crash as a result of a terrorist attack. 

The 1/100,000 risk of dying in an automobile accident produced a mean WTP of $156, 

whereas  the  four  other  accidents  produced  significantly  higher  amounts  (ranging  from 

$184  for  the  AIDS  risk  to  $193  for  Alzheimer’s  disease).  In  addition,  there  was 

substantial  heterogeneity  across  individuals.  For  each  of  the  questions,  about  ten 

respondents were 

willing to pay nothing to eliminate the 1/100,000 risk, producing a VSL 

of  0.  A

nd  for  each  of  them,  about  fifteen  people  were  willing  to  pay  at  least  $500  to 

eliminate  the  1/100,000  risk,  producing  a  VSL  of  $50  million.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the 

possibility of substantial diversity across both risks and persons. 

 

 

A. Risks 

I have emphasized that the 

data that underlies the $6.1

 million figure comes from 

risks  o

f  accidents  in  the  workplace—and  that  even  if  this  data  can  be  generalized,  it 

would not justify a probability-independent VSL. But there is a point of greater practical 

importance.  A  1/100,000  risk  of  dying  in  a  workplace  accident  might  well  produce  a 

different WTP from a 1/100,000 risk of dying of cancer from air pollution, which might 

in turn be different from a 1/100,000 risk of dying in an airplane as a result of a terrorist 

                                                 

47 W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 
33, 39-41 (2004) 
48 On the “

might well,” see below. 

14 

 

attack,  and  that  number  might  in  turn  by  different  from  a  1/100,000  risk  of  dying  as  a 

result  of  a  defective  snowmobile.  The  very  theory  that  lies  behind  the  government’s 

current use of VSL justifies a simple conclusion: VSL should be risk-specific; it should 

not be the same across statistically equivalent risks. The use of a single number almost 

certainly produces significant blunders. 

1.  Data.  Notice  initially  that  the  very  category  of  “workplace  risks”  conceals 

relevan

t  differences.  The  American  economy  contains  a  wide  range  of  occupations  and 

industries,  and  a  uniform  VSL  should  not  be  expected  to  emerge  from  each  of  them. 

Indeed,  a  recent  study  finds  significant  differences  across  both  occupations  and 
industries,49 with blue collar workers showing a higher VSL than others.50 It is inevitable 

that a wide range of values would emerge from studies that looked separately at machine 

operators,  executive  positions,  sales,  dental  technicians,  equipment  cleaners,  security 
guards,  and  secretaries51—and  undoubtedly  diverse  values  could  be  found  within  each 

category.  

In addition, many risks controlled by the EPA are qualitatively different from the 

workplace risks that EPA has used to generate its VSL. Two differences are particularly 

important. First, the workplace studies do not involve cancer, and cancer risks are often 

involved  in  environmental  decisions.  There  is  considerable  evidence  that  the  risks 
associated  with  cancer  produce  a  higher  WTP  than  other  kinds  of  risk.52  For  example, 

Hammit and Liu find that in Taiwan, willingness to pay to elimin
ate a cancer risk is about 
one-third  larger  than  WTP  to  avoid  a  risk  of  a  similar,  chronic  degenerative  disease.53 

Some contingent valuation studies sugg

est that peo

ple are willing to pay twice as much to 

p

revent

 a cancer death as an instantaneous death.

 People seem to have a special fear of 

54

cancer, and they seem to be willing to pay more to prevent a cancer death than a sudden 

unanticipated  death,  or  a  death  from  heart  disease.

  The  “cancer  premium”  might  be 

55

                                                 

 Id.  

49 W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 
39-41 (2004) 
50
51 See id. at 33. Viscusi does not produce separate numbers for the different occupation groups, but his data 
clearly indicate that separate numbers would emerge. 
52  See  Richard  L.  Revesz,  Environmental  Regulation,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis,  and  the  Discounting  of 
Human Lives, 99 Colum. L. Rev. 941, 962–74 (1999).  
53 See Hammitt and Liu, supra note. 
54 See Id. 
55 See GEORGE TOLLEY ET AL., STAT

E OF THE ART HEALTH VALUES 339-40 (1993). 

15 

 

produced  by  the  “dread”  nature  of  cancer;  it  seems  well-established  that  dreaded  risks 
produce special social concern, holding the statistical risk constant.56  

To  be  sure,  existing  evidence  on  this  count  is  not  unambiguous.  One  study  of 
occupational  exposures  does  not  find  a  significantly  higher VSL for cancer risks.57 But 

that  study  assumes  that  occupational  cancers  account  for  10-20  percent  of  all  cancer 

deaths—

an  amount  that  is  almost  certainly  too  high.  If  occupational  exposures  account 

for 5% of all cancers—a far more realistic number—then the VSL for cancer risks may 

be  as  high  as  $12  million,  about  double  the  amount  that  EPA  now  uses.  The  current 
findings conflict58; but in principle, the VSL figures should be risk-specific, and we know 

enough to suspect that cancer risks produce an unusually high VSL. 

The second difference between workplace risks and the risks that concern EPA is 
that the latter risks seem peculiarly involuntary and uncontrollable.59 Unlike the risks of 

workplace  accidents,  pollution  risks  are  not  assumed  voluntarily  in  return  for 

compensati

on.60  A  great  deal  of 

literature  suggests 

that 

involuntary,  dread, 

uncontr
ollable, and potentially catastrophic risks produce unusually high levels of public 
concern.61  If  so,  the  numbers  that  derive  from  workplace  accidents  will  substantially 

understate willingness to pay for regulatory benefits provided by the EPA and many other 
agencies as well.62  

The implications go well beyond the distinction between workplace accidents and 

environmental risks. For example, people appear to be willing to pay far more to produce 
safety in the air than to produce safety on the highways63; it follows that VSL should be 

higher  for  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  than  for  the  National  Highway  Traffic 

                                                 

56 See Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (2000). 
57

03). 

  See  Viscusi  and  Aldy,  supra  note,  at  22.  In  the  same  vein,  see  W.  Magat  et  al.,  A  Reference    Lottery 
Metric for Valuing Health, 42 Management Science 1118 (1996) (finding no difference  between valuations 
of cancer death and auto accident death). 
58 Id. at 57. 
59 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value 
of Nothing (20
60 Of c
ourse it is possible to question the idea that workplace risks are assumed voluntarily and in return for 
compensation. For example, many workers probably do not know the risks that they face. The distinction I 
am  drawing  here  is  one  of  kind  rather  than  degree. 
  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Bad  Deaths,  14  J.  RISK  & 
UNCERTAINTY 259 (1997). 
61 See SLOVIC, The Perception of Risk, supra note. 
62 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Hein
of Nothing
63 See Carlsson et al., supra note. 

zerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value 

 (2003). 

16 

 

Safety  Administration.  Oddly,  the  former  agency  has  an  unusually  low  rather  than  an 
unusually  high  VSL.64  Some  diseases  would  produce  a  higher  VSL  than  others.  A 

1/100,0

00  risk  of  death  from  Alzheimer's  disease,  for  example,  would  almost  certainly 

produce a higher VSL than 1/100,000 risk of death from a heart attack; 1/50,000 risk of 

an  AIDS  death  would  not  produce  the  same  VSL  as  a  1/50,000  risk  of  death  from  a 

defective brake system on an automobile; most people would pay more to reduce a risk of 

dying  from  slow-acting  strokes  than  from  strokes  that  kill  outright.  There  should  be  a 

distinctive  population-wide  median  VSL  for  mortality  risks  of  airplane  accidents,  of 

cancer  from  air  pollution,  of  motor  vehicle  accidents,  of  defective  toys,  of  cancer  from 

water pollution.  

In  fact  studies  have  been  done  for  seatbelt  use,  automobile  safety,  home  fire 

detectors, and more, and they find a wide variety of numbers, with a VSL ranging from 

$770,000  (smoke  detectors,  based  on  data  in  the  1970s)  to  $9.9  million  (fatality  risks 
associated  with  safety  belts  and  motorcycle  helmets).65  And  within  each  of  these 

categories,  further  distinctions  would  undoubtedly  emerge.  All  cancer  fatalities  are  not 

the  same;  informed  people  would  surely  make  distinctions  between  those  that  involve 

long periods of suffering and those that do not. If we are really interested in basing VSL 

on WTP, a uniform num

ber, treating all statistically identical mortality risks as the same, 

is fatall

y obtuse. 

2. Practice. These claims are not entirely foreign to current regulatory policy. In 
the  context  of  arsenic  regulation,  the  EPA  was  alert  to  some  of  them.66  Hence  its  own 

sensitivity analysis for arsenic suggested the need for an upward revision of 7%, because 
of  the  involuntariness  and  uncontrollability  of  the  risk.67  With  this  revision,  along  with 

the revision for income growth, the value o
f a statistical life would rise from $6.1 million 
to  $7.2  million.68  In  fact  there  are  reasons  to  suggest  that  this  amount  might  be  far  too 

low.  Dean

  Revesz  suggests  that  “the  value  of  avoiding  a  death  from  an  involuntary, 

carcinogenic risk should be estimated as four times as large as the value of avoiding an 

                                                 

64 See Table I supra. 
65 Viscusi and Aldy, at 25. 
66 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 
67 66 Fed. Reg. at 7014. 
68 Id. 

17 

 

instantaneous workplace fatality.”69 If we take this approach, the VSL, in the context of 

arsenic, jumps from $6.1 million to $24.3 million. I am not arguing that $24.3 million is 

the correct number; I am suggesting only that VSL is almost certainly risk-specific. 

3. Qualifications. Three qualifications are important. First, psychological studies 
about  heightened  public  concern70  may  not  translate  into  higher  WTP.  Social  scientists 

might be able to show that certain qualitative factors make people especially concerned 

about  certain  risks,  but  it  is  an  independent  question  whether  and  how  much  WTP 

increase as a result. Fortunately, a number of studies of WTP contain at least suggestive 
answers to that question, demonstrating that VSL does vary significantly across areas.71  

Second,  it  is  important  not  to  think  that  there  is  a  rigid  dichotomy  between  the 
tary/uncontrollable and the voluntary/controllable.72 This is a continuum, without 

involun

sharp divisions among various points, and hence it is a mistake to believe that risks can 

be  neatly  separated  into  the  two  categories.  Are  the  risks  from  air  pollution  in  Los 

Angeles  involuntarily  incurred?  The  answer  might  seem  to  be  affirmative,  but  people 

have  a  choice  whether  or  not  to  live  in  Los  Angeles.  Are  the  risks  of  airplane  travel 

uncontrollable?  Many  people  think  so,  but  the  decision  to  fly  is  itself  under  human 

control.  Death  from  an  asteroid  seems  to  be  a  model  case  of  involuntariness,  at  an 

opposite  pole  from  hang-gliding.  But  why?  In  deciding  whether  a  risk  is  faced 

involuntarily, or w

hether it is within personal control, the underlying issues seem to be 

whethe
r  those  exposed  to  the  risk  are  exposed  knowingly  and  whether  it  is  costly  or 
otherwise  difficult  for  people  to  avoid  the  risk.73  When  risks  are  approached  in  these 

terms, it is clear that some risks are worse than others, even if the probability of harm is 

identical. This point is enough to suggest that VSL cannot be uniform across risks.  

  Third,  it  is  possible  that  extreme  aversion  to  certain  risks  reflects  a  form  of 
bounded  rationality74—and  hence  it  is  possible  to  doubt  whether  that  extreme  aversion 

should be allowed to play a role in regulatory policy. Suppose, for example, that people 

really  are  willing  to  pay  twice  as  much  to  avoid  a  cancer  risk  as  to  avoid  a  sudden, 

                                                

 

ote. 

69 See Revesz, supra note 7, at 982. 
70 See Slovic, supra n
71 See Hammitt and Liu, sup
72 See Cass R. Sunstein, Bad Deaths, 14 J. RISK & UNCE
73 See id. 
74 See 

Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay, supra note.  

ra note, and the meta-analysis in Viscusi and Aldy, supra note. 

RTAINTY 259 (1997).  

18 

 

unanticipated  death.  Must  these  numbers  be  decisive  for  purposes  of  policy,  assuming 

that  the  contingent  valuation  study  is  reliable?  They  might  not  be  if  we  have  reason  to 

believe  that  the  WTP  figures  are  not  accurately  measuring  welfare.  And  is  it  even 

plausib

le to think that the “cancer premium” is so high that it actually doubles the cost of 

death? Is it reasonable to think that a death from cancer is actually twice as bad as a death 

that  is  sudden  and  unanticipated?  To  be  sure,  a  degree  of  pain  and  suffering  typically 

accompanies  cancer,  and  this  point  helps  explain  the  obtuseness  of  using  the  same 

number for cancer risks as for risks of sudden, unanticipated deaths. But it is not easy to 

defend the set of (exotic) values that would lead to the conclusion that the relevant pain

 

and suf

fering is as bad as death itself. If WTP is not measuring welfare here, and if the 

inflated numbers for cancer deaths are a product of an intuitive recoil or terror at the idea 

of cancer, then regulators might not use the unrealistically high monetary values. To be 

least controversial, WTP numbers would reflect informed rather than reflexive judgments 

about the nature of the harms involved. 

 

 

B.  Persons 

Even when risks are identical, people are heterogeneous in their values and their 

preferences.  The  $6.1  million  itself  is  the  median  figure—it  is  the  median  of  a  set  of 

means. But everyone agrees that in workplaces and elsewhere, individual WTP is highly 

variable.  Some  of  the  variability  stems  from  different  degrees  of  aversion  to  different 

risks.  Some  people  are  especially  concerned  to  avoid  the  dangers  associated  with 

pesticides, whereas others focus on the risks of air travel; some of these differences are a 

product  of  beliefs  (about  existing  risk  levels)  and  others  of  tastes  and  values.  So

  too, 

thos

e with high levels of background risk should be expected to be willing to pay less to 

avoid an additional risk of 1/100,000 than those with low levels of background risk. If a 

relevant population faces thirty annual mortality risks of 1/10,000 or higher, it should be 

expected to show a lower VSL with respect to a new risk of 1/100,000 than a population 
whose background risks are less serious.75 The difference between the VSL of people in 

                                                 

75 See Louis R. Eeckhoudt and James K. Hammitt, Background Risks and the Value of a Statistical Life, 23 
J Risk and Uncertainty 261 (2001). 

19 

 

wealthy nations and that of people in poor nations, taken up below, is partly a product of 

the fact that the latter group generally faces far higher background risks. 

It is likely that WTP varies with respect to age as well. We might well predict that 

other things being equal, older people will show a lower WTP and hence a lower VSL, 

simply because they have fewer years left. One study, for example, finds that the VSL of 

a  48-year-old  is  10  percent  lower  than  that  of  a  36-year-old;  another  finds  that  people 
under 45 has a VSL twenty times higher than people over 65.76 The most careful analysis 

suggests that VSL peaks around age thirty, stays constant for about a decade, but declines 

from that point, so much so that the VSL for a 60-year old is approximately half of that of 
people  from  thirty  to  forty.77  These  findings  raise  particular  conundrums  in  the  case  of 

people  under  eighteen,  including  children;  how  should  government  proceed  if  the  VSL 

for those between infancy and fifteen years of age show a tiny VSL, simply because they 

have little or no money? It is implausible to use a tiny VSL for them; but what number 
should  be  used,  and  why?  Little  progress  has  been  made  on  this  question,78  with  the 
overnment using its ordinary, uniform number for children as for everyone else.79 But if 

g

we put the vexing case of valuing childr

en to one side, 

then the prevailing theory suggests 

 VSL for those at the last stages of life than for those who have many decades to 

a lower
go—and that this difference ought to be reflected in regulatory policy.80 

Along the same lines, many analysts have suggested that regulatory policy should 
focus not on statistical lives but on statistical life-years (VSLY).81 Suppose that they are 

right. If so, then the statistical lives of young people are likely to be worth more than the 

statistical  lives  of  older  people.  The  government’s  interest  in  focusing  on  VSLY  led  to 

widespread  public  objections  to  what,  under  one  proposal,  would  seem  to  be  a  “senior 

death discount”—in accordance with which someone over seventy would be “worth” 58 

                                                 

76  See  Viscusi  and  Aldy,  supra  note,  at  51.  For  contrary  evidence,  see  Sunstein,  Lives,  Life-Years,  and 
Willingness to Pay, supra note. 
77

  See  Joseph  Aldy  and  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Age  Variations  in  Workers’  Value  of  Statistical  Life  (2003), 

available on ssrn.com. 
78  For  an  overview  that  turns  out  to  be  highly  tentative  and  indeterminate,  see  Environmental  Protection 
Agency, Children’s Health Valuation Handbook (2003). 
79 See id. at 3-12-3-13, referring to Environmental Protection Agency, Guidelines for Preparing Economic 
Analyses (2000). 
80 See Sunstein, supra note. 
81 See id.  

20 

 

cents on the dollar.82 But assuming that people over 70 are willing to pay about 58%, on 

average,  of  what  people  under  70  are  willing  to  pay,  the  theory  that  underlies  current 

practic

e justifies exactly this disparity.  If the theory is right (a question to which I will 

turn), then a disparity between older people and younger people make perfect sense to the 

extent that the WTP figures justify it. 

Even  more  fundamentally,  those  with  little  to  spare  will  show  a  far  lower  VSL 

than  those  who  have  plenty.  WTP  depends  on  ability  to  pay  (ATP),  and  when  ATP  is 

low, WTP will of course be low as well, holding preferences constant. For this reason the 

VSL of people with an annual income of $50,000 will be lower than that of people with 

an annual income of $150,000. People in the former category might be willing to pay no 

more than $25 to reduce a risk of 1/100,000, where people in the latter group might be 

willing  to  pay  as  much  as  $100.  If  so,  government  should  not  require  everyone  to  pay 
$100; its decision to do so would harm those unwilling to pay that amount.83 A uniform 

VSL, of the sort that government now uses, threatens to “overprotect” the poor, in a way 

that might well be harmful to them—and also threatens to underprotect the wealthy, in a 
way that is highly likely to be harmful to them.84 

As a simple matter of fact, we would expect that unionized workers would receive 

more  compensation  for  incurring  risks—and  studies  almost  always  sho

w  a  higher  VSL 

for unio
nized workers, with amounts found to be as high as $12.3 million, $18.1 million, 
and even $44.2 million.85 We would expect to find large differences across nations, with 

VSL being higher in rich countries than in poor ones. And in fact, studies find a VSL as 

low as $200,000 for Taiwan, $500,000 for South Korea, and $1.2 million for India—but 
$21.7  million  for  Canada  and  $19  million  for  Australia.86  Consider,  for  purposes  of 
illustration, the following table87: 

 

                                      

          

 

te information and unbounded rationality; for discussion, see TAN infra. 

82 See id. 
83 I am assuming adequa
84  Compare  EPA’s  explicit  and  unexplained  refusal  to  consider  differences  “in  age,  health  status, 
socioeconomic status, gender or other characteristic of the adul
t population.” 68 Fed. Reg. 1660, 1695 (Jan. 
13, 2003). 
85 See Viscusi and
86 See id. at 27-28. 
87 Drawn fr

 Aldy, supra note, at 45, 

om id. at 26-27. 

21 

 

Table 3: VSL Across Nations 

VSL (in 2000 US$) 

Nation and year of study
Japan (1991) 
South Korea (1993) 
Canada (1989) 
India (1996/97) 
Taiwan (1997) 
Australia (1997) 
Hong Kong (1998) 
Switzerland (2001) 
United Kingdom (2000) 

$9.7 million 
$0.8 million 
$3.9–4.7 million 
$1.2–1.5 million 
$0.2–0.9 million 
$11.3–19.1 million 
$1.7 million 
$6.3–8.6 million 
$19.9 million 

 
It would follow that within the United States, wealthy populations would show a 

higher VSL than poorer populations. If a program is designed to combat health risks in 

wealthy suburbs, the VSL would be above the population-wide median; if the protected 

population is mostly in poor areas, the VSL would be below it. Currently agencies pay no 
attention to this possibility in undertaking cost-benefit analysis.88 

What about the more controversial catego

ries of race and gender? Recent studies 

show s

ignificant differences. Using workplace data from 1996 to 1998, Leeth and Ruser 

find that women’s VSL ranges from $8.1 million to $10.2 million, whereas men’s VSL is 
less than half that, ranging from $2.6 million to $4.7 million.89 Leeth and Ruser find that 

Hispanic  males  show  a  slightly  higher  VSL  than  white  males  ($5  million  to  $3.4 
million)90—and  most  strikingly,  that  African-Americans  receive  no  compensation  for 
workplace risks, producing a VSL of 0.91 Using workplace data from 1992 through 1997, 

Viscusi also finds a significant disparity across racial lines, though his numbers are quite 
th and Ruser.92 In Viscusi’s study, the VSL is highest 

different from those found by Lee

for white males and lowest for African-American males, with white females and African-

Americans  falling  between  the  poles.  More  particularly,  Viscusi  finds  that  the  overall 
white VSL is $15 million, while the overall African-American VSL is $7.2 million.93 For 

                                                 

88 See Adler and Posner, supra note. 
89 See Leeth and Ruser, supra note, at 266. 
90 Id. at 270. 
91 Id. at 275.  
92 See Viscusi, Raci
93 See Viscusi, Racial Differ

al Differences, supra note, at 252. 
ences, supra note, at 252. 

22 

 

white  females,  the  overall  VS

L  is  $9.4  million,  compared  to

  $18.8  million  for  white 

males; for Africa

n-American females, the o

veral

l VSL is $6.9 million

, compared to $5.9 

million for Afric

an-American m

for blue-collar m

ales and $8.5 million

ales. Another study by Viscusi finds a VSL of $7 million 
les.94 The differences between 

e-collar fema

 for blu

Leeth  and  Ruser

  on  the  one  han

d  and  Visc

usi  on  the  other  r

emains  a  puzzle.  For  my 

purposes,  the  central  point  is  that  demographic  differences  in  VSL  are  entirely  to  be 

expected, and they are found in both studies.  

 

 

C

. Theor

y and Practice 

If

 we put the foregoing points together, we can see that there is not one VSL, but 

an exce

ptionally large number of VSLs. In fact each of us has not one VSL but a number 

of them, targeted to each risk that each of us faces. A policy that truly tracks WTP would 

seek to provide each person with the level of protection for which he is willing to pay to 

reduce each risk. Tracking WTP is the goal that underlies current practice; and apart from 

questions of administrability, it calls for a maximum level of ind v

i iduation.  

1. A thought  experiment. As a thought experiment, suppose that an all-knowing 

regulator could costlessly determine each person’s WTP for each statistical risk that she 

faces—and  perfectly  match  the  level  of  regulatory  protection  to  that  WTP.  In  these 

circumstances, the regulator should give each person no more and no less than his WTP 

for each risk that he faces. (In cases in which people’s WTP is low because they are poor, 

they might be subsidized; but they would not be forced to purchase goods for an amount 
in excess of their WTP. I will return to this point,95 but subsidies are not my topic here.) 

Under  this  approach,  regulatory  benefits  would  be  treated  the  same  as  every  other 

commodity that is traded on markets, including  afety itself. Of course most people face 

s

extremely  serious  problems  in  dealing  with  risk,  stemming  both  from  an  absence  of 
information and from bounded rationality.96 The all-knowing regulator would overcome 

these problems and provide people with what they would want if they did not suffer from 

them. If we could do this, then the current theory would be perfectly implemented. If so, 

it would follow that with full individuation, overall WTP would be lower for poor people 

                                   
, Value of Life, supra note, at 39. 

             
94 See Viscusi
95 See TAN below. 
96 See Christine Jolls et al., A Behavioral Approach to Law and Econom

 

ics, 50 Stan L Rev 1471 (1998). 

23 

 

than for wealthy people, for African-Americans than for whites, and (possibly) for men 

than for women. But under this thought experiment, government would not discriminate 

against  any  group  by  deciding  (for  example)  on  a  high  VSL  for  programs  with  95% 

whites  and  a  lower  VSL  for  programs  with  55%  African-Americans.  The  difference 

would  be  a  product  of  aggregations  of  fully  individual  VSL—aggregations  of  the  kind 

that the most conventional markets, including those for automobiles and consumer goods, 

now provide.  

Of  course  there  are  two  practical  problems  with  taking  the  thought  experiment 

se

riously. The first is that we do not

 know the WTP of every in

dividual, and as a practical 

matter,

 it is not possible to find out. The second problem is that regulatory benefits are 

often collective goods—goods that cannot feasibly be provided to one without also being 

provided to many. In the context of air pollution, for example, it is not possible to provide 

cleaner  air  for  some  without  providing  cleaner  air  for  many  or  all.  In  regulating  air 

pollution and water pollution, individuation is simply not an option.  

These  problems  are  fatal  objections  to  full  individuation.  But  they  are  not  fatal 

objections to more individuation. At a minimum, agencies should be encouraged to take 

account  of  existing  research  in  their  sensitivity  analyses,  which  would  result  (for 
example) in increased “upper bound” estimates for cancer risks.97 In addition, disparities 

in VSL findings might be mapped onto different agency estimates, producing reasonable 

rather than arbitrary differences across agencies. If, for example, the risks of death from 

workplace  accidents  produce  a  lower  number  than  the  risks  of  death  from  consumer 

products,  then  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Administration  might  have  a  lower 

VSL  than  the  Consumer  Product  Safety  Administration.  We  could  easily  imagine  a 

research program in which the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs attempts to 

elicit far more information on VSL across different risks. A movement in this direction 

need not raise troubling ethical questions.  

It would be far more controversial to suggest that agencies should adopt different 

VSLs  depending  on  whether  the  affected  population  is  especially  wealthy  or  especially 

poor. But at the very least, agencies should adjust VSL to changes in national wealth over 

                                                 

97 See the discussion of the sensitivity analysis for arsenic, supra note.  

24 

 

time, producing a higher amount than would come from inflation adjustments alone.98 Or 

suppose,  for  example,  that  a  regulation  is  designed  to  protect  migrant  farmworkers, 

expected  to  show  a  low  VSL.  Current  studies  in  fact  estimate  the  relationship  between 
income  and  VSL,99  allowing  agencies  to  make  suitable  adjustments.  And  when  the 

population  is  relatively  wealthy,  the  agency  might  adopt  a  higher  VSL.  For  present 

purposes,  I  am  suggesting  only  that  an  approach of this  kind is indicated by the theory 

that  government  now  uses.  I  will  turn  in  Part  IV  to  the  larger  questions  that  such  an 

approach would make it necessary to answer. 

2. Optimal individuation. The larger question is simple: What is the optimal level 

of  individuation  with  respect  to  the  value  of  life?  The  answer  depends  in  part  on  how 

much  we  know.  Even  in  markets,  individuals  are  not  usually  asked,  and  charged,  their 

particular  WTP.  In  real  estate  markets,  negotiation  between  individuals  is  the  usual 

practice. But for ordinary consumer goods—cereal, soap, casebooks, subscriptions to law 

reviews—a standard price emerges from the forces of supply and demand. It seems clear 

that a u

niform value of life, cutting across domains in which those forces almost certainly 

establish  disparate  amounts,  fits  poorly  with  the  theory  that  currently  underlies 

government practice. It is also clear that full individuation is not feasible. The appropriate 

intermediate approach depends on two familiar variables: the costs of decisions and the 

costs of errors. In the early years of cost-benefit analysis, a uniform number is probably 

the  best  that  agencies  could  do.  As  better  information  emerges  about  different  VSLs 

across  risks  and  persons,  the  use  of  a  uniform  number  will  be  increasingly  difficult  to 

support. And if those differences are substantial, the argument for further differentiation 

will  be  strengthened.  We  might  see  a  uniform  number  as  a  plausible  “first  generation” 

response  to  the  problems  posed  by  cost-benefit  analysis.  The  second  generation  is  now 

well underway, and hence finer distinctions will be increasingly hard to resist. 

 

 

D.  Administrative Law 

How do these points bear on the legality of agency action? Courts have started to 

develop principles by which to review agency decisions about how to assess the costs and 

                                                

 

98 See note supra. 
99 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note. 

25 

 

benefits  of  regulation.100  Some  statutes  explicitly  require  agencies  to  balance  costs 

against benefits, and under such statutes the agency’s choices about valuation might be 
challenged as unreasonable or arbitrary.101 If an agency used a VSL of $200,000, it would 

almost certainly be assigning an arbitrarily and hence unlawfully low monetary value; if 
it  used  a  VSL  of  $40  million,  its  selection  would  be  arbitrary  high.102  In  all  cases  the 

agency is required to produce a reasonable explanation for why it has proceeded one way 
rather than another.103 

In view of the arguments made thus far, we could easily imagine legal challenges 

to agen

cy decisions. Suppose that the EPA continues to use the $6.1 million figure, based 

on  workplace  studies.  The  agency’s  decision  would  be  vulnerable  on  several  grounds. 

First,  it  might  be  too  low  in  light  of  the  growth  in  national  income.  Second,  it  fails  to 

account  for  evidence  that  pollution  risks,  especially  if  cancer  is  involved,  produce  a 

higher VSL than workplace risks. Third, it does not, on the facts stated, come to terms 

with  the  possibility  that  the  protected  group  is  wealthier  or  poorer  than  the  group 

involved  in  the  workplace  studies.  All  of  these  challenges  are  plausible  under  existing 

law.  As  new  and  better  data  emerge,  they  become  stronger  still.  It  is  certainly  possible 

than a decade from now, the use of a uniform figure will seem obtuse, even indefensible. 

Is there anything than agencies might say in response? They might urge that the 

existing evidence is too ambiguous and contestable to justify a change in current practice. 
Most studies based on more recent data find a VSL in the range of $6.1 million.104 With 

respect to cancer, EPA’s Science Advisory Board (SAB) rejected an upward revision for 

especially  dread  illnesses,  finding  that  the  existing  literature  does  not  justify  any  such 
revision;  and  some  evidence  directly  supports  the  view  of  the  SAB.105 To be sure, it is 

more  than  plausible  to  think  that  VSL  is  wealth-dependent;  but  EPA  might  urge  that  a 

uniform  number  is  preferable  on  moral  and  distributive  grounds  and  not  grea

tly  out  of 

line  with  existing  evidence.  In  any  case,  a  single  number  might  have  the  advantage  of 

e

asy  administrability—and  produce  results  that  in  general  would  be  the  same  as  those 

                                            
eading case is Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1991). See also American 

     
100 The l
Dental Association v. Martin, 984 F.2d (7th Cir. 1993). 
101
 See, e.g., 15 USC 2601© (Toxic Substances Control Act). 
102 This is an implication of Corrosion Proof Fittings, supra note.  
103 Id.  
104 See, e.g., Leeth
105 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note 5

 and Ruser, supra note.  

7. 

26 

 

produced  by  imaginable  variations.  Most  of  the  time,  the  agency’s  choice  will  not  be 

affected if it selects a VSL of $3.5 million or $10 million; if so, a uniform number would 

seem acceptable.  

In  many  cases,  I  believe  that  these  responses  are  unconvincing  as  a  matter  of 

policy. But in light of the properly limited role of courts in the oversight of agency action, 
they  are  convincing  as  a  matter  of  law.106  Courts  should  allow  agencies  considerable 

room  to  maneuver  here,  at  least  until  the  evidence  against  a  uniform  number  becomes 

overwh

elming. Permission to adopt such a number has an important corollary: An agency 

would  be  on  firm  legal  ground  if  it  attempted  to  make  adjustments  of  the  sort  I  have 

suggested, even if current evidence does not unambiguously support those adjustments. 

IV. Why WTP? Easy Cases, Hard Cases 

 
Thus far I have assumed that the theory behind current practice is straightforward—

that it depends on an empirical elicitation of people’s WTP as the foundation for VSL. If 

the assumption is correct, then a high degree of individuation is justified. But perhaps the 

assumption  is  false.  Perhaps  the  prevailing  theory  does  rely  on  elicited  WTP,  but  also 
adopts a norm in favor of the equality of persons (and possibly mortality risks as well).107

 

Might 

that  more  complex  theory  be  correct?  In  any  case,  what  is  the  argument  for 

embodying  people’s  actual  WTP  in  regulatory  policy?  Why  should  anyone  care  about 

actual  WTP  at  all?  Why  should  government  conduct  cost-benefit  analysis  with  close 
reference to VSL108? 

 

  

 
Let  us  begin  with  easy  cases.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  assume  a  society  in 

A. Easy Cases 

which  people  face  multiple  risks  of  1/100,000,  and  in  which  every  person  is  both 

adequately informed and willing to pay no more and no less than $60 to eliminate each of 

those  risks.  Assume  too  that  the  cost  of  eliminating  these  1/100,000  risks  is  widely 

va

riable,  ranging  from  close  to  zero  to  many  billions.  Assume  finally  that  the  cost  of 

eliminating any risk is borne entirely by those

 who benefit from risk elimination. Under 

                                                 

106 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, for more extended discussion.  
107 Some support for this position can be fo
108 These questions are pressed in Ackerm

und in the remarks of EPA, quoted in note supra. 
an and Heinzerling, supra note.  

27 

 

that  assumption,  regulation  imposes  the  equivalent  of  user’s  fee;  for  example,  people’s 

water bills will entirely reflect the costs of a policy that eliminates a 1/100,000 of getting 

cancer from arsenic in drinking water. If the per-person cost is $100, each water bill will 

be increased by exactly that amount. 

1. The straightforward argument. With these assumptions, the argument for using 

WTP  is  straightforward.  Regulation  amounts  to  a  forced  exchange;  it  tells  people  that 

they must purchase certain benefits for a certain amount. Why should government force 

people  to  pay  for  things  that  they  do  not  want?  By  hypothesis,  a  forced  exchange  on 

terms that people dislike will make them worse off. The case for using WTP depends on 

the simple idea that government should make Pareto-superior moves (those that make at 

least  one  person  better  off  without  making  anyone  worse  off)  and  that  it  should  avoid 

mak ng  Pareto-inferior  m

i

oves  (those  that  make  at  least  one  person

  worse  off  without 

mak
ing anyone better off). At first glance, use of WTP and VSL, on the assumptions I am 
making,  seems  hard  to  contest.109  For  purposes  of  evaluating  regulation,  it  does  not 

matter  if  the  existing  distribution  of  income  is  unjust  or  if  poor  people  are,  in  an 

intelligible  sense,  coerced  to  run  certain  risks.  The  remedy  for  unjust  distributions,  and 

for that form of coercion, is not to require people to buy regulatory benefits on terms that 

they find unacceptable.  

 

Consider how this argument works with respect to risks and persons. Suppose that 

people are willing to pay no more than $50 to avoid a 1/100,000 risk of dying in a car 

crash,  but  they  are  w

illing  up  to  $100  to  avoid  a  1/100,000  risk  of  dying  of  cancer.  If 

govern

me

nt uses a WTP for both risks of $75, it will force people to pay more than they 

want to void the risks associated with a

 a

irplane crashes, 

and less than they want to avoid 

risks o

f cancer. Why should government do that? And if the argument is convincing in 

this  example,  it  should  apply  in  numerous  cases  in  which  WTP  and  VSL  vary  across 

risks. 

                                                 

109 I am putting to one side the possibility that WTP and hence VSL reflect competition for better relative 
position; if so, the VSL numbers, based on market evidence, are too low. See Frank and Sunstein, supra 
note.  In  brief:  Suppose  that  workers  (for  example)  are  willing  to  pay  only  $250  annually  to  eliminate  a 
1/10,000 risk; suppose too that worker well-being depends, in large part, on relative income, not absolute 
income;  and  suppose  finally  that  workers  would  be  willing  to  pay  more  than  $250  if  all  workers  were 
simultaneously  making  the  same  payment,  because  in  that  event,  rel
ative  position  would  not  be 
compromised.  Under  these  assumptions,  the  WTP  numbers,  based  on  market  evidence  o
r    contingent 
valuation studies, underestimate VSL by a significant amount. See id.  

28 

 

 

With respect to persons, the argument is more controversial, above all because it 

treats poor people as less valuable (literally) than poor people. But at least at first glance, 

differences  are  appropriate  here  as  well.  The  reason  is  not  that  poor  people  are  less 

valuable  than  rich  people.  It  is  that  no  one, rich or poor, should be  forced to pay more 

than  th

ey  are  willing  to  pay  for  the  reduction  of  risks.  This  idea  embodies  a  norm  of 

equality. And if poor people are unwilling to pay much for the reduction of serious risks, 

the  appropriate  response  is  not  a  compelled  purchase,  but  a  subsidy.  Suppose,  for 

example,  that  each  member  of  a  group  of  relatively  poor  people,  earning  less  than 

$30,000 annually, is willing to pay only $25 to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000—about one-

half,  let  us  suppose,  of  the  nation’s  population-wide  median  of  $50.  Should  regulators 

require  every  citizen,  including  those  in  the  relatively  poor  group,  to  pay  $50?  In 

principle,  the  government  should  force  exchanges  only  on  terms  that  people  find 

acceptable, at least if it is genuinely concerned with their welfare.  

 
Does the easy case seem implausibly unrealistic? In many contexts, it certainly is. 
The  costs  of  air  pollution  regulation  are  not  fully  borne  by  its  beneficiaries.110  But  for 

workers’ compensation regulation, the situation is very different: Nonunionized workers 

faced a dollar-for-dollar wage reduction, corresponding almost perfectly to the expected 
 received.111 For drinking water regulation, something similar is 

value of the benefits they

involved. The cost of regulations is passed onto consumers in the form of higher water 
bills.112 Hence the easy case finds a number of real-world analogues. 

2. Objections. There are several possible objections. They point to some important 

qualifications,  but  none  of  them  is  a  convincing  refutation  of  the  straightforward 

argument. 

(a) Adaptive preferences and “miswanting.” The first objection would emphasize 

the possibility that people’s preferences have adapted to existing opportunities, including 
deprivation.113  Perhaps  people  show  a  low  WTP  for  environmental  goods,  including 

health  improvements,  simply  because  they  have  adjusted  to  environmental  bads, 

including  health  risks.  Perhaps  people’s  WTP  reflects  an  effort  to  reduce  cognitive 

                                                 

110 Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air Act Regulation, 24 Regulation 34 (2001). 
111  Price  Fishback  and  Shawn  Everett  Kantor,  A  Prelude  to  the  Welfare  State  (Chicago:  University  of 
Chicago Press, 1998). 
112 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note.  
113 See Jon Elster, Sour Grapes (1983); Adler and Posner, supra note.  

29 

 

dissonance  through  the  conclusion  that  risks  are  lower  than  they  actually  are.114  To 
generalize the objection, perhaps people suffer from a problem of “miswanting”115; they 

want  things  that  do  not  promote  their  welfare,  and  they  do  not  want  things  that  would 

promote their welfare. If this is so, then WTP loses much of its underlying justification; 
people’s  decisions  do  not  actually  promote  their  welfare.116  And  if  government  can  be 

confident  that  people  are  not  willing  to  pay  for  goods  from  which  they  would  greatly 

benefit, then government should abandon WTP.  

In  some  contexts,  this  objection  raises  serious  problems  for  neoclassical 

economics and for unambivalent enthusiasm for freedom of choice. But in the context of 

ordinary  regulatory  policy,  this  objection  has  more  theoretical  than  practical  interest. 

Typically we are speaking here of steps that would reduce low level mortality risks (say, 

1/50,000) and here there is no reason to believe that the use of informed WTP (say, $100) 

is a product of adaptive preferences. 

(b)  Inadequate  information  and  bounded  rationality.  A  closely  related  objection 

would  point  to  an  absence  of  information  and  to  bounded  rationality.  People  have  a 
notoriously  difficult  time  in  dealing  with  low-probability  events.117  If  people  are  not 

aware of what they might be gaining by regulation, their WTP might be too low. And if 

people are unable to understand the meaning of ideas like “1 in 50,000,” or to respond 

rationally  to  such  ideas,  then  there  are  serious  problems  with  relying  on  WTP.  In 

imaginable  circumstances,  this  is  a  serious  difficulty  for  the  use  of  WTP  and  VSL. 

Perhap

s people’s WTP reflects excessive discounting of future health benefits; if workers 

are ignoring the future, or applying an implausibly high discount rate, then there is a good 

argument fo

r putting their WTP to one side.  

By hypothesis, however, there is no such problem here. We are dealing with cases 

in which WTP is a result of adequate information and in which bounded rationality is not 

leading people to err. In any case the relevant numbers come from contingent valuation 

                                                 

 See George A. Akerlof, An Economic Theorist’s Book of Tales 123-37 (1984). 

114
115 Daniel T. Gilbert & T.D. Wilson, Miswanting, in Thinking and Feeling:  The Role of Affect in Social 
Cognition  178  (Joseph  P.  Forgas  ed.,  2000);  Timothy  D.  Wilson  &  Daniel  T.  Gilbert,  Affective 
Forecasting, Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, June 2003, at 345. 
116  For  general  discussion,  see  Daniel  Kahneman,  A  Psychological  Perspective  on  Economic
E
Experienced Utility, 11
2 Q.J. Econ. 375, 379–80 (1997). 
117  The  literature  on  this  point  is  vast.  For  overviews,
Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law, 112 Yale L.J. 6

s,  93  Am. 
con.  Rev.  (Papers  &  Proc.)  162  (2003);  Daniel  Kahneman  et  al.,  Back  to  Bentham?    Explorations  of 

  see  Jolls  et  al.,  supra  note;  Cass  R.  Sunstein, 

1 (2002). 

30 

 

studies  or  market  evidence  in  which  decisions  are  adequately  informed.  If  not, 

appropriate adjustments should be made. 

(c)  Rights.  A  quite  different  objection  would  point  to  people’s  rights.  Perhaps 

people  have  a  right  not  to  be  subjected  to  risks  of  a  certain  magnitude,  and  the  use  of 

WTP  will  violate  those  rights.  And  it  does  seem  fully  reasonable  to  say  that  whatever 

their WTP, human beings should have a right not to be subject to risks above a particular 

level.  Imagine,  for  example,  that  poor  people  live  in  a  place  where  they  face  a  1/20 

annual 

risk  of  dying  from  water  pollution;  it  makes  sense  to  say  that  the  government 

should reduce that risk even if people are willing to pay only $1 to eliminate it and the 
per-person cost is $100.118  

As  an  abstract  claim  about  people’s  rights,  the  objection  is  entirely  correct. 

Something has gone badly wrong if people are exposed to serious risks and if their WTP 

prevents  them,  and  is  invoked  to  p

revent  their  government,  from  doing  anything  in 

respons

e. It would be foolish to suggest that WTP is determinative of the appropriate use 

of government  subsidies; a redistributive policy hardly tracks people’s WTP. (Would it 

make sense to say that government will give poor people a check for $100 only if they 

are  willing  to  pay  $100  for  the  check?)  And  in  many  cases  people  are  subject  to  risks 

whose magnitude is indeed a violation of rights. But this point has little force against the 

particular  argument  I  am  making.  The  initial  problem  is  that  in  the  cases  under 

discussion,  rights  of  this  kind  are  usually  not  involved;  we  are  speaking  here  of 

statistically  small  risks.  Suppose  that  this  response  is  unconvincing  and  that  rights  are 

indeed involved. If so, there is a still more fundamental point. When rights are involved, 

the proper response is not to force people to 

buy protection that they do not want, but to 

provide
 a  subsidy  that  will  give  them the  benefit for free or enable them to receive the 
benefit  at  what  is,  for  them,  an  acceptable  price.119  Nothing  here  is  meant  to  deny  the 

possibility  that  government  should  provide  certain  goods  via  subsidy,  or  indeed  that 
subjection  to  risks  above  a  certain  level  is  a  violation  of  rights.120 The question here is 

                                                 

118  I  bracket  the  possibility  that rights are resource-dependent and simply assume here that risks above a 
certain level should count as violative of rights. 
119I put to one side the question whether people should be given in-kind benefits or instead lump sums. 
120  There  is  s  separate  question,  not  addressed  here,    whether  and  when  subjection  to  risks  of  harm  (as 
opposed  to  actual  harm)  is  itself  a  harm.  See  Matthew  Adler,  Risk,  Death  and  Harm:  The  Normative 
Foundations of Risk Regulation, 87 Minn. L. Rev. 1293 (2003). 

31 

 

one  of  regulation  under  the  stated  assumptions.  So  long  as  that  is  the  question,  use  of 

WTP does not violate anyone’s rights. 

(d)  Democracy  vs.  markets.  An  independent  objection  would  stress  that  people 

are citizens, not merely consumers; it would urge that regulatory choices should be made 
after citizens have deliberated with one another about their preferences and values.121 The 

argument  against  forced  exchanges  treats  people  as  consumers;  it  sees  their  decisions 

about  safety  as  the  same  as  their  decisions  about  all  other  commodities.  For  some 
decisions,  this  approach  is  badly  misconceived.122  Our  constitutional  system  is  a 
deliberative  democracy,123  not  a  maximization  machine,  and  many  social  judgments 

should  be  made  by  citizens  engaged  in  deliberative  discussion  with  one  another  rather 

than by

 aggregating the individual choices of consumers.124  

In the context of racial and sex discrimination, for example, the legal system does 

not  aggregate  people’s  WTP;  the  level  of  discrimination  is  not  set  by  using  market 

evidence or contingent valuation studies to see how much people would be willing to pay 

to  discriminate  (or  to  be  free  from  discrimination).  So  too,  the  prohibition  on  sexual 

harassment  does  not  emerge  from  asking  anything  about  WTP.  Through  political 

processes, citizens have decided that certain forms of discrimination are illicit, whatever 

people’s  WTP.  The  protection  of  endangered  species  might  be  understood  in  similar 

terms.  On  reasonable  assumptions,  it  would  make  little  sense  to  aggregate  people’s 

willingness  to  pay  in  deciding  in  deciding  whether  and  when  to  protect  members  of 

endangered  species;  this  is  a  moral  question  to  be  resolved  through  democratic 

discussion,  not  through  exercises  in  consumer  sovereignty.  The  question  of  animal 

welfare  is  closely  analogous.  Laws  that  forbid  cruelty  to  animals,  and  that  impose 

affirmative  duties  of  protection  on  human  beings,  stem  not  from  anything  involving 
WTP,  but  from  a  belief  that  moral  commitments  call  for  them.125  Thus  Amartya  Sen 

emphasizes  that  “discussions  and  exchange, and even political arguments, contribute  to 

                                                

 

121 See Elizabeth Anderson, Value in Ethics and Economics (1993); Ackerman and Heinzerling, supra note.  
122 See Anderson, supra note. 
123 See William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (1994). 
124  See  the  discussion  of  “government  by  discussion”  in  Amartya  Sen,  Rationality  and  Freedom  287-89 
(2001). 
125 See Gary Francione, An Introduction to Animal Rights (2001)

. 

32 

 

the  formation  and  revision  of  values,”126  and  urges  that  in  the  particular  context  of 

environmental  protection,  solutions  require  us  “to  go  beyond  looking  only  for  the  best 

on  of  existing  individual  preferences,  or  the  most  acceptable  procedures  for 

reflecti
choices based on those preferences.”127 

These  claims  are  both  fundamental  and  correct;  they  point  to  some  serious 

limitations on the use of WTP for purposes of policy. But it is important not to read such 

objections  for  more  than  they  are  worth.  In  trading  off  safety  and  health  in  our  own 

private lives, we do not have static values and preferences. Much of the time, our choices 

are  a  product  of  reflection,  even  if  we  are  simply  acting  as  consumers.  Reflection  and 

deliberation, including reflection and deliberation with others, is hardly absent from the 

market domain. To be sure, moral questions are not to be reso

lved by aggregating private 

willing

ness  to  pay.  Sometimes  people’s  preferences,  even  though  backed  by  WTP,  are 

morally  off-limits,  and  policy  should  not  take  account  of  them.  In  addition,  people  are 

sometimes unwilling to pay a great deal for goods that have strong moral justifications; 

animal welfare is an example. In these circumstances, the market model is inapplicable.  

But  do  these  arguments  suggest  that  government  should  override  individual 

choices about how much to spend to eliminate low-level risks, even when those choices 

are adequately informed? For environmental protection generally, it is indeed important 

to go beyond “the best reflection of existing individual preferences.” But this point does 

not mean that people should be required to pay (say) $100 to eliminate mortality risks of 

1/100,000 when they are willing to pay only $75. If people’s WTP reflects an absence of 

information  or  insufficient  deliberation,  then  it  is  important  for  other  people,  in 

government as elsewhere, to draw their attention to that fact. And in some cases, a low 

WTP might be overridden on the ground that it is rooted in errors, factual or otherwise. 

But these points should not be taken as a general objection to governmental reluctance to 

force people to reduce statistical risks at an expense that they deem excessive. Here is one 

way  to  understand  the  argument  I  am  making:  Ours  is  a  deliberative  democracy,  to  be 

sure,  but  in  that  democracy,  it  is  valuable  for  regulators  to  consider  more  fully 

in

dividuated VSLs in deciding how to proceed, at least under the stated assumptions.  

                                                 

126 Sen, supra note, at 287. 
127 Id. at 289. 

33 

 

(e)  Very  low  probabilities  and  catastrophic  risks.  Suppose  that  everyone  in  the 

United States faces an annual death risk of 1/10,000,000—and that the risk, if it comes to 

fruition, will kill every person in the country. The expected number of annual deaths is 

26,  which  would  produce  expected  annual  costs  in  excess  of  $158  million,  assuming  a 

VSL of

 $6.1 million. But if we attempt to elicit each individual’s WTP to avoid a risk of 

1/10,000,000,  we  might  well  produce  a  number  very  close  to  zero—yielding  both  26 

expected annual fatalities and expected annual costs very close to zero. This seems to be 

an  anomaly;  is  it  really  sensible  to  conclude  that  the  prevention  of  26  deaths  is  worth 

nothing?  A  fully  ex  ante  perspective,  based  on  people’s  WTP  to  avoid  very  low 

probability risks, suggests an affirmative answer. But assigning a value near zero, for the 

prevention of dozens of deaths, seems quite implausible. In cases of this kind, we seem to 

find a serious problem with the ex ante perspective on VSL. 

This  conclusion  understates  the  problem.  In  the  case  at  hand,  the  risk  is 

potentially catastrophic; if the 1/10,000,000 chance comes through, every American will 

be  dead.  Even  if  people  show  a  WTP  near  zero  to  avoid  a  risk  of  that  size,  it  does  not
 
ght to think that the nation should spend almost nothing to prevent it.128 The point 

seem ri

has a general bearing on precautions against low probability risks of catastrophe: Some 

degree  of  prevention  is  justified  even  if  WTP  numbers  do  not  justify  them.  Part  of  the 

problem with those numbers is that if individual behavior is consulted, it will not reflect a 

“catastrophe premium” or “extermination premium” that would almost certainly emerge 

if  it  were  possible  to  test  for  it.  But  part  of  the  problem  may  be  that  WTP  is  not  an 

adequate  measure  of  social  responses  to  catastrophes,  perhaps  because  people  are  not 

familiar with making choices about risks of that sort. 

I believe that this is a sound objection to the use of a (low or near-zero) VSL in 

the context of catastrophic risks, even if the WTP numbers justify that VSL. But this is an 

extremely  limited  objection;  it  does  not  apply  to  the  overwhelming  number  of  cases  in 

which VSL is used.  

(f) Third party effects. A final objection would point to effects on third parties. If 

outsiders would be adversely affected, and if their welfare is not being considered, then 

the  WTP  calculus  is  seriously  incomplete.  This  point  creates  a  general  and  badly 

                               

                 

 

128 See Richard

 Posner, supra note.  

34 

 

neglect

ed problem for WTP as it is currently used: Agencies consider people’s WTP to 

eliminate  statistical  risks,  without  taking  account  of  the  fact  that  others—especially 

family members and close friends—would also be willing to pay something to eliminate 

those risks. John might be willing to pay $25 to eliminate his own risk of 1/100,000, but 

his  wife  Jane  might  be  willing  to  pay  $25  to  eliminate  John’s  risk  too;  if  we  add  the 

WTP, on John’s behalf, of John’s friends and relatives, the total WTP might soon exceed 

$100. This point is a real problem for existing uses of WTP.  

But we are stipulating that there are no third party effects here. The argument for 

using WTP, on the stated assumptions, is that government should not force people to buy 

goods  that  are  not  worthwhile  for  them.  At  least  at  first  glance,  this  argument  seems 
sound with respect to statistical risks of the kind on which I am focusing here.129  

 

 

B

. WTP and Easy Cases: Demographic Differences, International Differences 

1.  Rich  and  poor.  Suppose  that  poor  people  are  willing  to  pay  only  $20  to 

eliminate a statistical risk of 1/100,000, but that wealthy people are willing to pay $60. It 

would follow that the VSL would be lower for poor people than for wealthy people—and 

that  a  regulatory  policy  that  focuses  on  WTP  would  provide  a  higher  VSL  for  wealthy 

people  ($6  million)  than  for  poor  people  ($2  million).  Is  this  unjust  or  unfair  to  poor 

people? On the current assumptions, it is not. Government should not force poor people 

to buy more than their WTP to eliminate statistical risks; forced exchanges of this kind do 

poor  people  no  good  and  some  harm.  It  is  tempting  to  justify  a  uniform  VSL,  one  that 

does not distinguish between rich and poor, on the ground that it embodies a form of risk 
equity,  treating  every  person  as  no  more  and  no  less  than  one130  and  redistributing 

resourc

es in the direction of poor people. But this is an error. A uniform WTP, taken (let 

us suppose) from a population-wide median, does not produce redistribution toward the 

poor,  any  more  than  any  other  kind  of  forced  exchange.  Government  does  not  require 

people to buy Volvos

, even though Volvos would reduce statistical risks. If government 

                                                

 

129  Note  that  the  argument  would  not  apply  to  risks  faced  by  nonhuman  animals;  in  that  event,  people’s 
WTP could not tell the whole story. 
130  See  Frank  Ackerman  and  Lisa  Heinzerling,  Priceless:  On  Knowing  the  Price  of  Everything  and  the 
Value of Nothing (2003). 

35 

 

required everyone to buy Volvos, it would not be producing desirable redistribution.131 A 

uniform VSL has some of the same characteristics as a policy that requires people to buy 

Volvos. 

2. Rich countries, poor countries. The point has significant implications for global 

risk  regulation.  I  have  suggested  that  people  in  poor  nations  show  a  lower  VSL  than 
people in wealthy nations.132 Building on evidence of this kind, some assessments of the 

effects of global warming find far higher monetized costs from deaths of people in rich 
es than from deaths of people in poor countries.133 In its Second Report in 1995, 

countri

the  International  Panel  on  Climate  Change  calculated  that  a  life  in  an  industrialized 

country  was  worth  $1.5  million,  while  a  life  in  a  developing  country  was  worth  only 
$150,000.134  These  assessments  have  been  highly  controversial;  John  Broom

e,  for 

example, notes that under this approach, an American life is worth 10 or 20 Indian lives, 
dgment that he deems “absurd.”135 Hence some analysts, including the Internationa

a ju

l 

Panel, h

ave opted for a world-wide VSL of $1 million, a choice that seems quite arbitrary 

and potentially harmful to people in rich nations and poor ones alike. The problem raises 

important dilemmas. 

       a.  Abstract  values?  How  should  global  institutions  assess  the  monetary  value  of 

human lives? What are the monetized costs of (say) 10,000 worldwide deaths from global 

warming,  deaths  that  include  (say)  8000  people  from  poor  countries  and  2000  from 

                                                 

 See id. 

131 Of course it is sometimes desirable for government to create  “safety floors,” for automobiles and other 
consumer goods, in part as a response to an absence of adequate information in the market. But such floors 
should  not  be  seen  as  a  redistributive  tool,  simply  because  they  are  not  likely  to  produce  good 
redistribution. See Susan Rose-Ackerman, Progressive Law and Economics, 97 Yale LJ 1083 (1989). 
132 See note supra.  
133 See http://www.ipcc.ch/pub/reports.htm 
134
135 See John Broome, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Population, 29 J Legal Stud 953, 957 (2000), noting that 
that  this  conclusion  is  a  product  of  what  Broome  rejects,  “a  money-metric  utility  function  to  represent  a 
person’s preferences. “ Id. (In the easy cases, I suggest that a money-metric utility function is not absurd, 
and it is not quite that in the hard cases either; see below.) See also the discussion of the International Panel 
on Climate Change, Climate Change 2001, available at http://www.grida.no/climate/ipcc_tar/wg3/302.htm:  
“The VSL is generally lower in poor countries than in rich countries, but it is considered unacceptable by 
many analysts to impose different values for a policy that has to be international in scope and decided by 
the international community. In these circumstances, analysts use average VSL and apply it to all countries. 
Of  course,  such  a  value  is  not  what  individuals  would  pay  for  the  reduction  in  risk,  but  it  is  an  ‘equity 
adjusted’ value, in which greater weight is given to the WTP of lower income groups. On the basis of EU 
and US VSLs and a weighting system
 that has some broad appeal in terms of government policies towards 
income  distribution,  Eyre  et  al.  (1998)  estimate  the  average  world  VSL  at  around  1  million  Euros 
(approximately US$1 milli

on at 1999 exchange rates).” 

36 

 

wealthy ones? The discussion thus far suggests that there is no sensible abstract answer to 

these  questions;  we  have  to  know  what,  in  particular,  the  answer  is  for.  If  a  general 

question is asked, outside of any particular context, about the monetary value of a stated 

numbe

r  of  deaths  in  2020,  it  is  best  unanswered  (except  perhaps  with  laughter).  The 

appropriate  assessments  of  VSL,  and  variations  across  countries,  depends  on  their 

intended  use.  If  disparate  numbers  are  meant  to  identify  the  actual  monetary  values  of 

human lives, and to suggest that people in Canada are “worth” much more than people in 

Argentina or that poor people are “worth” less than rich ones, they are ludicrous as well 

as offensive. 

We can go further. If the disparate numbers are meant to suggest the appropriate 

amount  that  donor  institutions  should  spend  to  reduce  mortality  risks,  they  make  little 

sense. The fact that a poor person in a poor nation would be willing to pay $1 to eliminate 

a risk of 1/10,000, whereas a wealthy person in a wealthy nation would be willing to pay 

$100,  cannot  plausibly  be  used  to  defend  the  view  that  an  international  agency  should 

devote its resources to the latter rather than the former. To see the point, suppose that you 

are asked to choose be

tween two programs: 

(A)  Program  A  would  eliminate  (at  a  stated  cost  to  you  of  $500)  a  1/10,000  risk 

faced by fifty poor people in Costa Rica, each willing to pay $2 to eliminate that 

(B)  Program B would eliminate (also at a stated cost of $500) a 1/10,000 risk faced 

by  fifty  wealthy  people  in  Berlin,  each  willing  to  pay  $350  to  eliminate  that 

risk. 

same risk.  

In  principle,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  you  should  prefer  to  save 

the 

Berliners, even those their VSL is far

 higher. In fact Program A has much higher priority, 

because  it  would  help  people  who  are  facing  extreme  deprivation.  What  is  true  at  the 

individual level is true across nations as well.  

(b)  VSL  in  poor  countries.  But  imagine  that  the  government  in  a  poor  nation  is 

deciding on appropriate policy to reduce workplace risks. At least under the assumptions 

I have given thus far, such a government would do well to begin by using the admittedly 

low  WTP  of  its  own  citizens.  If  citizens  in  that  nation  show  a  WTP  of  $2  to  eliminate 

risks  of  1/10,000,  then  their  government  does them  no  favors  by  requiring  them  to  pay 

37 

 

$50 or $10. This is the sense in which VSL properly varies across nations, and in which 

citizens of poor nations have a lower VSL than citizens of wealthy ones. The point has 

strong  implications  for  international  labor  standards.  It  is  tempting  to  suggest  that 

workers  in  poor  countries,  for  example  China  and  India,  should  receive  the  same 

protection  as  those  in  the  United  States;  why  should  a  worker  in  Beijing  be  subject  to 

significantly higher death risks than a worker in Los Angeles?  

As a matter of basic principle, there is no good answer to this question. But as a 

matter of regulatory policy, the answer is straightforward. So long as the distribution of 

global  income  has  the  form  that  it  does,  a  system  that  gives  Chinese  workers  the  same 

protection as American workers is not in the interest of Chinese workers—assuming, as 

we are, that the cost of that protection is borne by workers themselves. Requiring Chinese 

workers  to  have  the  same  protection  as  Americans  amounts  to  a  forced  exchange  on 

terms that Chinese workers reject. The idea that workers in poor nations should have the 

“same” protection as workers in wealthy nations is an error, rooted in a moral heuristic 

involving the equal worth of all human lives—a heuristic that sometimes works well but 
that also misfires.136 

Note,  once  again,  that  the  argument  for  using  WTP  does  not  imply  satisfaction 

with the 

existing distribution of wealth. We might believe that the existing distribution is 

unjust and that it should be dramatically changed. The problem with forced exchanges is 

that

 they do nothing to alter existing distributions. In fact they make poor people worse 

off, requ

iring them to use their limited resources for something that they do not want to 

buy. 

 

C. Harder Cases: Kaldor-Hicks and Welfare 

There  is  an  obvious  artificiality  in  the  assumptions  thus  far.  Most  important, 

people  do  not  always  bear  the  full  social  costs  of  the  regulatory  benefits  they  receive. 

Sometimes they pay only a fraction of those co

sts—or possibly even nothing at all. When 

this  is 

so,  the  normative  analysis  is  much  more  complicated.  In  the  context  of  air 

pollution regulation, for example, there is a complex set of distributional effects, and on 
balance, poor people, and members of minority communities, appear to be net gainers.137 

                                                

 

136 On moral heuristics in general, see Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics, Minn L Rev (forthcoming 2004). 
137 See Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air Act Regulation, 24 Regulation 34 (2001). 

38 

 

An  efficiency  analysis,  based  on  WTP,  might  not  produce  an  adequate  account  of  the 

welfare  effects  of  air  pollution  regulation.  And  even  if  it  does,  an  account  of  welfare 

effects  might  not  end  the  normative  question,  because  the  distributional  gains  are 
important to consider.138 The difficulty is that a high VSL, one that exceeds what WTP 

studies show for poor people, might produce outcomes that are in the best interest of poor 
people, in the sense that the result is a welfare improvement for them.139 Note that these 

points 

do  not  bear  directly  on  the  question  whether  VSL  should  vary  across  risks.  But 

they  do  bear  on  the  issue  of  varying  VSL  across  persons,  and  in  particular  across 

differences that result from disparities in income and wealth. 

Suppose, for example, that beneficiaries of a proposed drinking water regulation 

are willing to pay only $80 to eliminate a risk of 1/80,000 in drinking water; that the per-

person cost of eliminating a 1/50,000 risk is $100; but that for every dollar of that cost, 

the  beneficiaries  pay  only  80  cents.  The  remaining  20  cents  might  be  paid  by  water 

companies  themselves,  in  the  form  of  reduced  profits,  or  by  employees  of  the  water 

companies, in the form of reduced wages and fewer jobs. In this example, the costs of the 

regulation exceed the

 benefits; it is inefficient. But by hypothesis, the regulation makes 

its ben

eficiaries of the regulation better off. If the WTP criterion is used, the fact that the 

monetized costs exceed the monetized benefits is decisive. But as a normative matter, the 

analysis here is far harder than in the easy cases. On what assumption should the WTP 

numbers be decisive?   

The  assumption  must  be  that  economic  efficiency  is  the  goal  of  government,  at 

least 

in the context of regulation—that in order to know what to do, we should aggregate 

the benefits and costs 

of regulation, and act if and only if the benefits

 exceed the costs. 

e
Wh n 

using  the  WTP  numbers,  government  is  acting  as  a  maximization  machine, 

                                                 

138 The Office of Management and Budget has expressly recognized this point in its most recent guidelines 
governing regulatory impact analysis. See 2003 Report to Congress at 131: “Those who bear the costs of a 
regulation  and  those  who  enjoy  its  benefits  often  are  not  the  same  people.  .  .  .  Your  regulatory  impact 
analysis should provide a separate description of distributional effects (i.e., how both benefits and costs are 
distributed  among  sub-populations  of  particular  concern)  so  that  decision  makers  can  properly  consider 
them along with the effects on economic efficiency.” 
139  For  relevant  discussion,  see  Christine  Jolls,  Accommodation  Mandates,  53  Stan.  L.  Rev.  223  (2000). 
Jolls argues that accommodation mandates might produce desired redistributive gains whether or not they 
are efficient, and she supplies a detailed analysis of when those gains are most likely to occur. At present, 
there is no parallel discussion for regulation of the sort I am discussing here. My suggestion is that under 
imaginable assumptions, some such regulation will be defensible on distributive grounds. 

39 

 

aggregating all benefits and costs as measured by the WTP criterion. But this is a highly 

contestable  understanding  of  what  government  should  be  doing.  In  fact  it  represents  a 

shift from the relatively uncontroversial Pareto criterion, exemplified above, to a version 
of the far more controversial Kaldor-Hicks criterion,140 which assesses policy by asking 

this question: Are the gainers winning more than the losers are losing? The Kaldor-Hicks 
criterion  is  sometimes  described  as  potential  Pareto  superiority,141  because  it  asks 

whether in principle, the winners could compensate the losers, and a surplus could be left 

over. The difficulty of course is that Pareto superiority is merely potential. Some people 

really are losing and others are gaining.  

In  the  harder  cases,  the  gainers  are  gaining  less  (in  monetary  terms)  than  the 

losers  are  losing—and  hence  the  regulation  is  said  to  be  unjustified.  Under  the 

assumptions  I  have  given,  the  regulation  is  indeed  inefficient:  Its  social  cost  is  higher 

than its social benefit. But is the regulation undesirable? This is not at all clear. The first 

problem  is  that  WTP  is  measuring  gains  and  loses  in  monetary  terms,  rather  than  in 
welfare terms.142 It is possible that those who gain, in the harder cases, gain more welfare 

than  the  losers  lose;  WTP  is  not  dispositive  on  that  question.  The  second  problem  is 

distributional. Suppose that in terms of overall welfare, the regulation is not desirable; it 

makes aggregate welfare lower rather than higher. But suppose too that those who benefit 

are more advantaged than those who lose. If, for example, those who are willing to pay 

$80 are disproportionately poor, and those who pay the remainder are disproportionately 

wealthy

, the regulation might be plausibly justified despite the welfare loss.  

It is natural to respond here that if redistribution is what is sought, then it should 

be produced not through regulation but through the tax system, which is a more efficient 
way  of  transferring  resources  to  those  who  need  help.143  I  agree.  But  suppose  that 

                                                

 

140 It is only a version of that criterion, because it is measuring welfare in monetary equivalents. A direct 
assessment of welfare, if it were possible, might show that the regulation in question is justified on Kaldor-
Hicks grounds. 
141 See, e.g., Richard Posner. Economic Analysis of Law 14 (4th ed. 1992) (“The Kaldor-Hicks concept is 
also and suggestively called potential Pareto superiority: The winners could compensate the losers, whether 
or not they actually do.”). 
142 On the direct measurement of welfare, see Daniel Kahneman, forthcoming. 
143

 See, e.g., Louis Kaplow & Steven Shavell, Why the Legal System is Less Efficient Than the Income 
Tax  in  Redistributing  Income,  23  J.  Legal  Stud.  667,  667  (1994)  (“[R]edistribution  through  legal  rules 
offers  no  advantage  over  redistribution  through  the  income  tax  and  typically  is  less  efficient.”);  Steven 
Shavell, A Note on Efficiency vs. Distributional Equity in Legal Rulemaking, 71 Am. Econ. Rev. (Papers 
&  Proc.)  414,  414  (1981)  (describing  how  income  tax  can  compensate  for  inefficient  li
ability  rules  and 

40 

 

redistribution is not going to happen through the tax system. If so, then the regulation in 

the harder cases cannot be ruled off-limits despite its inefficiency. 

Return finally to the use of VSL in poor nations in the regulatory context that is 

my principal focus here. Suppose that in such nations, VSL turns out to be $100,000. If 

relevant governments use a VSL of $6 million, on the theory that their citizens should not 

be valued less than those of wealthy nations, social harm will almost inevitably result. In 

the easy cases, the forced exchanges will  be ludicrously harmful to the people they are 

supposed  to  help.  In  the  hard  cases,  where  the  beneficiaries  pay  only  a  fraction  of  the 

cost, such a nation will be spending far too much of its money on risk reduction (or more 

precisely,  on  reducing  the  risks  that  happen  to  get  onto  the  regulatory  agenda).  The 

inefficiency of an extremely high VSL will be felt acutely and in many forms, including 

decreased employment. But if the costs of risk reduction will be paid by third parties—

for example, wealthy nations—then the people in that poor country will be helped even if 

risk reduction is based on an excessive VSL.  

Of  course  they  would  almost  certainly  be  helped  more  if  they  were  given  cash 

(supposing  that  it  would  not  be  squandered)  rather  than  in-kind  benefits.  But  if  cash 

redistribution  is  not  possible,  regulatory  benefits,  provided  for  free  or  for  a  fraction  of 

their cost, remain a blessing. If, for example, a global institution uses a world-wide VSL 

of $1 million, and if that amount exceeds the domestic VSL of people in poor nations, it 

is possible that poor people will gain a greater deal if the resources for risk-reduction are 

provided  by  wealthy  nations.  In  the  harder  cases,  the  simple  point  is  that  many  of  the 

intende

d beneficiaries of regulation are in fact net gainers. 

 

D. Harder Cases as Easy Ones, and VSL Again 

 
Is  there  a  reason  to  treat  the  harder  cases  as  identical  to  the  easy  ones?  Is  this 
absurd144? Agencies do not distinguish between them, although recent guidelines, calling 

                                                                                                                                                 
redistribute income); David A. Weisbach, Should Legal Rules Be Used to Redistribute Income?, 70 U. Chi. 
L.  Rev.  439,  439–40  (2003)  (“[T]he  tax  system  is  a  better  tool  for  redistribut
ion  of  income  than  legal 
rules.”). 
144

 See Broome, supra note, at 121. Broome urges that “there are separate reasons why preferences are an 
unsatisfactory  basis  for  valuing  lives,”  including  the  fact  that  “in  contexts  involving  risks,  people’s 
preferences are generally muddled and incoherent” rather than rational. Id. at 122. If preferences are in fact 
muddled and incoherent, current practice is of course on thin ground. 

41 

 

agencies to attend to distributional issues, might eventually encourage them to do so.145 A 

possible  reason  for  treating  the  harder  cases  as  the  easy  ones  is  optimistic:  Perhaps 

everyth

ing will balance out in the end. Perhaps no group will be systematically helped or 

hurt,  and  the  tax  system  will  be  used  to  produce  appropriate  redistribution.  In  the  real-

world  domestic  cases,  we  might  also  think  that a direct  inquiry  into  welfare, bypassing 

WTP,  would  be  extremely  difficult  or  perhaps  even  impossible  to  operationalize.  If 

distributional  considerations  are  deemed  relevant,  interest-group  warfare  might  be  the 
consequence, rather than distribution to those who particularly need and deserve help.146 

More  modestly,  we  might  conclude  that  agencies  should  generally  pursue  efficiency, 

using VSL as the foundation for decisions, but should allow distributional findings to cut 

the other way in cases in which there is compelling reason to allow them to do so. In fact 

this  approach  is  a  plausible  way  of  reading  OMB’s  current  guidelines  on  regulatory 
impact analysis.147 

 Let us return in this light to VSL. In th

e easy cases, the resulting redistribution is 

almost 

certainly  perverse,  because  forced  exchanges,  under  the  stated  assumptions,  are 

highly likely to harm the people who are being coerced. But in the harder cases, it cannot 

be said that the beneficiaries of regulation will be harmed if government uses a number 

that  exceeds  their  actual  VSL.  Everything  depends  on  the  distributional  effects  of  the 

regulation.  If  the  beneficiaries  are  well-off,  a  high  VSL  might  produce  perverse 

redistribution if those who lose are toward the bottom of the economic ladder. We could 

imagine  this  result,  for  example,  with  a  pollution  program  that  protects  those  who  visit 

expensive recreational areas. If the beneficiaries are poor, a

nd if the costs are born by the 

w

ealthy or more generally, a high VSL might be in the interest of those who need help. 

Air pollution programs

, providing special protection for those in cities, a
ppear to be an 
e.148 We can therefore reject the confident view of economically inclined analysts 

exampl

who believe that accurate VSLs, based on actual WTP (and hence individuated), should 

always  be  the  basis  of  regulatory  policy.  But  we  can  also  reject  the  confident  view  of 

      

                                          

 

145 See note supra.  
146 See Viscusi, supra note. 
147 See note supra. 
148 See Kahn, supra note. 

42 

 

skeptics who believe that a uniform WTP, refusing to make distinctions among persons, 

is best on distributive grounds. 

What are the implications for individuation of VSL? It remains true that according 

to the theory that underlies agency valuations, a higher degree of individuation would be 

desirable.  It  also  remains  true  that  with  respect  to  risks,  individuation  is  appropriate 

insofar  as  valuations  differ  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  risk  at  stake.  The  principal 

qualification  is  that  a  uniform  VSL,  one  that  gives  disadvantaged  people  regulatory 

protection  in  excess  of  their  WTP,  might  turn  out  to  have  fortunate  distributional 

consequences  in  the  harder  cases.  We  should  be  careful  about  this  point.  It  will  not 

always hold, and if the goal is to provide more assistance to those in need, a uniform VSL 

is  hardly  the  best  way  to  achieve  that  goal.  Consider  the  case  of  poor  nations:  a 

worldwide  VSL,  adopted  by  each  nation,  of  $6.1  million  would  almost  certainly  be 

harmful,  simply  because  the  resulting  levels  of  regulation  would  have  such  adverse 

effects

 on wages and employment levels. (In these circumstances it is unsurprising that 

workers  in  wealthy  nations,  not  in  poor  ones,  often  clamor  the  loudest  for  greater 

protection of workers in poor nations; workers in wealthier nations would be the principal 

beneficiaries  of  such  regulation,  which  would  protect  them  against  competition  from 

those in poorer nations.) My only point is that in some cases, individuation across persons 

will  produce  worse  outcomes  on  distributional  grounds  and  possibly  on  grounds  of 

welfare as well. 

How,  then,  should  global  institutions,  like  the  International  Panel  on  Climate 

Change, assess the monetary costs of risks faced by people all over the world? As I have 

suggested, the answer turns on the purpose of the assessment—on what issue the answer 

is  supposed  to  be  addressing.  There  is  no  good  acontextual  way  of  deciding  on  the 

aggregate costs of global climate change by 2050; actually that is a ludicrous question, 

because it does not (as stated) have any point. A far more sensible question is whether it 

would make sense for any particular nation to accept a particular way of responding to 
the  problem,  such  as  the  Kyoto  Protocol.149  At  the  national  level,  an  assessment  of  the 

                                                

 

149 See William Nor
168 (2000): “Finally, the Ky
of  the  costs  are  bo
world on balance benefits from

 the Kyoto Protocol.” 

dhaus and Joseph Boyer, Warming the World: Economic Models of Global Warming 
oto Protocol has significant distributional consequences.  . . . The lion’s share 
rne  by  the  United  States.  Indeed,  the  United  States  is a  net  loser  while  the  rest  of  the 

43 

 

costs and benefits of the Kyoto Protocol is not much different from an assessment of the 

costs  and  benefits  of  any  other  regulation.  If  the  risk  of  death,  as  a  result  of  climate 

change
, is in the neighborhood of 1 in 100,000, then the ordinary framework applies, with 
appropriate  individuation  across  both  risks  and  persons.150  For  wealthy  nations,  the 

argument  for  signing  the  Kyoto  Protocol  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  the  harms  of 
global warming will be felt disproportionately in poor nations,151 and also by the fact that 

wealthy  nations  have  done  by  far  the  most  to  produce  the  situation  that  makes  global 

warming a serious problem. An analysis of these questions would make it necessary to go 

far  beyond  the  present  topic.  My  goal  here  has  been  to  suggest  that  within  nations, 

diverse VSL are perfectly sensible, and that answers to questions about valuation must be 

closely attuned to the purposes for which those questions are being asked. 

 

 
 

Conclusion 

The theory that animates current valuations of mortality risks argues in favor of 

far  more  individuation.  A  uniform  VSL  cannot  possibly  cut  across  all  risks  and  all 

individuals.  Does  the  risk  involve  cancer?  What  kind  of  cancer?  Does  it  involve  air 

pollution  or  driving  on  the  highways?  It  is  obtuse  to  adopt  an  approach  that  values  all 

statistically equivalent mortality risks in the same way. In addition, individuals display a 

great  deal  of  heterogeneity  in  their  VSL—not  simply  because  of  different  tastes  and 

values,  but  also 

because  of  different  levels  of  income  and  wealth.  Willingness  to  pay 

depend

s  on  ability  to  pay.  Nothing  I  have  said  here  is  meant  to  suggest  approval  of 

existing  distributions  of  resources.  Of  course  poor  people  are  not  “worth  less”  than 

wealthy ones, and it is often appropriate for government to provide resources directly to 

poor  people  or  instead  to  subsidize  the  provision  of  regulatory  benefits.  But  forced 

exchanges  are  not  a  good  way  to  assist  poor  people,  and  a  uniform  VSL  is  often  a 

perverse  response  to  inequality.  In  theory,  risk  reduction  policies  should  be  more  fully 

individuated,  giving  each  person  regulatory  protection  that  corresponds  to  his  WTP  for 

the particular risk in question.  

                                                 

150 See generally id.  
151 See id. 

44 

 

Of  course  this  is  not  practicable.  Government  lacks  the  necessary  information 

about individual risk preferences; categorical judgments are inevitable. In any case many 

of  the  benefits  provided  by  regulation  are  collective  in  character.  Regulators  cannot 

feasibly provide protection to one person without simultaneously providing protection to 

many. But it is nonetheless important to see what the current theory counsels in principle, 

and  to  understand  that  the  limitations  are  practical  ones,  some  of  which  might  be 

overcome  as  knowledge  progresses.  And  even  with  the  practical  limitations,  a  uniform 

VSL is increasingly difficult to justify.  

We know enough to know that some risks produce a higher VSL than others—a 

judgment that would produce significantly different analyses in many cases, above all by 

producing a higher VSL for cancer risks. A program that protects old people will produce 

a

v

 lower VSL than one that protects younger people, and there is no ethical objection to 
ariations on the basis of age.152 And 

ffects mostly wealthy people, a VSL 

if a program a

based  on  the  population-wide  median  will  be  too  low.  It  would  follow  that  the  Federal 

Aviation Administration should have a relatively high VSL, because people who fly are 

wealthier  than  the  population  median—and  when  the  EPA  is  engaging  in  cost-benefit 

analysis for programs protecting poor people from risks associated with hazardous waste 

sites, it should have a relatively low VSL.  

The principal qualification here is that when the beneficiaries of regulation do not 

pay all of its cost, a high VSL may actually be in their interests. The easy cases, in which 

the  beneficiaries  are  forced  to  pay  for  regulatory  benefits,  are  not  the  same  as  those  in 

which  they  pay  only  a  fraction  of  the  cost.  Nonetheless,  current  practice  treats  them  as 

identical, perhaps because of the great difficulty in untangling the incidence of regulatory 

benefits and costs. My goal has not been to resolve that difficulty, but to suggest that the 

theory  behind  current  practice  justifies  far  more  individuation  of  VSL  than  regulators 

currently provide. However we deal with distributional problems and the hardest cases, 

the use of a uniform VSL is unacceptably obtuse. 

 
 
 

                                                

 

152 See Aldy and Visc
the need to

 produce a VSL for children. 

usi, supra; Sunstein, supra. I am putting to one side the difficult questions raised by 

45 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1
C
 
 
 

111 East 60th Street 
hicago, IL  60637 

csunstei@uchicago.edu 

46 

 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other 
Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of 
Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 
1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 
1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A 
Quantitative Study (August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical 
Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning 
Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing 
Everyone Else Does) (April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial 
Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the 
Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) 

 
1

. 

2

. 

3
4
5

. 
. 
. 

6
7
8

. 
. 
. 

9

. 

1

0. 

1
1
1

1. 
2. 
3. 

1
1

4. 
5. 

1

6. 

1

7. 

1

8.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory 

Adjudication (September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Be
nefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 

. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 

1
9. 
2
0. 
21. 
2
2. 
23.  William M
24. 

et for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan 

J. Mark Ramseyer, The Mark
(August 1994)
 
Robert H. G
Kenneth W. Dam, Some 
Protection of Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 

ertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 

Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property 

25. 
2
6. 

2

7. 

47 

 

28. 

2

9. 

30. 
31.
 

32.

 

33. 
34.
 
35.
 

36. 
37.
 

38. 

s 

mino (December 

mages (February 1995) 

 Approach to the Selection of Cases for 

dman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Ci

David Frie
1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime 
Consumption (January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Da
Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviation
from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal
Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business 
Enterprise (April 1995) 
Richar
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and
(November 1995) 
Cass R
J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law 
Regimes: Econometrics from Japan
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fen
Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) 

. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 

d Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 

 (January 1996) 

 Biotechnology 

ces 

39. 
40.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal D

isputes 

41. 

Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, C
Concealed Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of C
Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 199

hapter 11: An Overview of the Law and 

rime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry 

44. 
45.  William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay 

7) 

42. 
43. 

48. 

46. 
47. 

iel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: 

(March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Dan
Evidence from California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Ap
the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law throu
the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive 
Damages (with
 Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  
51.  William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influe

50. 

49. 

gh 

proach to 

nce: 

52. 

A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation
Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1

 for Why Campaign Expenditures are 

998)  

48 

 

53.  

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 
71. 

73. 

ages: Their Determinants, 

 (April 1998)  

ge the Size and 

 Crime (May 1998) 

ourt and Congressional 

Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic 
Analysis of Law (March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are 
Homeowners Better Citizens?
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to 
Law and Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, 
Police Departments, and
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 
1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Dam
Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme C
Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, 
Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Chan
Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Th
1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Do
(November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International L
(November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (Decemb
1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest
“Third Way” (January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of
1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods 
(February 1999
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic E
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling a
Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism B
e Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental 
Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputatio

ctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law 

n Costs (March 1999) 

 Evidence (February 

nterprise (February 

: Notes Toward A 

eory of Chapter 11 (October 

) 

nd the Law, with 

aw 

er 

72.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (Apri

l 

1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, 
Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Pr
and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  

ivate 

49 

 

74. 

75. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 

81. 

82. 
83. 

84. 
85. 
86. 

87. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation 
Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Agai
(May 1999) 

n 

76.  William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz

 

s a 

on of Technological Change (June 1999) 

Collection (May 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want 
Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity a
Functi
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judici
Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Jur
ies Less Erratic 
than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 
Richar
Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) 
Randal C. Picker, R
Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 
Douglas G. Baird a
Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal 
Characteristics (November 19

d A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special 

egulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 

nd Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal 

99) 

al 

r 1999) 

nces Are Distorted (November 1999) 

tive Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 

Prefere
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and 
Satire (Novembe
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on 
Deriva
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (Janu
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and 
Complexity in Contracts (January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and 
Ghost (February 2000)  
David
The Severity Shift (February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with 
Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000

 Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: 

Blackstone’s 

ary 2000) 

) 

88.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis Wh

en 

50 

 

97. 

98. 

99. 

100.
 
101. 
102.
 

103.
 
104.
 
105. 

106. 
107. 

108.

 

l 

)  

. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 

Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (Apri
2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 
2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 
2000, revised May 2002
Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
William M. Landes and Richard A
Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative 
Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  
Jack Goldsmith and A
Internet (November 2000) 
Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
Dougl
System (November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International
Relations:  A Rational Choice Perspective (Novembe

lan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the 

as Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent 

r 2000) 

 

 
 
 

112. 

109. William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
110.
111.

Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (Dece
2000) 
Richar
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
William M. Landes, Copyright, Bo
Economic Approach (December 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule 

114. 
115. George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital 
 

d A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious 

rrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An 

(January 2001) 

mber 

113. 

d  Economics  of  Consumer 

(January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 
Richard  Hynes  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  The  Law  an
Finance (February 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference
(March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird, Does 
Age (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Ras
the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Sh

elters (May 2001) 

116.
 
117. 

118.

 

119. 

120. 

121. 

122. 

 Cost-Benefit Analysis:  A Positive 

Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital 

mussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and 

 to Law) 

51 

 

123. William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished

 

? 

124.

 

125.

 

001) 

(May 2
Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 
2001) 
Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The 
Market for Federal Judicia
l Law Clerks (June 2001)   

126.  Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Mak

ing (June 

2001) 

127.  Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
128.   
129.  Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hi

Cass R. Sunstein, The La

ws of Fear (June 2001) 

dden Perils of Property 

Transfer (July 2001) 

130.  Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for

 

Centralized Coordination i

n a Networked World (July 2001) 

131.   Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov,

 

 Predictably 

132. 
133. 

Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Sho
Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry:  Creating 
Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (Augus

uld Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 

t 2001) 

134.  Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Allocation  of  the  Commons:  Parking  and  Stopping  on

 

the Commons (August 2001) 

135.  Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
136. 

. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of 

Eric A
Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from 
Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  
(November 2001) 

Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law 

an 

138. 

137. 

139.  Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? 

Board Connecti

ons and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 

140.  Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the 

 
Doha 

nd Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation 

“Solution” (February 2002) 
Edna Ullmann-Margalit a
(February 2002) 
Daniel N. Shav
Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 
2002) 

iro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in 

143.  Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation

 

lution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal 

and Dispute Reso
Studies 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended 
Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2

002) 

141. 

142. 

144. 

52 

 

145.  David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law 

146. 

Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success
or Fail

ure (March 2002) 

 

147.  Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution 

148.  David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002

, 

(April 2002, The Antitrust Bulletin) 

Coase 

Lecture February 2002) 

149.  Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (Apr
150.  Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New E

il 2002) 
xecutive Order for Improving 

151. 

152. 

153. 

opyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 

Federal Regulation?  Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, C
2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Ge
2002; revised March 2003) 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunste
a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 

in, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What 

netic Material (May 

154.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyrig

ht 

(July 2002) 

155.  Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the 

Government as Insurer? (July 

2002) 

156.  Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Inst
157.  Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002)
158. 

 

itutions (July 2002) 

 Canon in Regulatory Law (with 

Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New
Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) 
Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag
and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A T
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications f
Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence o
Cooperation on the File-Swa

heory of the Laws of War (September 2002) 

pping Networks (September 2002) 

: Mechanisms of Consent 

f 

or 

159. 

160. 
161 

162. 

Cass R. Sunstein,

163.  David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
164. 
165.  Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
166. 

 Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 

Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (Octo
2002) 
Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) 
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget 
(November 20

02) 

167. 
168. 

ber 

169.  Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxati

on: An 

Economic Analysis (November 2002) 

53 

 

170.  Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework fo

r 

the Regu

lation of Public Health (December 2002) 

171.  Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) 
172. 

tion and Risk-Taking with Multiple Tax Rates 

173. 

David A. Weisbach, Taxa
(December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Ras
2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Fry
munications Act of 1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 
175.  Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 
176. 

174. 

mussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 

ing Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecom-

177. 

178. 

179. 

l C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come 

David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case o
Short-Term Assets (January 2003) 
Randa
with the 1996 Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman and Ran
munications: Iowa Utilities and Verizon (January 2003) 
William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect
An Economic Perspective (February 2003) 
Cass R. Sun

dal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecom-

 Liability for Copyright Infringement: 

f 

180. 
181.  Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 
182. 

stein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 

Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: A
(April 2003) 

ggregation, Amplification and Distortion 

183.  Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 

2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost

184. 
185.  Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an 

-Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 

Oxymoron (May 2003) 

186.  Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and 

Countervailing 

187. 

188. 

189. 

Measures (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Cr
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Econ
(May 2003) 
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—
2003) 

omic Perspective 

and Crime (June 

itique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 

190.  Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional 

191.   Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to P
ay (June 2003) 
192.  Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Lega

l Systems 

Protec

tion (June 2003) 

(July 2003) 

193.  Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) 
194. 

, The Integration of Tax and Spending 

David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim
Programs (September 2003) 

54 

 

195.  William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not 

Memories: What Was the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids 
to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003) 
196.  Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, S

exuality, 

197.  Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and 

and Marriage (Sep

tember 2003) 

Conten

t (September 2003) 

198.  Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting 

on Federal Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigat
199.  Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Incom

ion (September 2003)  
e Producing Crimes with 

Variable Leisure Time (October 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Pro

200. 
secution History Estoppel (October 2003) 
201.  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 

2003) 

202.  David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) 
203. 
David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (Janua
ry 2004) 
204.  Cass R. Sunstein, Fear and Liberty (January 2004) 
205. 
206. 

Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Des
Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of Inter
(February 2004) 

troy (January 2004) 

national Adjudication 

207.  Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregati

ng 

the Value of S

tatistical Lives (February 2004) 

 
 

55 

 

