Public Law and Legal Theory Working Papers

Working Papers

University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

2004

Dollars and Death
Cass R. Sunstein

Eric A. Posner

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/
public_law_and_legal_theory

Part of the Law Commons

Chicago Unbound includes both works in progress and final versions of articles. Please be aware that
a more recent version of this article may be available on Chicago Unbound, SSRN or elsewhere.

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein & Eric Posner, "Dollars and Death" (University of Chicago Public Law & Legal Theory Working Paper No. 71, 2004).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Working Papers at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Public
Law and Legal Theory Working Papers by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact
unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 222 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
Dollars and Death 
 
Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
 
September 2004 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
://www.law.uchicago.edu

The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http

/Lawecon/index.html 

and at the 

Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper C
http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=600662 

ollection: 

5, 2004 

September 
Preliminary draft 
Forthcoming University of Chicago Law Review 
All rights reserved 
 

Dollars and Death 
 
Eric A. Posner* and Cass R. Sunstein** 

 
 

 
 
 

Abstract.  Administrative  regulations  and  tort  law  both  impose  controls  on  activities  that 
cause mortality risks, but they do so in puzzlingly different ways. Under a relatively new 
and  still-controversial  procedure,  administrative  regulations  rely  on  a  fixed  value  of  a 
statistical life representing the hedonic loss from death. Under much older law, tort law in 
most states excludes hedonic loss from the calculation of damages, and instead focuses on 
loss of income, which regulatory policy ignores. Regulatory policy also disregards losses to 
dependents; tort law usually  allows dependents to recover for loss of support. Regulatory 
policy generally treats the loss of the life of a child as equivalent to the loss of the life of an 
adult; tort law usually treats the loss of the life of a child as less valuable. Regulatory policy 
implicitly values foreigners as equal to Americans; tort law does not. We argue that both 
areas  of  law  make  serious  mistakes  in  valuing  life  and  that  each  should  learn  from  the 
other. Regulatory policy properly focuses on hedonic loss from death, and tort law should 
adopt this approach. But regulatory policy should imitate tort law’s individualized approach 
to  valuing  the  loss  from  death,  including  its  inclusion  of  losses  to  dependents.  If  these 
changes  were  made,  tort  awards  would  be  more  uniform  and  predictable,  and  regulations 
would be less uniform and more stringent. In addition, average tort damages for wrongful 
death would be at least twice as high as they are today. With respect to dollar judgments for 
mortality  risks,  a  pervasive  issue  is  how  to  combine  accuracy  with  administrability  and 
predictability; both bodies of law could do far better on this score.  

How  should  the  legal  system  assign  dollar  values  to  human  lives?  Consider  a 

highly publicized example. 

On September 22, 2001, Congress enacted legislation to compensate the survivors 
of  the  attacks  of  eleven  days  earlier.1  Under  the  final  regulations,2  survivors  were 

permitted to claim amounts for both economic and non-economic losses. The economic 

losses  were  to  be  measured  by  calculating  each  victim’s  expected  lost  wages  from 

 
                                                
* Kirkland and Ellis Professor of Law, University of Chicago Law School. 
** Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School 
and  Department  of  Political  Science.  Thanks  to  Matthew  Adler,  Ward  Farnsworth,  Robert  Hahn,  Saul 
Levmore,  Richard  Posner,  Adrian  Vermeule, and W. Kip Viscusi for comments, and to Nikkie Eitmann, 
Josh Kluewer, Wayne Hsiung, Gavin Martinson, and Andres Sawicki for research assistance. Posner thanks 
the Russell Baker Scholars Fund for financial support. 
1 Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization Act, § 405(c)1-2, 49 U.S.C § 40401 (2001). 
2  See  http://www.usdoj.gov/victimcompensation/.  For  discussion,  see  Symposium,  53  DePaul  L  Rev  205 
(2003). 

September  11,  2001  through  the  anticipated  date  of  retirement,  subject  to  several 

adjustments,  including  a  reduction  by  an  es

timate  of  household  consumption  or 

expenditure  by  the 

victim.  Noneconomic  losses  were  set  at  $250,000  per  victim  plus 

$

100,000 per surviving spouse and

 for each surviving ch

ild.3 

In  all,  2,878  families,  about  97  percent  of  those  eligible,  received  compensation 

f

unts ranging from a low of $250,000 to
rom the fund, with amo
 a high of $7.1 million; 
e  average  award  totaled  about  $2.1  million  per  family.4  Hence  there  was  significant 

 

th

varia

presu

bility  among  awards.  But  the  variability  came  amidst  a  serious  effort  to  produce 
mptive floors  and  caps, with a “baseline” for single decedents of $300,0005 and a 

comm

itment to allow awards exceeding $3,000,000 only in unusual circumstances. These 

awar

varia

ds  have  been  attacked  on  multiple  grounds,  including  excessive  and  insufficient 
bility.6 

The  September  11  awards  reflect  a  strong  influence  from  tort  law,  which  they 

simu

ltaneously modify. But in American law, tort doctrines provide only one of two sets 

of ru

les for monetizing death. The other comes from administrative regulations, and there 

are  s

triking  contrasts  between  the  two  bodies  of  law.  One  of  our  main  goals  here  is  to 

bring

 the two in contact with one another. 

Countless regulations now attempt to reduce statistical risks. Cost-benefit analysis 
7  and  to 
m
ust  generally  accom
ndertake that analysis, agencies must turn human lives into monetary equivalents.8 For 

pany  these  regulations,  at  least  if  their  costs  are  high,

u

ple,  the  Environm

exam
most recently $6 million.9 Through tort law, courts provide

ental  Protection  Agency  values  each  life  at  a  uniform  number, 

 a set of fact-specific awards 

                                                 
3 28 C.F.R. § 104.44 (2004). 
4  See  David  W.  Chen,  After  Weighing  Value  of  Lives,  9/11  Fund  Completes  Its  Task,  The  New  York 
Times, June 16, 2004, at A1. 
5 66 Fed Reg 66,274-75. 
6 See Alina Tugend, Lives in the Balance, The National Journal Government Executive, September 2003, at 
50;  David  W.  Chen,  Man  Behind  Sept.  11  Fund  Describes  Effort  as  a  Success,  With  Reservations,  The 
New York Times, January 1, 2004, at B3. 
7 See Stephen Breyer et al., Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy 120-35 (5th ed. 2002). 
8 A general overview can be found in Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Analysis, Circular A-
4 (September 17, 2003), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/regpol.html#rr 
9 See 66 Fed. Reg. at 7012. In its July 2003 regulation governing food labeling of trans fatty acids, the Food 
and Drug Administration used a VSL of $6.5 million, s
ee 68 Fed. Reg. 41434, 41488 (July 11, 2003); in its 
March 13, 2003 proposed rule on dietary ingredients and dietary supplements, the same agency su
ggested a 
VSL of $5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 12158, 12229 (using this value to calculate the “value of a statistical 
life day”

).  

2 

that  attempt  to  compensate  for  and  to  deter  wrongful  death.  The  resulting  awards  are 

highly variable. For example, courts have recently given successful plaintiffs as little as a 
few thousand dollars and as much as tens of millions of dollars.10 

 

Notwithstanding  their  overlapping  goals,  administrative  regulations  and  tort  law 

diverge

 from one another in dramatic and puzzling ways. The most obvious difference is 

that tort law generally disregards the welfare loss to the person who has died; regulatory 

policy  treats  that  loss  as  its  central  and  indeed  exclusive  focus.  Consider  a  few  other 

differences: 

(cid:131) Tort law focuses directly on the loss to dependents;11 regulatory policy pays 

(cid:131) Tort  law  makes  damages  a  function  of  lost  income;  regulatory  policy 

no attention to that loss.12  

di

sregards lost income. 

                                                                                                                                                 

 
Some  individuation  has  been  suggested  by  the  interest  in  statistical  life-years,  a  measure  that 
naturally  produces  a  higher  degree  of  particularity.  Office  of  Management  &  Budget,  Circular  A-4, 
ble at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a004/a-
Regulatory Analysis, at 30 (Sept. 17, 2003), availa
4.pdf. More specifically, the guidelines say:  

Another way that has been used to express reductions in fatality risks is to use the life expectancy 
the  "value  of  statistical  life-years  (VSLY)  extended."  If  a  regulation  protects  individuals  whose 
method, 
average remaining life expectancy is 40 years, a risk reduction of one fatality is expressed as "40 life-years 
extended." Those who favor this alternative approach emphasize that the value of a statistical life is not a 
single number relevant for all situations. In particular, when there are significant differences between the 
ed 
effect on life expectancy for the population affected by a particular health risk and the populations st
in the labor market studies, they prefer to adopt a VSLY approach to reflect those differences. You should 
consider providing estimates of both VSL and VSLY, while recognizing the developing state of knowledge 
in this area. 

udi

Longevity  may  be  only  one  of  a  number  of  relevant  considerations  pertaining  to  the  rule.  You 
should keep in mind that regulations with greater numbers of life-years extended are not necessarily better 
than regulations with fewer nu
mbers of life-years extended. In any event, when you present estimates based 
on the VSLY method, you should adopt a larger VSLY estimate for senior citizens because senior citizens 
face larger overall health risks from all causes and they may have accumulated savings to spend on their 
health and safety. 

The  valuation  of  fatality  risk  reduction  is  an  evolving  area  in  both  results  and  methodology. 
Hence, you should utilize valuation methods that you consider appropriate for the regulatory circumstances. 
Since the literature-based VSL estimates may not be entirely appropriate for the risk being evaluated (e.g., 
the use of occupational risk premia to value reductions in risks from environmental hazards)
, you should 
explain  your  selection  of  estimates  and  any  adjustments  of  the  estimates  to  reflect  the  nature  of  the  risk 
being  evaluated.  You  should  present  estimates  based  on  alternative  approaches,  and  if  y
ou  monetize 
mortality risk reduction, you should do so on a consistent basis to the extent feasible. Id.  
10 See below. 
11 For this and other statements about tort law, see notes below. 
12 See, e.g., Regulatory Analysis, supra note, and 66 FR 6976-01 (2001) (arsenic regulation), in support of 
all of the sta

tements in this section on regulatory policy. 

3 

(cid:131) Tort  law  uses  a  case-specific  number  to  assess  damages,  making  individual 

differences  crucial;  regulatory  policy  embodies  a  uniform  number  per  life 

saved, one that fails to pay attention to individual differences. 

(cid:131) Tort law focuses directly on the suffering and distress felt by the decreased; 

regulatory policy does not attend to that issue.  

(cid:131) Tort law generally treats children as worth less than adults, because survivors 

lose  less,  in  economic  terms,  when  children  die;  regulatory  policy  generally 

tr

eats children as equivalent to adults.13 

(cid:131) Tort  law  treats  foreign  victims  of  torts  differently  from  American  victims, 

implicitly valuing them less

, because of deference to local law, unless they are 

killed in the United States, in which case American values are used. Insofar as 

regulations  affect  peopl

e  outside  of  the  country,  regulatory  policy  generally 

ignores foreigners altogether, implicitly treating their lives as valueless. 

What accounts for these differences? It is tempting to say that the answer lies in 

the  conflicting  goals  of  the  two  sets  of  controls.  While  tort  law  seeks  to  ensure 

compensation,  especially  for  family  members,  regulatory  policy  is  designed  to  produce 

optimal levels of risk. This point con

tains some truth. Tort law has long focused on the 

compensation  of  those  still  living—a  focus  that  naturally  leads  to  disregard  of  the 

deceased, an emphasis on what the plaintiffs have lost, and an interest in a set of highly 

individuated awards. By contrast, regulatory policy, which has assigned monetary values 

to statistical lives for little more than two decades, is concerned above all with producing 

the  right  deterrent  signal,  a  concern  that  might  seem  to  explain  the  use  of  a  single, 

uniform  number  for  the  valuation  of  what  most  matters:  the  loss  of  life.  But  as  a  full 
account  of  the  differences,  this  explanation  is  much  too  simple.14  Tort  law  does  and 

should  provide  deterrence  as  well  as  compensation,  and  if  wrongful  death  actions 

produc

e  significant  underdeterrence,  something  is  seriously  amiss.  In  any  case  the 

catalogue  of  differences  raises  many  questions  about  regulatory  policy  even  if  it  is 

focused  on  deterrence.  If  the  goal  of  administrative  regulation  is  optimal  risk  levels, 

                                                 
13 The recent interest in “statistical life-years” would value children more than adults; see below. 
14 We return to this question in Part V. 

4 

should 

regulators  really  use  a  uniform  value  per  life  saved?  Should  they  disregard  the 

suffering fe

lt by dependents—and by those who die?15  

For

  both  bodies  of  law,  a  pervasive  question  is  how  to  combine

  accuracy  with 

admini

strability.  A  simple  and  uniform  number,  accompanied  by  blanket  exclusions  of 

values  that

  are  hard  to  calculate,  might  well  be  simplest 

to  administer—and  regulatory 
generally  takes  this  approach.16  In  addition,  an  effort  at  greater  accuracy  might 

policy 

invite  inter

est-group  maneuvering;  a  uniform  number  provides  a  degree  of  insulation 

against  spe

cial  pleading.  But  if  full  compensation 

and optimal deterrence are the goals, 

then  a 

high  degree  of  individuation  should  be  expected,  tailoring  dollar  amounts  to  the 

precise cir

courts  pos

cumstances of mortality risks. Suppose, for example, that both regulators and 
sessed  “hedometers,”17  costlessly  able  to  calculate  the  anticipated  or  actual 

loss, to all

, from every human death. If hedometers were available, courts could ensure 

perfectly  a

ccurate  compensation,  and  both  courts  and  regulators  would  bring 

about 

optima

l deterrence, attuned to individual circumstances. If administrative costs were zero, 

different agencies should offer a wide range of diverse values for statistical lives, subject 

                                                 
15  It  would  be  possible  to  argue  that  both  of  these  are  picked  up  by  figures  for  VSL:  we  explore    that 
question below. 
16  The  most  explicit  discussions  of  varying  VSL  have  come  from  the  EPA.  In  its  2003  discussion  of 
hazardous air pollutants, see 68 Fed. Reg. 1660, 1693 (Jan. 13, 2003), the EPA noted that there “is general 
agreement that the value to an individual of a reduction is mortality risk can vary based on several factors, 
including the age of the individual, the type of risk, the level of control the individual has over the risk, the 
individual’s  attitude  toward  risk,  and  the  health  status  of  the  individual.”  Nonetheless,  the  agency 
announced, without offering reasons, that it “prefers not to draw distinctions in the monetary value assigned 
to  the  lives  saved  even  if  they  differ  in  age,  health  status,  socioeconomic  status,  gender  or  other 
characteristic  of the adult population.” Id.  

An extended discussion of related issues can be found in the EPA’s arsenic proposal, see 65 Fed. 
Reg.  38888,  38945  (June  22,  2000).  There  the  EPA  noted  that  the  “factors  which  may  influence  the 
estimate  of  economic  benefits  associated  with  avoided  cancer  fatalities  include  (1)  a  possible  ‘cancer  
premium’ (i.e., the additional value or sum that people may be willing to pay to avoid the experiences of 
dread, pain and suffering, and diminished quality of life associated with cancer-related illness and ultimate 
fatality); (2) the willingness of people to pay more over time to avoid mortality risk as their income rises; 
(3) a possible premium for accepting involuntary risks as opposed to voluntary [sic] assumed risks; (4) the 
greater risk aversion of  the general population as opposed to workers in the wage-risk valuation studies; 
(5) ‘altruism’ or the willingness of people to pay more to reduce risk in other sectors of the populationl and 
(6) a consideration of health status and life years remaining at the time of premature mortality.” The EPA 
acknowledged that these factors “may significantly increase the present value estimate,” but said that “there 
is currently neither a clear consensus among economists about how to simultaneously analyze each of these 
adjustments  nor  is  there  adequate  empirical  data  to  support  quantitative  estimates  for  all  potentially 
significant  adjustment  factors.”    Id.  Hence  the  EPA  solicited  comments  on  these  issues  and  said  that  it 
would ask its Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) to conduct a review. Id. 
17  For  those  who  are  skeptical  of  utilitarian  approaches,  substitute  the  term  “eudaimeters,”  based  on  the 
Greek  notion  of  eudaimonia,  establishing  a  more  complex  notion  of  well-being.  See  Martha  N
ussbaum, 
The Fragility of Goodness (1986). 

5 

to the limitation that regulatory programs often apply to many people at once; and courts, 

focusing  on  individual  cases,  would  offer  an  even  wider  range  of  dollar  awards  in  the 

event o

f wrongful death.  

Because administrative costs are high (and also because of political constraints on 
inequality18), more uniformity is inevitable; but how much? One of the most noteworthy 

features  of  the  comparative  exercise  is  that agencies opt for uniformity, whereas courts 

call for a high degree of individuation. Undoubtedly this difference is partly a function of 

the  ex  post  focus  of  wrongful  death  actions  and  the  ex  ante  focus  of  regulation.  But  it 

would be most surprising if the radical difference, on this count, could be justified by that 

difference in perspective. 

We  believe  that  both  bodies  of  law  can  learn  a  great  deal  from  the  other.19  In 

particular,  we  suggest  five  large-scale  reforms.  First,  agencies  should  move  in  the 

direction of the more individuated approach of tort law. They should not use a uniform 
number per life saved. In addition, they should consider pain and suffering, dread,20 and 

loss to dependents. These changes would make a dramatic difference for administrative 

practice,  replacing  the  crude  current  effort  to  use  a  single  value  for  statistical  lives. 

Second,  courts  should  move  in  the  direction  of  administrative  regulation  by  taking 

account  of  the  welfare  loss  to  the  decedent.  This  change  would  significantly  alter 

wrongful death cases, by producing far higher recoveries in many cases. Third, agencies 

should  move  in  the  direction  of  courts  by  including  the  emotional  distress  and  other 

welfare  losses  incurred  by  dependents;  courts  should  not  ignore  losses  of  support  for 

dependents  (as  agencies  do),  but  they  should  offer  more  accurate  and  fine-grained 

understandings  of  that  figure.  These  changes  would  increase  the  stringency  of 

administrative  regulations  and  promote  less  arbitrary  figures  from  courts.  Fourth,  both 

courts and agencies should change their valuation of the deaths of children by taking the 

child’s  welfare  loss  seriously  while  also  accounting  for  the  possibility  of  offsetting 

                                                 
18 See below. 
19 There is a third body of relevant law: criminal prohibitions. These prohibitions overlap, to some extent, 
with both tort law and administrative regulation, carving out a subset of conduct for special sanctions. By 
attending to enforcement levels and sanctions, it might even be possible to deduce an implicit value of life, 
or of statistical risks, from criminal law. Ideally, of course, legislators would ensure that all three bodies of 
law  worked  well  together,  producing  the  right  deterrent  signal.  For  present  purposes,  however,  we  put 
criminal law to one side. 
20On some of the complexities here,

 see Matthew Adler, Fear Assessment (unpublished manuscript 2004)). 

6 

behavior  by  parents.  Fifth,  agencies  and  courts  should  evaluate  mortality  risks  that  are 

imposed  on  foreigners—both  resident  aliens  and  nonresident  aliens  whose  mortality  is 

affected  by  domestic  activities—in  a  manner  that  is  consistent  with  the  diplomatic 

objectiv

es of the political branches. 

This Article is organized as follows. Part I provides the background from both tort 

law and regulatory policy. Part II discusses the theoretical basis for valuing human lives. 

Part  III  investigates  a  range  of  methodological  difficulties  and  implications.  Part  IV 

proposes reforms to tort law and regulatory policy. Part V explores the question why tort 

law and regulatory policy currently take such different approaches to valuing loss of life. 

 

I. Back

ground 

 

 

A. How Tort Law Values Loss of Life 

At common law, victims (that is, their estates) and dependents could not recover 

damages for wrongful death. As a result, courts did not face the problem of calculating 

damages for loss of life. In the nineteenth century, however, many states enacted statutes 

that provided for recoveries. Wrongful death statutes provided that dependents, including 

spouses  and  children,  may  recover  damages  for  lost  support.  Survival  statutes  provided 

that the victim’s estate may recover damages for certain losses that the victim incurred as 

a  result  of  the  tort,  such  as  medical  expenses  and  earnings  lost  between  injury  and 
death.21  Today,  most  states  have  one  or  both  types  of  statutes,  or  statutes  that  combine 

elements of each type. In addition, there has been much judge-created common law that 

can  be  traced  to  these  statutes.  As  a  general  proposition,  one  can  say  that  courts  now 

award  damages  on  account  of  death  caused  by  a  tort,  but  the  rules  vary  widely  by 
jurisdiction. 22 

Despite  the  variations,  there  are  common  themes.  Most  courts  award  “non-

economic” damages, that is, damages for pain and suffering incurred by the victim as a 

result  of  the  tort  prior  to  death,  and  also  for  the  distress  and  loss  of  companionship 

                                                 
21 2 Dan B. Dobbs, Law of Remedies 423 (2d ed. 1993). 
22 Id., at 421-445. 

7 

suffered  by  dependents  or  heirs.23  All  states  award  “economic”  damages.  In  states  that 

use  the  “loss  to  dependents”  measure,  these damages are supposed to make dependents 

whole;  roughly,  they  provide  the  support  that  dependents  would  have  received  if  the 

victim had lived. This may be measured as lost contributions from victims to dependents 

(housin

g, food, and so forth), or, more crudely, future income minus victim’s expenses. 

In states that use the “loss to estate” measure, damages are supposed to approximate the 
victim’s estate if she had lived a natural life—total future income minus expenses.24 

Notice  that  the  non-economic  and  economic  measures  do  not  provide  an  award 

for  the  loss  of  life  per  se—that  is,  the  victim’s  “loss  of  life’s  pleasure,”  also  known  as

 

hedonic  damages.  Plaintiffs  suing  on  behalf  of  a  victim  who  has  no  future  income,  no 

dependents, and 

zero damages or damages sufficient only to cove

no spouse, and who dies without feeling pain, should ordinarily receive 
r funeral expenses.25 This large category 

of people includes elderly people who are living off savings and unemployed or homeless 

people.  It  also  includes  homemakers,  unless  an  implicit  value  is  assigned  to  household 

services. And it includes children—at least in “loss to dependent” states, because children 
do not have dependents who lose support as a result of their death.26 

 

Of course, this is a matter of formal law; in practice, damages are often awarded 

on account of the deaths of people who have no income, and often damages are in excess 

of lost income. This is partly because non-economic damages will be available in most 

cases,  partly  because  juries  are  given  a  great  deal  of  discretion  to  award  damages  in 

wrongful death cases and are provided little guidance by courts, and partly because courts 
use  fictions  in  order  to  ensure  a  “reasonable”  recovery.27  But  if  all  this  is  true,  then 

                                                 
23  Id.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  resulting  awards  have  a  high  degree  of  arbitrariness.  See 
David W. Leebron, Final Moments: Damages for Pain and Suffering Prior To Death, 64 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 
256 (1989). 
24 Id., at 430-38. 
25 E.g., McGowan v. Wright, 524 So.2d 308 (Miss. 1988). 
26 In “loss to estate” states, the child’s future income will be calculated, and awarded to parents or heirs. 
See Dobbs, supra, at 436. 
27  For  example,  the  household  services  of  the  child  –  w
middle class house

holds, are trivial – may be given a high value. See Dobbs, supra, at 440. 

hich  in  most  households,  and  certainly  modern 

8 

damages  for  wrongful  death  are  highly  arbitrary,28  and  indeed  this  is  the  conventional 
wisdom,29 supported by our own evidence as discussed below.30 

Only  five  states  permit  damages  for  hedonic  loss:  Arkansas,31  Connecticut,32 
 
Hawaii,33 New Hampshire,34 and New Mexico.35 As a matter of theory, plaintiffs in these 

states  can  recover  damages  on  account  of  the  wrongful  death  of  people  who  have  no 

income  and  otherwise  would  not  be  entitled  to  non-economic  damages.  However,  the 

statutes and judicial opinions in these states do not explain the methodology, and judges 
usually  leave  the  calculation  to  the  jury,  with  lax  oversight.36  In  some  cases,  courts 

appear to misunderstand the nature of hedonic loss—for example, confusing it with lost 
income.37 

 

The  upshot  is  that  it  is  exceptionally  hard  to  predict,  as  a  matter  of  formal  law, 

what  damages  for  wrongful  death  will  be  in  any  particular  case.  However,  verdict  and 

settlement  data  can  be  used  to  paint  a  rough  picture.  We  examined  data  from  two  data 

sets:  (1)  an  unscientific  Jury  Verdict  and  Settlement  data  set  that  provides  a  wealth  of 
information  about  the  characteristics  of  the  cases  (“JVS”)38;  and  (2)  a  more  scientific 

                                                 
28

 Even 

aside from the legal confusion, jurors do not do a good job of monetizing losses when provided 
with no clear guidance to discipline their judgments. David Schkade et al., Deliberating About Dollars: The 
Severity Shift, 100 Colum. L. Rev. 1139 (2000). 
29 See, e.g., David Baldus, John C. MacQueen, and George Woodworth, Improving Judicial Oversight of 
Jury  Damages  Assessments:  A  Proposal  for  the  Comparative  Additur/Remittitur  Review  of  Awards  for 
Nonpecuniary Harms and Punitive Damages, 80 Iowa L. Rev. 1109 (1995). 
30 See TAN infra. 
31 See Durham v. Marberry, 2004 Ark. LEXIS 179 (interpreting ambiguous 2001 amendment to Arkansas 
survival statute (Ark. Code Ann. § 16-62-101(b)) as permitting recovery for hedonic loss). 
32 See Katsetos v. Nolan, 368 A.2d 172 (Conn.1976); Chase v. Fitzgera d, 45 A.2d 789 (Conn.1946). 
33 See Montalvo v. Lapez, 884 P.2d 345, 364 (Haw. 1994). 
34 See Marcotte v. Timberlane/Hampstead School District, 733 A.2d 394 (N.H. 1999). 
35  See  New  Mexico  St.  §41-2-1  (discussed  in  Smith  v.  Ingersoll-Rand  Co.,  214  F.3d  1235,  1245  (N.M. 
2000)). Mississippi briefly allowed damages for hedonic losses in wrongful death cases, but the case that 
approved  such  damages  –  Choctaw  Maid  Farms  v.  Hailey,  822  So.2d  911  (2002)  –  was  overturned  by 
statute.  See  Brendan  I.  Koerner,  What’s  Your  Happiness  Worth?,  Legal  Affairs,  January/February  2004. 
Hedonic losses may also be permitted in federal civil rights cases involving wrongful death. See Sherrod v. 
Berry, 629 F. Supp. 195, 205 (N.D.Ill.1985), rev’d on other grounds, 856 F.2d 802 (7th Cir. 1988); Frye v. 
Town of Akron, 759 F. Supp. 1320, 1325-26 (N.D. Ind. 1991). However, it is not yet clear whether other 
circuits will follow Sherrod. See Wescott v. Crinklaw, 133 F.3d 658, 660-61 (8th Cir. 1998). 
36 See Dobbs
37 Cohen suggests
 that they have not, citing Lengel v. New Haven Gas Co., 111 A.2d 547 (1955), where the 
court reversed an award of $60,000 because not justified b
y the decedent’s lost income; the court did not 
mention hedonic loss. See Lloyd Cohen, Toward an Economic Theory of the Measurement of Damages in 
a Wrongful Death Action, 
38 The data are from the Jury Verdict and Settlements, Combined database in Lexis. This data set appears to 
have been generated from various local verdict and settlement reporting services, whose se
lection methods 

34 Emory L.J. 295, 307 (1985). 

, supra, at 445. 

l

9 

Civil Justice System data set that contains little information about the characteristics of 
cases (“CJS”).39 

Table  1  provides  some  examples  from  the  JVS  data  set;  these  examples  are 

selected to show the range of real world outcomes. 

Case 
cherwhite v. San Bernandino City 
fied Sch. Dist. 

wn v. LaFontaine-Rish Medical 
ociates 

Sat
Uni
Romero v. West Valley Sch. Dist. 
Scurlock v. Twin Labs, Inc. 
un v. CH Franciscan Shared 
Bra
. 
Lab
oratories, Inc
Cook v. Newm  
an
Champion v. Outlook Nashville, Inc. 
Anonymous v. Anonymous 
Bro
Ass
Tengler v. Preferred Unlim
ited, Inc. 
Solis v. Fiatallis North America, Inc. 
Smith v. Antoine 
Huertero v. W
Ventura v. Lipton 
Davis v. Ponce 
Ojeda v. Shropshire 
Riley v. Giroux 
Tipp v. Dow Chemical Co. 
Domback v. Kubsch 
arz v. St. Francis Medical Center 
Stol
l v. Berkowitz 
Ebe
n v. Mercy Health Corp. of 
Ega
hestern PA 
Sout
mes v. Harris 
Hol
Men
dola v. Witkowski 
 

ersching 

Table 1: Tort Values of Life 

Facts 

State  Year 

CA 

2002 

school playground accident (11 
years old) 
school bus accident (5 years old) 

2003 
2003  products liability (drug) 

WA 
TX 

Award40 

$500,000 

$1.8 million 
$2 million 

WI 

2003  medical malpractice (lab delay) 

$650,000 

MO 
TN 
OH 

2002  medical malpractice 
2002  police brutality 
2002  malpractice (9 months old) 

NY 

2003  malpractice (anesthesia) 

IL 
TX 
TX 
CA 
NY 
TX 
TX 
FL 
TX 
WI 
CT 
PA 

onths old) 

firefighter death in arson 

automobile accident 

1999 
2003  worksite accident 
2003  dram shop (9 years old) 
2003  police error (18 m
1999  malpractice 
2003 
2002  malpractice 
2003  malpractice 
2001  workplace—asbestos 
2004  malpractice 
2003  malpractice 
2003  malpractice 

PA 

2003  malpractice 

$3 million 
$4.4 million 
$7.5 million 

$365,000 

$18.2 million41
 
$12 million 
$276,000 
$2.1 million 
$15 million 
$506,000 
$1 million 
$750,000 
$9 million 
$198,500 
$7.8 million 
$2.9 million 

$125,000 

DC 
NY 

2003 
2002 

auto accident (81 years old) 
railroad-auto accident (77 years 

old) 

$1.75 

million 

$10,00042 

                                                                                                                                                 
are  not  disclosed.  Thus,  it  is  unsafe  to  assume  that  the  data  are  randomly  generated,  and  indeed  Lexis 
explicitly disclaims that they are. 
39 The data were generated by the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. Data and 
other 
information  are  available  online  at:  http://webapp.icpsr.umich.edu/cocoon/NACJD-STUDY/ 
03957.xml. The website includes information on verdicts and settlements of tort lawsuits between January 
and December 2001 from the
 75 largest counties in the United States. These data were randomly generated. 
40 We do not include punitive damages, pain and suffering damages, medical expenses, past income, and so 
forth, so this category is an attempt to determine the implicit valuation of the loss of life itself. Thus, we do 
include (after death) losses to dependents, both economic and noneconomic. 
41 The driver was high on drugs; we suspect that in this c
included a punitive element, even though not classified as such. 
42 Classified as “pecuniary costs”; it is not clear what this means. 

ase, as in other high award cases, the damages 

10 

 

In  the  JVS  data  set,  the  mean  award  for  loss  of  life—meaning,  usually,  lost 

income to dependents or the estate, or mental distress to dependents (we tried to exclude 

punitiv

e  damages,  damages  for  pain  and  suffering  of  the  victim  prior  to  death,  medical 

expenses,  funeral  expenses,  and  so  forth)—was  $3

.1  million,  and  the  median  was  $1.1 

million. This is roughly consis

was about

 $3,75

9,000 and the 

Thus, the CJS survey sugge

sts 

tent with the findings of the C

JS survey, in which the mean 
 2001.43 
media  was $
n
a samp
that  e JVS survey may be reasonably reliable. 4 In any 

le of cases from

961,000 for 

th

 

4

event, it seems clear enou

gh th

at wh n outl ers are excluded, the tort sys

e

i

lives at well under $3 m

illion, and about half the tim

e under $1 million.

tem v

alues lost 
45 We suspect that 

the  real  am

ounts  are  somewh

decline  during  post-verdict 

pro

w

at  lo er;  th   evidence  sugges
e
ceed gs.46  he  considerab
T

in

ts  that  awards  g

enerally 

le  variance  in  both 

data  sets 

also  supports  the  conven

tiona

l  w om  that  the  damage  awards  have  a  degree  of 

isd

arbitra

riness,  that  is,  they  are  not  closely  tied  to  the  underlying  concerns  of  the  tort 

system and are also erratic an

d u

npre ictable 47 

d

.

rd

 

ay be m

Bureau of 

 Another d

Counties, 2001, 

t the data 
ry awards 
illion. Id., 
. And see 
me pattern. 

                    
43 Thomas H
Justice Statistics 
44
ata s

laims, or appears to claim, tha
tatistics for 2002 ju
 and high of $100 m
elements as punitive damages
ata set, which show the sa

                            
h, Ci
vil
. Cohen & Steven K Smit
 Trial C ses and Verdicts in Large 
a
NCJ 
20
Bulletin, April 2004, 
2803, a  p. 10. 
t
y Ve
rdi
et was created by Jur
ct Rese rch, which c
a
njury (43  ed. 2004). S
 I
ds in ersonal
nt Award Tren
 P
an $4.7
million; low of $5,809
dian $1.6 million; me
 
ch (for  s) irrelevant 
 su
u
ury Ve ict Research d
r J
rd
ility 10 -09 (1991). 
iab
8

s would inc
 e
cusi, Reforming Produ
m of selec
igh awards both because o
Mitchell Polinsky, Are 
erg et al., 26 J. L

set is reliable. See Curre
(not settlements) are: me
at 6. Note that these award
lude
Viscusi’s figures, generated from an arlie
cts L
See W. Kip Vis
45 We should note the proble
ore likely to settle cases that are likely 
tion effects. Parties m
igh stakes 
version
f ris
to produce h
and of the lik
 
Rational? A 
 Dama es Really Insignificant, Predictab
Punit
cases. See A. 
le, and 
g
ents data 
68 (1997). To be sure, verdicts and s
d. 663,
egal S
Comment on Eisenb
em
ettl
 6
eflect  th
  than  the  verdicts;  however,  this  m
r
e  lowe
ents 
includes  settlements,  an
ay  r
e 
p
laintiff’s risk of losing, a risk that is absent for verdicts. Still, all this means, for our purposes, is that there 
is a lot of unexplained variance in the cases: if some high amount, X, is the “real” level of damages for loss 
of life, then why are so many verdicts so much lower? 
46  See,  e.g.,  Ivy  E.  Broder,  Characteristics  of  Million  Dollar  Awards:  Jury  Verdicts  and  Final 
Disbursements, 11 Just. Sys. J. 34
9 (1986) (finding that plaintiffs ultimately received about 57 percent of 
the  verdict);  Neil  Vidmar  et  al.,  Jury  Awards  for  Medical  Malpractice  and  Post-Verdict  Adjustments  of 
Those  Awards,  48  DePaul  L.  Rev.  265  (finding  reductions  of  about  7  to  60  percent  in  different 
jurisdictions). 
47 The standard deviation for the JVS data set is $6.1 million, with a minimum of $0 and a maximum of $50 
million. We do find it difficult to believe that the data were selected because of their variance, however, so 
the variance may be reliable (or else it just reflects gaps and inaccuracies in the data, e.g., treating punitive 
damages  as  if  they  were  economic  loss  damages).  In  the  CJS  data  set,  th
e  standard  deviation  is  $11.7 
million, with a minimum of $705 and a maximum of $120 million, according to our own calculations. For 
analysis  of  product  liability  cases,  See  W.  Kip  Viscusi,,  Inter
national  Review  of  Law  and  Economics 
(1988); W. Kip  Viscusi, J. Legal Studies (1988); W. Kip Viscusi,
 J. Legal Studies (1986). 

ely higher litigation costs in h

k a
ive
tu
ar

d  the  settlem

11 

Hence  two  points  emerge  from  the  wrongful  death  cases.  The  first  is  that  in 

principle,  the  law  calls  for  a  highly  individuated  approach,  one  that  recognizes  a  wide 

range  of  factors  that  bear  on  the  degree  of  loss  to  dependents.  The  second  is  that  in 

practice, actual awards on account of loss of life are usually well below $3 million and 

also characterized by great variance. 

 

B. How Regulatory Policy Values Loss of Life 

As  we  have  noted,  agencies  now  assign  monetary  values  to  human  lives.  The 

practice is recent, having become systematized only as a result of an executive order from 
1981.48 For a period, agency figures were highly and inexplicably variable.49 With some 

exceptions,  however,  most  regulatory  agencies  have  now  converged  on  a  fairly  narrow 

range for the valuation of life: $5 million to $6.5 million. Consider the following table, 

accounting for agency valuations in the recent past: 

 

Table 2: Agency Values of Life, 1996–2003 

Agency 

Regulation and Date 

D
M
A

ept of Transportation/Federal 
otor Carrier Safety 
dministration 

D
S

ept. of Health & Human 
ervices/FDA 

D
ept. of Agriculture Food Safety 
nd Inspection Service 
a

D
S

ept. of Health & Human 
ervices/FDA 

O

ffice of Management and Budget 

Safety Requirements for Operators of Small 
Passenger-Carrying Commercial Motor Vehicles 
Used in Interstate Commerce 
August 12, 2003 
68 FR 47860-01 
Food Labeling: Trans Fatty Acids in Nutrition 
Labeling, Nutrient Content Claims, and Health 
Claims 
July 11, 2003 
68 FR 41434-01 
Control of 1Listeria Monocytogenes in Ready-
to-Eat Meat and Poultry Products 
June 6, 2003 
68 FR 34208-01 
Labeling Requirements for Systemic Anti- 
bacterial Drug Products Intended for Human Use  
February 6, 2003 
68 FR 6062-01 
Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of 
Federal Regulations 
February 3, 2003 
68 FR 5492-01 

Value of  
Statistical Life 

$3 million 

$6.5 million 

$4.8 million 

$5 million 

$5 million 

                                                 
48 See Exec. Ord. 12291, Fed. Reg. (1981). For discussion of the origins of cost-benefit balancing in federal 
regulation, see Richard Pildes and Cass R. Sunstein, Reinventing the Regulatory State, 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1 
(1995). 
49 See Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are 
Distorted, 29 J. Legal Stud. 1105 (2000) 

12 

E

PA 

E

PA 

EPA 

EPA 

EPA 

EPA 

EPA 

Dept. of Transportation/FAA 

Dept. of Health & Human 
Services/FDA 

Dept. of Health & Human 
Services/FDA 

D
ept. of Agriculture/Food Safety & 
nspection Service 
I

educing Interstate Ozo

Control of Emissions from Nonroad Large 
Spark-Ignition Engines, and Recreational 
Engines (Marine & Land-Based) 
November 8, 2002 
67 FR 68242-01  
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: 
Arsenic and Clarifications to Compliance and 
New So
urce Contaminants Monitoring 
January 22, 2001 
66 FR 6976-01 
Control of Air Pollution from New Motor 
Vehicles: Heavy-Duty Engine and Vehicle 
Standards and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur 
Control Requirements 
January 18, 2001 
66 FR 5002-01 
Control of Air Pollution from New Motor 
Vehicles: Tier 2 Motor Vehicle Emissions 
Standards and Gasoline Sulfur Control 
Requirements 
February 10, 2000 
65 FR 6698-01 
Findings of Significant Contribution and 
Rulemaking on Section 125 Petitions for 
Purposes of R
Transport 
January 18, 2000 
65 FR 2674-01 
Final Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for 
Hazardous Waste
 Combustors 
September 30, 19
99 
64 FR 52828-01 
National Primary Drinking Water Regulations: 
Disinfectants and Disinfection Byproducts 
December 16, 
63 FR 69390-01 
Financial Responsibility Requirements for 
Licensed Launch Activities 
August 26, 1998 
63 FR 45592-01 
Quality Mammography Standards 
October 28, 1997 
62 FR 55852-01 
Regulations Res
tricting the Sale and Distribution 
of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect 
Children and Adolesc
ents 
August 28, 1996 
61 FR 44396-01
 
Pathogen Reduction; Hazard Analysis and 
Critical Control Point (HACCP) Systems 
July 25, 1996 
61 FR 38806-01 

1998 

ne 

$6 million 

$6.1 million 

$6 million 

$5.9 million 

$5.9 million 

$5.6 million 

$5.6 million 

$3 million 

$

2 - 3 million

 

$

2.5 million 

$1.6 million 

13 

Dept. of Transportation/FAA 

er Product Safety 

Consum
Comm

ission 

Consumer Product Safety 
Commission 

 

ing, 
ng Centers 

Aircraft Flight Simulator Use in Pilot Train
Testing and Checking and at Traini
July 2, 1996 
61 FR 34508-01 
Requirements for Labeling of Retail Containers 
of Charcoal 
May 3, 1996 
61 FR 19818-01 
Large Multiple-T
March 26, 1996 
61 FR 13084-01 

ube Fireworks Devices 

$

2.7 million

 

$5 million 

$3 - $7 million 

 
What  is  the  source  of 

these  numbers?  The  answer  involves  real-world  m

arkets, 

producing  evidence  of  compensation  levels  for  actual  risks.50

  In  the  workplace  and  for 

that 

consumer goods, additional sa

fety has a price; market evidence is i
nvestigated to identify 
price.51 Agency valuations are largely a product of studies of actual workplace risks, 
 paid to assume mortality hazards.52 The 
53 The calculation 

e general range of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000.

uch workers are

attempting to determine how m

relevant risks usually are in th

of  th

e  value  of  a  statistical  lif

e  is  a  product  of  simple  arithmet

ic.  Suppose 

that  worker

s 

must  be  paid  $600,  on  averag

e,  to  eliminate

  a  risk  of  1/10,000.  If  so,  the  value  of  a 

statistical  life  would  be  said

  to  be  $6  million.  Additional  informat

ion  comes  from 

ingent valuation studies, a

cont
sking people how much th
e 
statistical  risks  of  death.54  But  studies  of  this  kind  are  not  the  foundation  of  agency 

ey are willing to p

ay to reduc

policies  in  the  dom

ain  of  m

ortality  risks,  apparently  on  the  theo

ry  tha

t  real-wor

ld 

evidence is more reliable. 

Several  features  of  ag

ency  practice  are  noteworthy  by  w

ay  of  comparison  to 

wrongful  death  actions. 

The  m

ost  obvious  is

  that  agencies  provide  a  unifo

rm  numbe

r; 

they  make  no  effort  to  indi

viduate,  even  though  more 

individuation  would  not  be 

                            

                    
50 See W. Kip Viscusi, supra. 
51
 A valuable and comprehensi

 

ve ov
ritical  Re

erview can be found in W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph
view  of  Market  Estimates  Throughout  the  W

of  a  Statistical  Life:  A  C
Uncertainty 5 
(2003). 
52 See Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs, supra
 note, for discussi
53  See,  e.g.,  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  The  V
alue  of  Life:  Estimates  With  Risks  by  Oc
Econ. Inquiry 29, 33 (2004) (showin
g fatality risks ranging from about 1/100,000
54  See,  e.g.,  James  Hammitt  and 
in-Tau  Liu,  Ef
J
f 
Mortality  Risk,  28
  J.  Risk  and  Uncertainty  73  (2004);  George  Tolley  et  al.,  Valuing  Health  For  Policy 
(1995);  Valuing  Environmental  Preferences  (Ian  Ba
an  &  K.  G.  Willis  eds.,  1999);  Peter  Diamond  & 
Jerry Hausman, Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better Than No Number, 8 J. Econ. Persp. 45, 49-
52 (1994); Note, Ask A Silly Question, 105 Harv L Rev 1981 (1992). 

cupation  and  Industry,  42 
 to 45/100,000). 

fects  of  Disease  Type  and

n  the  Value  o

7  J.  Risk  an

  Latency  o

orld,  2

on. 

tem

 E. Aldy, The Value 
d 

14 

difficult. In addition, agencies use a higher (average) value for loss of life to the victim 

but  place  no  value  on  losses 

to  spouses,  friends,  and  others  who  suff

er  a  welfare  loss, 

economic and otherwise, in the event of death. The uniform numbers, refusing to make 

inquiries that would lead to le

ss uniformity or that would be difficult 

to administer, are 

not surpris

ing in light of the co

mparative y

outh of regulatory valuation and in light of the 

controversial  nature  of  imag

inable  distinctions.  More  accurat

e,  and  more  complex, 

valuations 

might  be  expected 

to  follow  an  i

nitial  period  in  which  assign

ment  of  some

 

number  of  statistical  lives  becomes  entrenched.  But  these  points  raise  the  theoretical 

questio

ns that bear on both judicial and administrative practice. 

 
C.  A Comparison: The September 11 Victim Compensation Fund 

As  we  mentioned  at  the  outset,  the  September  11  Fund  was  influenced  by  tort 

principles, and it is instructive to compare the awards to dependents of deceased victims 

of  the  September  11  attacks  both  with  tort  wrongful  death  awards  and  with  agency 

valuations of life. Table 3 displays the comparison. 

 
 
 

 

Table 3: Tort, Sept. 11 Fund, and Agency Valuations of Life 

System 

Mean 

Median 

Minimum 

Maximum 

Standard 
Deviation 

Tort 

$3.8 million 

$961,000 

$0 

$50 million 

$6.1 million 

Sept. 11 

$2.0 million 

$1.7 million 

$250,000 

$7.1 million 

$1.4 million 

$3 million 

$5.9 million 

$5. 4 million 

Agency55 
rt awards from the CJS data set (2001); Sept. 11 awards from Fund Website;56 agency valuations 
Note: To
from  Ta
ble  2  (post-2000).  The  Sept.  11  data  are  based  on  amounts  received  after  deductions  for  life 
insurance  payments,  and  the  like;  they  therefore  understate  true  valuations,  probably  by  a  few  hundred 
thousand dollars.57 
 
 

The Sept. 11 fund has a higher median but lower mean than the tort system does. 

$6.5 million 

$1.0 million 

The  lower  mean  is  due  t

o  the  lack  of  extreme  awards  characteristic  of  the  tort  system. 

 

The higher median is probably due to two factors: (1) inflation from 2001 to 2004; and 
                               
                 
55 The agency statistics cannot be straightforwardly compar
ed to the statistics for the other systems, because 
the former will vary depending on the relative size of the populations that the different regulations affect. 
Still, they give a general sense of the differences.  
56 Available at: http://www.usdoj.gov/victimcompensation/payments_deceased.html. The website provides 
the mean, median, and range; we calculated the standard deviation from the raw data (also provided by the 
website). 
57  See  the  examples  provided  at:  http://www.usdoj.gov/victimcompensation/award_summaries.pdf.  We 
have been unable to find the appropriate statistics. 

15 

(2) the much higher average income of the September 11 victims compared to that of the 

general  population.  Putting  aside  the  outliers,  then,  the  Sept.  11  Fund  and  tort  awards 

seem largely consistent, and both are much lower than agency valuations. What the Sept. 

11  Fund  shares  with  agency  valuations  is  the  much  lower  degree  of  variance  than  that 

found in the tort system. 

 
II. Theory: Why Should Loss of Life Be Valued? 

 

 
 

 

 

 
Many people believe that a human life is uniquely precious and therefore cannot 
be  given  a  monetary  valuation.58  Calculating  the  value  of  a  human  life  demeans  the 

victim of the wrong rather than vindicating his memory. The intuition is understandable. 

But for purposes of law and policy, what is the alternative? Awarding zero da

mages for 

wrongful  death  is  hardly  less  demeaning,  and  an  award  of  an  “arbitrary”  amount  of 

money—either  the  jury  or  the  legislature  should  pick  a  number  out  of  thin  air—is  no 

better. Similarly, it is hard to believe that regulatory policy should assume that human life 

is worth nothing or, alternatively, that it has some ar

bitrary value. 

To understand how loss of life should be valued, we need to understand the social 

purposes  such

  a  practice  would  advance.  There  is  no  acontextual  method 

for  assigning 

mo

netary  v

alues  t

o  mor

tality  a

nd  mort

ality  r

isks.  We  start  with  tort  law,  which  is 

conventionally said to have two goals: deterrence and com ensation.

p

59 Th

en we turn t

o 

regulato

ry poli

cy, which sh

are

s tort law’s

 goa

l of deter

rence. 

A. Tort Law and Deterrence 

 

1. Principles of Tort Damages 

The tort 

system has two purposes: compensation and deterrence. Frequently, but 

not always, the two purposes lead in similar directions. If the victim of a wrongful death 

action  cannot  be  compensated,  deterrence  is  still  a  possibility.  The  question  we  now 

investigate is what level of damages produces optimal deterrence of wrongful death. Our 

basic conclusion is that two approaches are formally equivalent and will accomplish that 

task: a monetary amount, before any harm occurs, that is the multiple of the magnitude of 

                                                 
58 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value 
of Nothing (2004). 
59 E.g., Erny v. Estate of Merola, 792 A.2d 1208, 12

17 (N.J. 2002). 

16 

the harm and its probability, assessed for every person who is made to face the relevant 

risk;  or  a  monetary  amount,  after  the  harm  occurs,  that  reflects  the  magnitude  of  the 

harm.  The  choice  between  the  two  approaches  largely  depends  on  questions  of 
administrability.60 

 

To  understand  how  deterrence  works,  one  must  take  an  ex  ante  perspective.61 

S

uppose that at time 1 the legal rules are chosen; at time 2 everyone chooses how to act 

and what level of care to take; and at time 3 injurie

s and deaths occur, and liability and 

d

amage

s are determined for wrongful death actions. On the deterrence approach, we want 

to choose legal rules at time 1 that produce damages at time 3 that give everyone optimal 

incentives at time 2. 

 
As is well known, people can be given optimal incentives to take care if they are 
required to pay damages for any financial losses that they cause (or negligently cause).62 

Imagine,  for  example,  that  a  particular  behavior,  such  as  driving,  will  cause  $1000  in 

losses if an accident occurs. A driver can control the probability that the loss will occur 

by  taking  more  or  less  care.  The  cost  of  care  increases  with  the 

amount  of  care  that  is 

taken. The efficient level of care is the amount at which the marginal cost of care equals 

the expected marginal cost of an accident. By requiring the tortfeasor to pay damages, the 

law  forces  the  driver  to  internalize  the  losses  that  she  creates,  and  so  she  will  take 
precautions when the costs of those precautions are less than the expected losses.63 

 

We  can  think  of  the  victim’s  loss  in  two  equivalent 

ways.  We  can  say  that  the 

v

ictim incurs the cost of the accident, L, at time 3. In our example, L = $1000. This is the 

“ex post” loss. Alternatively, we can say that 
                                                 
60

the victim incurs an expected loss of pL at 

 There

 are also equitable issues here; from the equitable point of view, perhaps it is worse to compensate 
everyone ex ante for risks than to compensate those for harm when those harms come to fruition (insurance 
practices  are  obviously  relevant  to  an  evaluation).  But  our  focus  here  is  on  deterrence,  and  we  do  not 
engage those issues. 
61 As should be apparent, we are not dealing here with intentional killings, as in cases of homicide. It is not 
clear that the risk of being murdered should be analyzed in the same way as the risks ordinarily involved in 
wrongful  death  cases,  which  typically  involve  negligence  in  one  or another form. Difficult questions are 
raised  by  the  evident  fact  that  people  would  be  willing  to  pay  different  amounts  to  avoid  statistically 
identical  risks:  A  1/100,000  risk  of  a  cancer  death  is  different  from  a  1/100,000  risk  of  a  sudden 
unanticipated death (as we stress), and a 1/100,000 risk of being strangled, or of being killed in a terrorist 
attack, would undoubtedly produce its own distinctive numbers.  
62 To keep things simple, we assume throughout that only the tortfeasor can control the probability of an 
accident. This allows us to focus on the optimal level of damages for loss of life. We also focus on optimal 
incentives to take care, in which case the tort rule can be either strict liability or negligence. 
63 William M. Lande
Economic Analysis of Accident Law (1987). 

s and Richard A. Posner, The Economic Structure of Tort Law (1987); Steven Shavell, 

17 

time  1,  where  p  is  the  probability  of  the  accident  at  time  3.  This  is  the  “ex  ante”  loss. 

From an economic perspective, these losses are equivalent. If an insurance market exists, 

people are assumed to be indifferent between being awarded pL, as potential victims, at 
time 1, and L, as actual victims, at time 3.64 Insurers will set the premium equal to pL, 

and they will pay out L if the accident occurs. Tort law, in theory, could either require all 

drivers to pay all potential tort victims pL at time 1, or (as in fact) only drivers who cause 

accidents to pay only actual victims L at time 3. If the insurer is subrogated (as is usually 

the  case),  then  the  victim  is  indifferent  between  these  two  systems,  as  is  the  insurer. 

Potential  victims  who  want  insurance  can  use  their  “damages”  of  pL  under  the  first 

system  to  pay  for  the

  insurance  premium,  and  simply  collect  from  the  driver  under  the 

second system without going through the insurance intermediary. Potential victims who 

do not want insurance could purchase an investment instrument that pays pL at time 1 in 
return for the chance of L at time 3.65 

 

Why  does  the  tort  system  award  damages  of  L  to  actual  victims  rather  than 

damages of pL to potential victims, when the two awards are equivalent? A large part of 

the answer is one of practicality. Potential victims cannot be easily identified in advance, 

and many risks are difficult or even impossible to calculate. In the unusual cases when 

the reverse is true—when courts cannot award L to actual victims because the loss will 

occur in the distant future—some courts have been willing to force potential tortfeasors 
to pay potential victims damages equal to pL.66 Thus, tort law does not, in principle, bar 

awards  of  pL  rather  than  L;  its  focus  on  L  stems  from  the  fact  that  L  is  a  far  simpler 

foundation for judicial decisions. 

 

2. Valuing Loss of Life 

 

 

Now  let  us  turn  to  the  problem  of  measuring  L  when  the  loss  is  death.  To  fix 

intuitions, suppos

e that the (multiply unfortunate!) victim of the wrongful death tort has 

no  dependents,  no  spouse,  no  friends,  and  no  income;  suppose  too  that  the  death  was 

instant,  involving  no  pain,  suffering,  dread,  or  medical  expenses.  Putting  aside  funeral 

                                                 
64 We put to one side some complexities with this assumption. 
65 Cf. Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Anti-Insurance, 31 J. Legal Stud. 203 (2002). 
66 See Matthew D. Adler, Risk, Death and Harm: The Normative Foundations of Risk Regulation, U. Minn. 
L.  Rev.  1419-21  (forthcoming  2004)  and  citations  therein  (discussing  tort  cases  that  recognize  torts  for 
increasing the risk of death). 

18 

expenses,  most  courts  would  be  required  by  law  to  award  zero  damages,  which  is  a 

serious puzzle. 

 

How should we think about valuing the loss of life? One thought is that the loss of 

life  should  be  valued  at  infinity  because  most  people  would  not  accept  any  amount  of 

money  in  exchange  for  their  lives.  If  L—the  loss—is  infinite,  then  the  product  pL  is 

infinite  as  well.  But  this  answer  mistakes  the  relevant  inquiry,  which  involves 

probabilities  of  death,  not  death  itself.  Designate  a  new  variable  R,  which  refers  to  the 

amount a person is willing to pay to avoid a particular risk of death. When a new risk is 

created—say,  a  new  kind  of  manufacturing  process  creates  new  sources  of  pollution, 

producing a new risk of 1/500,000 in the area—everyone who incurs this risk suffers a 

loss of welfare, which can be measured as R. If the person can pay to avoid this risk—

say, by moving—then he will pay any amount of money up to R. R is thus the ex ante 

payment to avoid the risk of death. 

 

It is desirable for potential tortfeasors to take account of this loss, R, for the same 

reason that it is desirable for them to take account of any other pecuniary or nonpecuniary 
loss.67 This can be done in two ways. All potential tortfeasors can be required to pay R to 

every potential victim (that is, all people who incur the new risk of death). Alternatively, 

tortfeasors  who  actually  cause  the  death  of  particular  victims  can  be  forced  to  pay  an 

amount of money only to those victims (their estates or dependents, or even to the state) 
such  that  the  expected  cost  for  the  potential  tortfeasor  is  R.68  Assuming  sufficient 

information, that amount is easily calculated. If victims are willing to pay R in order to 

avoid the risk, and the risk itself—that is, the probability of death, is q—then the proper 

level of damages is R/q. For example, i

f potential victims are willing to pay $600 in order 

to  avoid  the  risk  of  death,  and  the  risk  of  death  is  1/10,000,  then  their  estates  or 

                                                 
67 We are not discussing the optimal liability rule; simply assume that such a rule is in place. 
68 One or both methods have been discussed by various commentators. Ted R. Miller, Willingness to Pay 
Comes of Age: Will the System Survive, 83 Northwestern U.L. Rev. 876 (1989); Andrew Jay McClurg, It’s 
a Wonderful Life: The Case for Hedonic Damages in Wrongful Death Cases, 66 Notre Dame L. Rev. 57 
(1990); Landes and Posner, supra, at 187-89, 263-69; Shavell, supra, at 234 & n.7; Cohen, supra, at 316-20; 
Erin A. O'Hara, Hedonic Damages For Wrongful Death: Are Tortfeasors Getting Away With Murder?, 78 
Geo.  L.J.  1687  (1990);  Mark  Geistfeld,  Negligence,  Compensation, and the Coherence of Tort Law , 91 
Geo.  L.J.  585  (2003).  Arlen  criticizes  these  methodologie
s,  claiming  that  they  require  too  much 
information. See Jennifer Arlen, An Economic Analysis of Tort Damages for Wron
gful Death, 60 N.Y.U. 
L. Rev. 1113 (1985). Many articles defending the methodology, discussing aspects of it, or criticizing it are 
collected  in  The  New  Hedonics  Primer  for  Economists  and  Attorneys  (John  O.  Ward  and  Thomas  R. 
Ireland eds., 2d ed. 1996). 

19 

dependents should recover $6 million (at time 3). This is equivalent from the deterrence 

perspective to the first alternative, that of forcing tortfeasors to pay all potential victims 

$600 (at time 1).  

The  amount  R/q—$6  million,  in  our  example—is  often  called  the  value  of  a 

statistical  life  (VSL),  but  it  is  important  to  see  that  the  number  is  just  a  construct, 

designed to represent the cost of being subject to the risk of death, and not the value of 

human life in the ordinary sense. In fact the term “value of a statistical life,” though in 
common use,69 is actually quite misleading. What is really involved is the assignment of 

monetary  values  to  death  risks—an  assignment  of  the  sort  that  occurs,  though  almost 

always without formal calculation, whenever people run risks or take steps to reduce the 

risks that they face (as, for example, by purchasing smoke alarms or Volvos). 

The point to understand is that in order to calculate optimal damages for wrongful 

death, we do not need to ask how m

uch welfare or utility a dead person has, or how much 

w

elfare

  or  utility  declines  when  a  person  dies.  From  a  deterrence  perspective,  it  is 

sufficient to focus on the decline in welfare that results when a person is subjected to the 

risk of death. The assignment of a monetary value to mortality risks is an effort to ensure 

that focus. 

B. Tort Law and Compensation 

In  tort  cases  involving  easily  measured  losses,  the  deterrence  and  compensation 

goals are joined in an intuitively satisfying way. The tort victim who loses $1000 obtains 

damages  of  $1000.  The  tort  victim  is  fully  compensated,  and  optimal  deterrence  is 
achieved.70 In wrongful death cases, however, there appears to be a disjunction between 

the compensation and the deterrence goals. The dead person cannot be compensated—she 

is dead. Because of the compensatory focus of tort law, this may be the reason that courts 

denied damages for wrongful death prior to the enactment of wrongful death and survival 

statutes. Hence courts attempt to achieve the compensatory goals of modern tort law by 

focusing  on  the  losses  of  survivors.  We  think  that  the  attempt  is  inadequate  and  that 

courts can do much better. 

 

 

 

                                                 
69 See, e.g., Viscusi and Aldy, supra. 
70 Albeit only in simplified setting where the victim has no ability to reduce the probability of an accident 
by taking care. 

20 

 

 

 

Although dead people cannot be compensated, it is incorrect to say that tort law 

cannot,  with  respect  to  victims,  achieve  its  compensation  goal  in  the  wrongful  death 

context.  Compensation  is  possible  in  such  cases  once  it  is  understood  that  the  tort 

involve

s imposition of the risk of death.71 

To see why, imagine that courts adopted the alternative ex ante system of liability: 

all potential tortfeasors pay damages equal to R to all potential victims in time 1. If this 

were the normal system, then people would be compensated for being forced to undergo 

heightened risks of death. They would be compensated in the same sense as workers who 
are given hazard pay in return for voluntarily undertaking some risky task.72 

Now consider the regular ex post system. By awarding the victim’s estate R/q, the 

court does not compensate the victim in a straightforward sense: you cannot c

ompensate 

so

meon

e  who  is  dead.  But  suppose  that  the  victim  has  a  life  insurance  policy,  which 

provides that the insurer is subrogated to any claims that the victim’s estate has in case of 

wrongful death. In addition to getting the regular benefits of a life insurance policy, all 

potential victims who have life insurance would receive R in the form of the reduction in 

the life insurance premium. Because the insurer has the right to R/q in case of a wrongful 

death,  it  wi

ll  be  able  to  pass  on  the  cost  reduction  in  the  form  of  a  certain  premium 

reduction. In short, the risky behavior imp

oses a cost of R on all potential victims at time 

1, but at the same time all potential victims are compensated via the intermediation of an 
insurance  company  at  time  1.73  Thus,  tort  law  can  serve  its  compensatory  function  in 

wrongful  death  cases,  albeit  in  an  indirect  way  and  only  with  the  help  of  a  market 
intermediary.74  

 

To be sure, this is not what people usually mean by compensation in tort cases. 

The usual notion is that if one person commits a wrongful act that injures another person, 

                                                 
71  We  assume  that  there  is  no  hedonic  loss,  such  as  dread,  associated  with  the  risk.  If  there  is,  then 
additional compensation may be necessary. See Adler, supra. 
72 See W. Kip Viscusi, Risk by Choice (1983). 
73 Cf. Cohen, supra, at 338 (discussing a market in wrongful death actions). 
74  A  related  literature  discusses 
whether  tort  law should  award  damages  for  nonpecuniary  losses  such  as 
pain and suffering. Shavell argue
s that compensation for pain and suffering damages serves no insurance 
purpose,  because  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  marginal  value  of  a  dollar  for  a  person  is  higher 
when he endures pain and suffering than when he does not. See Shavell, supra, at 228. For a contrasting 
view, see Steven P. Croley and Jon D. Hanson, The Nonpecuniary Costs Of Accidents: Pain-And-Suffering 
Damages In Tort Law, 108 Harv. L. 
Rev. 1785 (1995). In the case of death, the victim himself cannot be 
insured against his own death in the sense of being made indifferent between life and death; life insurance 
payouts are to d

ependents, not insureds. 

21 

the  wrongdoer  should  compensate  the  victim  for  the  loss.  This  principle  yields 

straightforward  legal  results  in  ordinary  cases.  If  the  tortfeasor  destroys  the  victim’s 

automobile,  then  damages  should  equal  the  value  of  the  automobile  or  the  cost  of 

replacing  it.  Such  damages  would  make  the  victim  whole.  However,  damages  cannot 

c

ompen

sate  the  victim  of  a  wrongful  death  tort  because  the  money  has  no  value  for  a 

person  who  is  dead.  On  this  view,  courts’  refusal  to  award  damages  for  loss  of  life  is, 

from a strictly compensatory perspective, correct. 

 

To  avoid  this  odd  result,  some  scholars  have  suggested  that  a  risk  of  death  is  a 

harm; in their view, people should have a claim for tort damages if they are
 subjected to 
risks of death.75 Others have expressed doubts about whether a risk can be a harm,76 but if 

this debate is resolved in favor of the risk-is-harm view, then we are back to our earlier 

claim:  it  is  proper  to  award  damages  of  R in case of risk imposition. We add only that 

compensation can take the form of R/q in the case of death at time 3, as well as R for all 

potential victims at time 1, as long as potential victims purchase insurance and insurance 

premia adjust. 

C. Regulatory Policy 

 

1. Agencies and Deterrence.  

With  respect  to  valuing  the  loss  of  life,  the  implications  of  our  deterrence 

argument  is  the  same  for  regulatory  law  as  for  tort  law.  In  order  to  provide  optimal 

deterrence of behavior that cause a risk of death, the individual or firm that engages in 

this behavior should internalize R, so long as we are not concerned with the potentially 

negligent conduc

t of victims.77 

As  we  have  seen,  tort  principles  suggest  that  the  people  who  impose  risks  on 

others should either pay R to all affected persons at time 1, or R/q to all actual victims at 

time 3. As we noted above, nothing about deterrence theory requires that the payments go 

to the potential victims or the estates or dependents of victims. For deterrence purposes, 

payments could even go to the government. All that is importan

t is that people know that 

                                                 
75 See Christopher H. Schroeder, Corrective Justice and Liability for Increasing Risks, 37 UCLA L. Rev. 
439 (1990). 
76 See, e.g., Adler, supra; Matthew D. Adler, Against “Individual Risk”: A Sympathetic Critique of Risk 
Assessment (unpublished m.s. 2004); Claire Finkelstein, Is Risk a Harm?, 151 U. Pa. L. Rev. 963 (2003); 
Ariel Porat and Alex Stein, Tort Liability Under Uncertainty 101-115 (2001). 
77 For the sake of simplicity we are bracketing that issue. 

 

 

 

22 

they will have to pay for imposing risks on other people, and will have to pay an amount 
equal to the victims’ willingness to pay to avoid the risk.78 Payment to victims, potential 

victims,  dependents,  and  estates  may  provide  other  kinds  of  incentives,  such  as  the 

incentive  to  bring  lawsuits,  and  these  incentives  might  be  valuable,  but  they  should  be 

kept separate at the theoretical level. 

 

Federal regulations do not require firms to pay damages to people who are killed 

as a result of their behavior. Instead, regulatory agencies direct firms to take precautions 

that  (in  theory)  are  the  precautions  that  the  firms  would  take  if  they  were  subject  to 

(optimal)  tort  liability.  If  the  firms  fail  to  take  these  precautions,  they  are  fined  or 

punished  in  some  other  way.  To  determine  the  optimal  level  of  precautions,  agencies 

must perform on their own the calculations that tort law leaves to the potential tortfeasor. 

Thus, when firms impose risks of death on people, agencies must value those risks, just 

as in tort law. The analysis is the same as in tort theory. If a firm’s behavior increases the 

risk of death by q, and people are willing to pay R to avoid that risk, then the firm should 

be ordered to ta

ke precautions such that the joint costs of precautions and expected losses 

a

re min

imized. For example, i

f the firm’s activities impose a 1/10,000 risk on 1 million 

people, and the cost of incurring the risk is 

$500 per person, then the firm is implicitly 

causing

 harm of $500 million. One can conceptualize this equivalently as causing $500 of 

harm to 1 million people or $5 million of harm to 100 people, those who actually die as a 

result of the behavior. The regulatory agency uses these figures in a cost-benefit analysis: 

if these costs are greater than the benefits from the firm’s activities, then the agency will 

issue regulations that restrict the
 behavior of the firm and similar firms. In the regulatory 
context,  this  is  in  fact  the  standard  theory  of  valuation  of  statistical  lives79  (what  we 

prefer to call valuation of statistical mortality risks). 

 

Tort law and regulatory law, then, require decisionmakers to attach a value to R, 

the amount of money a person will pay to avoid a risk of death. But R is not the only loss 

 

                                                
78  Or  under  negligence  law,  only  if  they  do  not  take  the  cost-justified  precautions.  We  also  bracket  the 
question whe
ther the legal system should use willingness to pay or willingness to accept. On the difference, 
see Daniel Kahneman, Jack L. Knetsch, & Richard H. Thaler, Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect 
and the Coase Theorem, 98 J. Pol. Econ. 1325 (1990). 
79  See,  e.g.,  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Fatal  Tradeoffs  (1994);  EPA,  Guidelines  for  Pr
(2000); Circular C-4, supra note. 

eparing  Economic  Analyses 

23 

that is imposed when a  person dies. We have briefly described the general approach to 

the valuation of R; Part III goes into more detail. 

 

 

2. Coordinating Judicial and Agency Behavior.  

According to standard wisdom in law and economics, tort law and regulatory law 

have  redundant  functions:  both  deter  cost-unjustified  behavior.  Reliance  on  one  rather 
than the other should depend on their special investigation and enforcement advantages.80 

In the regulatory context, a significant disadvantage is that agencies need a great deal of 

information,  on  both  the  cost  and  the  benefit  side,  to  produce  optimal  regulations.  By 

contrast,  damage  rules  for  torts  require  courts  to  assess  costs  alone.  If  the  two  systems 

overlap—if,  as  is  often  the  case,  they  govern  the  same  behavior—they  may  interact  in 

complex ways. If both systems are optimal, and as a result people would take appropriate 

care  if  either  were  in  place,  the  regulatory  system  will  generate  unnecessary 

administrative  costs  and  possibly  excessive  deterrence.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  the 

rules of tort liability and damages imposed the proper incentives; if so, there would be no 

need for regulations, which could introduce distortions. Regulations are necessary largely 

because many of those who are harmed by private conduct are unlikely to bring suit and 

to receive compensation. In the context of air pollution, for example, chains of causation 

are  exceedingly  difficult  to  trace,  and  those  who  fall  prey  to  life-threatening  or  fatal 

diseases are unlikely to know that pollution is responsible. Because of collective action 

problems and informational deficits, tort law will not provide adequate incentives even if 

it is optimally tailored. 

 

We can clarify the problem by imagining the existence of a single agency, say the 

Federal Compensation and Deterrence Agency (FCDA), with the task of ensuring optimal 

deterrence  and  of  compensating  those  who  deserve 

it. Such an agency would avoid the 

redundancy  that  is  a  possible  outcome  of  parallel  systems  of  tort  law  and  agency 

regulation.  It  would  also  see  compensation  as  part  of  the  provision  of  appropriate 

incentives.  If  federal  agencies  acted  like  the  FCDA,  compensation  would  not  be 

necessary via the tort system. And if courts acted like the FCDA, compensating people 

while creating proper incentives, there would be no need for agency regulations. 

                                                 
80  For  example,  agencies  can  better  deter  behavior  that  produces  harm  with  long  latency  periods.  See 
Shavell, supra, at 277-86. 

24 

So  long  as  the  two  systems  are  in  place,  they  should  be  designed  so  as  to  be 

complementary—a task that has yet to be attempted and that we will not explore here. In 

the real world,  the existence of two systems is likely to be harmless, at least most of the 

time.  P

eople  who  take  cost-justified  precautions  avoid  fines  (from  regulatory  agencies) 

and damage payments (from tort victims); people who take suboptimal precautions risk 

both.  In  theory,  then,  people  whose  behavior  is  regulated  by  both  systems  will  not  be 
overdeterred.81  If  one  system  is  optimal  and  the  other  is  suboptimal,  however,  it  is 

important  that  the  suboptimal  system  yield  to  the  other;  regulatory  preemption  may 

accomplish  this  task  when  regulations  impose  the  proper  level  of  care  and  when  tort 
liability would distort incentives. 82 

A  more  interesting  difficulty  arises  when  two  activities  that  are  partial  (or  full) 

substitutes are regulated by different systems that rely on different valuations. Consider, 

for  example,  automobile  travel,  which  is  mainly  but  not  entirely  regulated  by  the  tort 

system (regulations affect the design of cars and highways, too) and short-haul air travel, 

which is mainly but not entirely regulated by agencies (tort law also matters, of course). 

Suppose that agencies and tort law use reasonable but different life valuations. This may 

distort incentives and cause people to substitute from driving to flying or vice versa. To 

see  why,  focus  on  the  valuation  of  lives  of  third  parties  (on  the  ground  victims  of  air 

crashes,  pedestrians).  If  tort  law  values  victims  less  than  regulatory  law,  then—all  else 

equal—driving will be cheaper than flying. So some people who would otherwise prefer 

to fly will drive instead

. Even though both tort law and the agencies use valuations that 

are  within  the  reasonable  range,  it  would  be  better  if  they  both  use  the  same  valuation 

than if they use different valuations, even if one must arbitrarily pick one number from 

the range.  

                                                 
81 In simple models, tort damages for negligence can be arbitrarily higher than the actual loss, and optimal 
deterrence will still be obtained; however, this result does not necessarily hold in more complex models, 
where damages may provide victims perverse incentives to engage in contributory negligence or otherwise 
 damages, 
expose themselves to the regulated activity “too much.” But even if there is an optimal level of
the  government  can  set  the  fines  for  regulatory  violations such that the expected tort damages pl
us fines 
equal the optimal level. 
82 See, e.g., Alan Schwartz, Proposals for Products Liability Reform: A Theoretical Synthesis, 97 Yale L.J. 
353,  388-92  (1988)  (arguing  that  compliance  with  regulations  should  immunize  firms  from  product 
liability). 

25 

This point suggests that it would be valuable for the federal government to create 

an  agency  or  commission  that  determines  focal  or  recommended  valuations,  and  urges 

courts to adopt them, taking advantage of the willingness of courts to allow themselves to 

be  influenced  by  agency  judgments  in  other  contexts.  Consider,  for  example,  a  Federal 

Loss  Valuation  Commission,  one  that  would  set  forth  guidelines  for  determining  the 

value of loss of life, loss of spouse, grief, and so forth, for use by courts in tort cases and 

by regulatory agencies in their cost-benefit analyses. The guidelines might or might not 

be purely advisory, but in any event they would tend to bring about a greater uniformity 

and also stimulate more systematic thinking about valuation of losses. But investigation 

of this possibility would take us well beyond our central concerns here. 

 
III. What Is the Value of the Loss of Life? 

A. General Issues 

 

 

We  have  seen  that  agency  practices  grow  out  of  real-world  evidence  involving 

labor  markets.  In  principle,  this  is  a  reasonable  start  under  the  framework  we  are 

elaborating.  Regulators  are  attempting  to  produce  the  optimal  level  of  deterrence  by 

reference  to  actual  market  valuation  of  statistical  risks.  Nonetheless,  serious  questions 

might be raised about the use of these studies by EPA and other agencies.  

 

1. Uniform Numbers or Variable Numbers  

The underlying studies of market behavior show significant variety in the crucial 
figures,  ranging  from  $0.7  million,  in  1997  dollars,  to  $16.3  million.83  Recently  OMB 

stressed that a “substantial majority of the resulting estimates of VSL vary from roughly 
$1  million  to  $10  million  per  statistical  life.”84  The  EPA  has  adopted  the  $6.1  million 

figure on th

e ground that it represents the median in the relevant studies.

 But there is a 

85

risk  of  arbitrariness  in  fastening  on  that  median  figure,  certainly  if  we  lack  reason  to 

believe  that  the  relevant  study  is  the  most  accurate.  In  fact  a  more  general  look  at  the 

VSL data produces further puzzles and wider ranges. Some studies find no compensating 

                                                 
83 See EPA, Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses 89 (2000). For a detailed outline and discussion, 
see Richard W. Parker, Grading the Government, 70 U Chi L Rev 1345, 1485-86 (2003). 
84 Circular A-4, supra, at 30. 
85 Id. 

26 

differentials  at  all,  indicating  a  VSL  of  zero86—implausibly  low,  to  say  the  least,  for 

purposes  of  policy.  Others  find 

that  non-unionized  workers  receive  negative 

compensating differentials for risk, that is, they appear to be paid less because they face 
mortality  risks.87  Another  study  finds  that  African-Americans  receive  no  significant 
compensating wage differential and hence that their particular VSL is zero.88 On the other 

hand, it is possible to find studies finding a VSL not below the range in Table 2 but above 

it; consider the finding that for people who choose jobs with low level risks, the VSL is 
as  much  as  $22  million.89  The  most  recent  meta-study,  far  more  comprehensive  than 

EPA’s own analysis, finds that most studies produce a range of between $3.8 million and 
$9 million.90 An obvious issue is the grounds for these nontrivial differences. 

 

 

2. Worker Ignorance  

A  different  objection  would  point  t

o  worker  ignorance.  Perhaps  workers  are 

u

nawar

e  of  the  risks  that  t

hey  are  running.  If  so,  the  labor  market  studies  do  not  really 

show h

ow workers are trading off risks for money, and hence they are essentially useless. 

This objection cannot be simply dismissed. But current agency practice depends on the 

judgment that the numerous studies of risk premiums indicate that sufficient numbers of 
workers are informed to establish a “price” for additional increments of safety.91 If that 

judgment is incorrect, then the current numbers need to be rethought, on t

he ground that 

labor markets do not show informed tradeoffs between mon

ey and statistical risks. Under 

the  cur

rent  theory,  the  regulators’  task  would  be  to  use  other  tools,  perhaps  contingent 

valuation studies, to establish those tradeoffs.  

 

 

3. Worker Coercion  

Do  workers  voluntarily  trade  risks  for  dollars?  An  obvious  objection  would  be 

that many of the relevant workers have few options, and hence their mar et behavior—

k

trading off a risk of 1/10,000, say, for an apparently low sum—is in an important sense 
involuntary.92 If taken as a normative claim about voluntariness, the claim may be right: 

 
                                                
86 See Peter Dorman and P. Hagstrom, Wage Compensation for Dangerous Work Revisited, 52 Industrial 
and Labor Relations Rev. 116 (1998). 
87 Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 44.  
88 Leeth and Ruser, supra note. 
89 Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 23. 
90 See id., at 18. 
91 See W. Kip Viscusi, supra n
92 See 

Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless (2003). 

ote; Viscusi and Aldy. 

27 

When people have few or bad options, their choices might not count as voluntary. But if 

taken as an objection to VSL studies, the claim is less helpful. Under the theory that we 

have outlined, the question is how much people are willing to pay to eliminate specified 

risks. Of course people are willing to pay less, for risk reduction, if they have less to pay. 

Note  also  that  the  VSL  numbers  for  workers  are  not  radically  different  from  the 
corresponding  numbers  generated  by  purchases  of  cars,  housing,  and  so  forth93—a  fact 

that weakens the suggestion that coercion lies behind the employment figures. 

In any case government does workers no favors by requiring them to “buy” more 

health  protection  than  they  want.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  workers  are  generally 

willing to accept $600 to run a risk of 1/10,000. If an agency bans that deal, and forbids 

workers from running that risk at that

 price, it will not improve workers’ welfare. This is 

simply 

a  specific  example  of  the  general  proposition  that  when  people’s  circumstances 

lead  them  to  make  harsh  deals,  they  are  usually  not  helped  when  government  blocks 

those  deals.  Of  course  the  analysis  would  be  different  when  those  who  receive  the 
benefits of regulation do not also pay for it.94 

 

 

4. Uniformity and Individuation  

Agency  regulations  use  a  single  value  for  a  statistical  life,  but  a  moment’s 

reflection should be enough to show that by the very theory that agencies now use, this is 
a blunder.95 There are several problems here. 

First,  people  will  almost  certainly  show a large difference in the dollar value of 

statistically  identical  mortality  risks.96  Would

  people  really  show  the  same  VSL  for 

1/100,000  risks  of  deaths  from  lun

g  cancer,  car  crashes,  plane  crashes,  strokes,  and 

Alzhei

mer’s disease? An affirmative answer would be extremely surprising, and a great 

deal  of  evidence  suggests  otherwise.  The  American  economy  contains  a  wide  range  of 

occupations and industries, and a uniform VSL should not be expected to emerge from 

 

                                                
93 See W. Kip Viscusi, supra note; Viscusi and Aldy, supra note. 
94 This complication is discussed in C
(forthcoming 2004). Compare Circular 
specific rule context”). 
95 See id.  
96  See  Richard  L
Human Lives, 99 Colum. L. Rev. 941, 962–74 (1999
Effects of Disease Type and Latency on the Value of Mortality R

.  Revesz,  Environmental  Regulation,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis,  and  the  Discounting  of 
). For evidence, see James Hammitt and Jin-Tau Liu, 
isk, 28 J Risk and Uncertainty 73 (2004). 

ass R. Sunstein, Valuing Life: A Plea for Disaggregation, Duke LJ 
A-4, supra note, at 30 (rejecting adjustments in VSL “to reflect the 

28 

each of them. Indeed, a recent study finds significant differences across both occupations 
and industries,97 with blue collar workers showing a higher VSL than others.98  

It is inevitable that a wide range of values would emerge from studies that looked 

separately at machine operators, executive positions, sales, dental technicians, equipment 
cleaners,  security  guards,  and  secretaries99—and  undoubtedly  diverse  values  could  be 

found  within  each  category.  In  addition,  many  risks  controlled  by  the  EPA  are 

qualitatively different from the workplace risks that EPA has used to generate its VSL. 

There 
is  considerable  evidence  that  the  risks  associated  with  cancer  produce  a  higher 
WTP  than  other  kinds  of  risk.100  For  example,  Hammit  and  Liu  find  that  in  Taiwan, 

willingness to pay to eliminate a cancer risk is about one-third larger than WTP to avoid a 
risk  of  a  similar,  chronic  degenerative  disease.101  The  “cancer  premium”  might  be 

produced  by  the  “dread”  nature  of  cancer;  it  seems  well-established  that  dreaded  risks 
produce special social concern, holding the statistical risk constant.102   

Second,  both  individuals  and  groups  should  be  expected  to  show  significant 

differences in their VSL. This is partly becau

se they are risk-averse or risk-inclined, and 

partly  because  of  differences  in  terms  of  both 

wealth  and  income.  Continuing  national 

income
  growth  means  that  studies  from  the  1970s,  on  which  agencies  now  rely, 
understate VSL. 103 Equally important, risk reduction programs that are aimed at wealthy 

populations  should,  under  the  prevailing  the

ory,  produce  a  higher  VSL  than  similar 

program

s  aimed  at  poor  populations.  Those  who  have  a  great  deal  of  resources  will 

naturally  show  a  higher  VSL  than  those  with  little.  According  to  the  theory  that  now 
                                                 
97 W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29, 
39-41 (2004) 
98 Id.  
99 See id. at 33. Viscusi does not produce separate numbers for the different occupation groups, but his data 
clearly indicate that separate numbers would emerge. 
100  See  Richard  L.  Revesz,  Environmental  Regulation,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis,  and  the  Discounting  of 
Human Lives, 99 Colum. L. Rev. 941, 962–74 (1999).  
101 See Hammitt and Liu, supra note. 
102 See Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (2000). 
103See  Dora  L.  Costa  &  Matthew  E.  Kahn,  The  Rising  Price  of  Nonmarket  Goods,  93  Am.  Econ.  Rev. 
(Papers & Proc.) 227, 229 tbl.1 (2003) (suggesting likely current v
alue of $12 million). For recent evidence 
that  the  current  numbers  are  indeed  too  low,  see  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Racial  Differences  in  Labor  Market 
Values  of  a  Statistical  Life,  27  J.  Risk  &  Uncertainty  239,  252  tbl.5  (2003)  [hereinafter  Viscusi,  Racial 
Differences], finding values as high as $15.1 million in the case of white males. In the context of arsenic 
regulation,
 noted in its sensitivity analysis that the appropriate adjustment would increase the 
VSL  from  $6.1  million  to  $6.7  million.  66  Fed.  Reg.  at  7012.  For  recent  evidence,  suggesting  that  the 
current VSL is $4.7 for a full sample, $7 million for blue-collar males, and $8.5 for blue-collar females. See 
W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. Inquiry 29 
(2004). 

 the EPA also

29 

animates  regulatory  practice,  agencies  should  use  a  VSL  that  corresponds  to  the  actual 

number for the population at stake.  

This point has numerous implications. The workplace studies on which agencies 

currently rely involve people with income that is below the population-wide median; to 

that extent, the numbers are too low as applied to a population that is more representative 

of  the  nation  as  a  whole.  Agency  distinctions  between  wealthy  and  poor  populations 

would undoubtedly be quite controversial, but they are required by the very theory that 

agencies  currently  use.  Less  controversially,  recent  evidence  suggests  that  older  people 
show  a  lower  VSL  than  younger  people,104  and  that  distinction  might  well  be 

incorporated into regulatory policy. 

 

The general conclusion is that use of WTP has a plausible logic to it, that variable 

numbers  make  far  more  sense  than  uniform  ones,  and  that  the  real  question  involve 

information  and  administrability.  Regulatory  programs  often  affect  thousands  or  even 

million

s of people at the same time, and full individuation is therefore impossible. A rule 

that  calls  for  minimum  levels  of  air  quality  cannot  provide  air  quality  that  is  perfectly 

calibrated  to  each  person’s  WTP.  Nonetheless,  agencies  could  certainly  move  in  the 

direction of greater individuation. So long as the WTP figures are accurate, government 

does  well  to  begin  with  them.  Exactly  the  same  is  true  for  courts  in  wrongful  death 

actions. 

B. Dependents 

 

 

 

Tort  law  generally  awards  dependents  the  portion  of  the  victim’s  future  income 

that  would  have  supported  those  dependents  if  the  victim  had  lived  a  normal  life,  plus 

n amount for grief, distress, and loss of companionship.

sometimes a
usually ignores the loss to dependents.106 What is the proper treatment? 

105

 Regulatory policy 

An  act  that  kills  a  breadwinner  harms  dependents  in  two  ways.  First,  the 

dependants  feel  grief  or  emo

tional  distress. 

Second,  the  dependents  are  deprived  of 

su

pport—a  source  of  income.  It  is  possibl

e,  of  course,  that  people’s  WTP  incorporates 

both of these harms—that when a worker, for example, is WTP $60 to eliminate a risk of 
 
                                                
104  Joseph  P.  Aldy  and  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Age  Variations  in  Workers’  Value  of  a  Statistical  Life  (2003), 
forthcoming. 
105 See Dobbs, supra, at 430-34. 
106 Our searches of the Federal Register database have disclosed no regulatory impact analyses that attempt 
to monetize losses to dependents resulting from the deaths of breadwinners. 

30 

1/100,000,  a  portion  of  that  figure  reflects  the  worker’s  desire  to  reduce  the  losses  of 

those  who  depend  on  him.  For  this  to  be  so,  however,  workers  would  have  to  be  pure 

altruist

s as well as aware of the universe of losses, and we believe that it would be heroic 

to assume that the WTP figures fully incorporate those losses. The extent to which they 

do so is an empirical question on which information is absent. Grief and lost income raise 

quite different issues, and so we discuss them separately. 

 

 

1. Grief 

When a person dies, his dependents such as his spouse and children are likely to 

feel  grief.  Grief  is  a  welfare  loss,  and  potential  tortfeasors  should  take  this  loss  into 

account  as  well  as  more  conventi

onal  losses.  Although  grief  will  be  felt  by  many 

nondependents as well, including friends and adult children, and grief felt by these people 

are  welfare  losses  as  well,  we  will  confine  our  attention  to  dependents,  for  whom  the 

emotional distress is likely to be particularly acute. 

 

One  reason  for  excluding  grief  is  the  difficulty  of  monetizing  it.  How  can  the 

WTP for grief be determined? The very question might seem absurd. Although it is easy 

to imagine contingent value questions that ask, “How much are you willing to pay today 

so  that  you  would  not  feel  grief  if  a  loved  one  died  at  some  time  in  the  future?”,  we 

suspect  that  people  would  have  difficulty  answering  this  question.  Even  though  people 

see grief 

as a welfare loss, and all things equal would prefer to avoid it, they might think 

that  they  ought  to  feel

  grief  if  a  loved  one  dies,  and  in  any  case  they  would  find  it 

exceptionally  difficult  or  even  impossible  to  monetize  the  value  of  not  feeling  grief. 

Other  contingent  valuation  questions  seem  more  promising.  For  example,  people  might 

be asked, “How much are you willing to pay to avoid having your spouse be subjected to 

a risk of 1/50,000?” This question, whose answer should incorporate an

ticipated grief, is 

not  fundamentally  different  from  others  that  are  taken  seriously  in  the  context  of 
regulatory policy.107 But contingent valuation studies generally face serious questions of 

                             

                   
107  See  Ian  J.  Bateman  and  Ken
neth  G.  Willis,  eds,  Valuing  Environmental  Preferences  (Oxford  1999); 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  The  Arithmetic  of  Arsenic,  90  Georgetown  L.  J.  2,255  (2002)  (discussing  contingent 
valuation study involving nonfatal cancer). 

 

31 

reliability,108  and  the  valuation  of  risks  faced  by  loved  ones  faces  those  questions  in 

unusually acute form. 

A better approach might be to find proxies. Consider, for example, the problem of 

valuing  the  grief  felt  from  the  death  of  a  spouse.  Studies  show  that  married  people  are 

happier  than  unmarried  people,  and  that  part  of  this  happiness  is  in  part  a  result  of 
emotional  closeness  and  companionship.109  Although  the  work  is  not  at  an  advanced 

stage,  it  suggests  that  th

e  difference  between  the  happiness  of  a  married  person  and  a 

widowe
d person can be quantified using simple scales based on subjective assessments of 
one’s emotional well-being.110 To derive a WTP to avoid grief from a spouse’s death, one 

would  need  to  (1)  determine  the  average  length  of  time  that  the  grief  persists  (for 

example, until remarriage); (2) find an equivalent happiness difference in an area of life 

that has been reliably monetized (for example, WTP to avoid disease or depression), and 

convert this difference into annual units; (3) multiply

 (1) and (2). 

A very crude estimate can be made from a recent study. This study shows that a 

person who is married has the level of self-reported happiness equivalent to that felt by a 

widowed  person  who  receives  an  extra  $100,000  per  year  (in  1990  dollars)  but  is 
otherwise equivalent.111 If the average number of years before remarriage or the “natural” 

termination of the original marriage (from divorce, or normal mortality) is, say, 5 years, 

then  the  welfare  loss  is  equivalent  to  about  $500,000  (or  closer  to  $400,000  with 

discounting).  We  emphasize  that  this  figure  is  meant  for  illustrative  purposes,  both 

because  the  methodology  is  different  from  the  standard  VSL  methodology  and  because 

the  methodology  is  very  new  and  at  an  early  stage  of  testing  and  development.  In 

addition, the study does not quite capture grief; if it captures anything, it is the monetary 

                                                 
108 See Richard B. Stewart, Liability for Natural Resource Injury: Beyond Tort, in Analyzing Superfund: 
Economics,  Science,  and  Law  219,  234-37  (Richard  L.  Revesz  &  Richard  B.  Stewart  eds.,  1995); 
Symposium, Contingent Valuation, 8 J. Econ. Persp. 3 (1994). 
109  See  Ed  Diener  et  al.,  Similarity  of  the  Relations  Between  Marital  Status  and  Subjective  Well-Being 
Across  Cultures,  31  J.  Cross-Cultural  Psych.  419  (2000);  Michael  Argyle,  Causes  and  Correlates  of 
Happiness, in Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology 359-62 (Daniel Kahneman et al. eds. 
1999). 
110 See Bruno S. Frey and Alois Stutzer, Happiness and Economics 57-58, 62-63 (2002). 
111 The study essentially finds correlations between self-reported happiness, on the one hand, and various 
life events, wealth, and so forth, on the others. See Andrew J. Oswald and David Blanchflower, Well-Being 
Over Time in Britain and the USA, 88 J. Pub. Econ. 1359 (2004); see also Andrew E. Clark and Andrew J. 
Oswald,  A  Simple  Statistical  Method  for  Measuring  How  Life  Events  affect  Happiness,  31  Intern’l  J. 
Epidemiology 1139 (2002). 

32 

equivalent  of  the  welfare  reduction  from  not  having  a  spouse  (a  number  that  may  be 

larger  or  smaller  than  grief  because  of  the  wrongful  death  of  a  spouse).  Still,  the  study 

shows 

that  the  amounts  under  consideration  are  not  trivial,  and  indeed  will  be  much 

higher when the decedent has multiple dependents—children as well as a spouse. 

Whatever  the  flaws  of  this  method,  it  is  likely  to  be  superior  to  the  current 

alternatives. Regulatory law implicitly treats this WTP as equal to zero, which cannot be 

right. Tort law leaves this question to the jury, which, without any guidance, is likely to 

produce  amounts  that  are  unreliable,  unpredictable,  or  both.  Jurors  must  engage  in  a 

difficult enterprise of translating grief into monetary equivalents and in any case rely on 

their  lay  judgments,  which  studies  suggest  are  systematically  incorrect.  For  example, 

people tend to think that victims of traumas never fully recover their sense of well-being, 

when in fact the grief or mental distress that results form such traumas usually dissipates 
after a few years.112 We conclude that some amount for grief sho

uld be included in both 

jury aw

ards and regulatory assessments of the loss associated with mortality risks. Any 

particular  number  has  a  degree  of  arbitrariness,  but  on  the  basis  of  current  evidence, 

$500,000 would not be the worst place to start. 

 

 

2. Lost Support  

When  a  person  dies,  dependents  are  deprived  of  the  portion  of  the  victim’s 

income  and  resources  that  were  used  for  their  benefit.  It  is  tempting  to  think  that  the 

monetized welfare loss—the dependent’s WTP to avoid loss of support—is equivalent to 

the lost support, but this is not likely to be true. 

  

 

To  see  why,  imagine  a  two  person  household  consisting  of  H  and  W.  W  is  the 

breadwinner, and H takes care of the house. W makes $50,000 per year. Suddenly, W is 

killed. What amount of money is necessary to compensate H for the loss of support? 

The  answer  is  not  $50,000  per  year  (that  is,  a  lump  sum  of  something  like  $1 

million). It is quite possible that many people in the position of H will now get a job that 

earns, say, $30,000 per year. Most Hs are not likely to be better off than they were before 

from a purely financial perspective, but it would be wrong to say that they are $50,000 

w

orse  off.  The  new  one-person  household  receives  only  $20,000  less  pe

r  year,  and  H 

 
                                                
112  See  Brickman,  Coates,  and  Janoff-Bulman,  Lottery  Winners  and  Accident  Victims:  Is  Happiness 
Relative?, 37 J. Personality & Soc. Psych. 917 (1978). 

33 

 

 

does not share his income with W. H must work now, and perhaps he must pay someone 

to  clean  the  house,  but  he  also  does  not  have  to  perform  household  services  that  partly 

benefit W, as he did before W’s death. 

Even if H cannot work (suppose he is disabled), the right answer is probably not 

$50,00

0. For one thing, W may devote only a small portion of her income to the support 

of  H.  Perhaps  she  spends  $40,000  for  herself,  and  only  $10,000  for  him.  On  the  other 

side, W may invest significant uncompensated work into supporting H: for example, she 

cooks  for  him.  The  former  consideration  suggests  that  $50,000  is  too  high,  the  latter 

consideration that $50,000 is too low. 

We can even imagine extreme situations, where the dependent is made better off 

(financially) by the breadwinner’s death. Suppose that a parent neglects his children, and 

gives them inadequate food and clothing. The parent dies and the children are moved to 

the home of relatives or to a foster home, where they receive adequate food and clothing. 

From the perspective of financial support (but not necessarily emotional well being), the 

children  are  better  off,  not  worse  off;  the  loss  of  support  caused  by  the  death  is  zero. 

These examples suggest that a high degree of in

dividuation is appropriate for judgments 

about  loss  of  support;  no  unifo

rm  number  could  possibly  make  sense.  For  regulators, 

dealing

  with  populations  rather  than  individuals,  it  would  be  necessary  to  assess  the 

population-wide mean for the relevant beneficiaries. 

How should loss of support be calculated? Consider first the death of a spouse in 

a  family  that  has  no  children.  As  a  matter  of  theory,  a  sensible  approach  would  be  to 
ine  the  economies  of  scale  from  household  production.113  Consider  two  people 

term

de

who have separate households; let their annual joint costs be C. Now the two people set 

up a single household; their annual joint costs drop to C’ because one kitchen is che

aper 

than two, and so forth. As a first approximation, ½(C–C’) would be the annual (financial) 

cost to one person from the death of the other. If on average, it takes a person X years to 

set up a new household after the death of a spouse, then the financial cost is ½X(C–C’). 

                                                
113  See  Gary  S.  Becker,  A  Treatise  on  the  Family  (30-53)  (1991)  (analyzing  the  division  of  labor within 
households). 

 

34 

This  figure  can  be  derived  from  existing  studies  that  look  at  the  financial  cost  of 
divorce.114 

When  children  exist,  the  calculations  are  more  complex.  If  one  of  two  parents 

dies, then the children are deprived of the victim’s investment in childcare. This amount 

can be roughly monetized by using market data for the cost of nannies and the like. If a 

single  parent  dies,  or  both  parents  die,  the  children  must  be  moved  to  a  new  family. 

Foster  parents  receive  a  subsidy  from  the  state;  this  is  a  first  approximation  of  the 

financial burden, and ought to be borne by the tortfeasor or regulated entity. Friends or 

relatives who take the children in also 

will incur extra expenses, for which they ought to 

b

e  com

pensated,  except  limited  by  any  economies  of  scale  (a  third  child  will  probably 

require less financial support at the margin than a first or second child). 

 

Tort law sometimes attempts to handle these complex problems, but imperfectly. 

In the jurisdictions with the most sophisticated rules, the courts award only a portion of 

the  decedent’s  lost  income  to  the  dependents,  after  subtracting  expenses  and  the  future 
consumption  of  the  decedent.  The  September  11th  Compensation  Fund  also  takes  this 

approach.  As  we  have  noted,  lost  income  is not likely to be the same as the monetized 

welfare loss. 

Regulatory  policy  entirely  ignores  lost  support.  This  would  not  be  a  wholly 

indefensible approach if WTP studies implicitly incor

porated the subjects’ expectation of 
pport  for  their  dependents  in  case  of  death.115  A  worker  who  demands  a  risk 

lost  su

premium for hazardous work might do so in part so that he can purchase extra insurance 

for his dependents. The WTP figure, then, reflects not only the worker’s hedonic loss of 
life,  but  the  worker’s  welfare  loss  from  expected  lost  support  for  dependents.116  The 

problem is that the WTP will not fully reflect the lost support if the breadwinner is not 

fully altruistic (and full altruism is rare) or if he does not think carefully about the needs 

of his dependents in the case of his death. We think that the approach we outlined above 

 

makes more sense. The adjustment, for the regulatory context, comes from the fact that 
                                                
114 See, e.g., Robert S. Weiss, The Impact of Marital Dissolution on Income and Consumption in Single-
parent Households, 46 J. Marriage & the Family 115 (1984); Karen C. Holden and Pamela J. Smock, The 
Economic  Costs  of  Marital  Dissolution:  Why  Do  Women  Bear  a  Disproportionate  Cost?,  17  Ann.  Rev. 
Soc. 51 (1991). 
115 A similar point can be made about agencies’ neglect of grief. 
116 In fact Viscusi has found that when workers’ compensation benefits are high, workers do accept a wage 
offset. See XX

.  

35 

regulations  necessarily  protects  large  numbers  of  people,  and  hence  estimates  for  the 

relevant  population  are  inevitable.  What  is  hard  to  defend  is  the  complete  exclusion  of 

lost sup

port from current regulatory practice. 

How  much  should  regulatory  agencies  value  the  loss  to  dependents?  Our 

argument above suggests that the value should be the lost household economies of scale 

until a new two-person household can be created. For two-person households, this is the 

extra  cost  (or  lower  benefits)  that  result  when  a  person  moves  from  a  two-person 

household to a one-person household. 

As  an  illustration,  imagine  that  the  two-person  household  has  a  joint  income  of 

$50,000 both before and after separation, but that living costs increase by $5,000 for each 

person; and that, on average, each person could form a new two-person

 household three 

years after the termination of the old one. Now suppose instead that one person dies; the 

loss  of  support  for  the  other  person  is  $5,000  per  year  for  three  years,  her  extra 
expense.117  Although  we  have  not  tried  to  determine  the  actual  amount,  given  current 

levels  of  income,  household  economies,  and  so  forth,  we  suspect  that  the  right  amount 

will be in the thousands or perhaps tens of thousands of dollars per death. 

C. Ch

ildren 

 

 

Because of its traditional focus on loss of income, tort law ought to produce low 

numbers for the loss of a child’s life. Children lack dependents; therefore, tortfeasors who 

kill  children  are  not  required  to  pay  damages  on  account  of  loss  of  support  in  loss-to-

dependents states. Whether the actual awards are lower for children than for adults is a 

hard question, given the discretion of the jury, and we do not have a full answer, though 
existing data provide some clues.118 By contrast, regulatory policy treats the life of a child 

                                                 
117 This is a conservative estimate; income and consumption decline precipitously after divorce and remain 
low for many years. For some (dated) statistics, see Robert S. Weiss, The Impact of Marital Dissolution on 
Income and Consumption in Single-parent Households, 46 J. Marriage & Fertility 115 (1984). Women also 
experience a large decline in income after the death of a spouse; see Richard V. Burkhauser et al., How the 
Death  of  a  Spouse  Affects  Economic  Well-Being  after  Retirement:  A  Hazard  Model  Approach,  72  Soc. 
Sci.  Q.  504  (1991)  (limited  to  after  retirement);  Michael  D.  Hurd  and  David  A.  Wise,  The  Wealth  and 
Poverty of Widows: Assets Before and After the Husband’s Death, in The Economics of Aging 177 (David 
A. Wise ed. 1989). 
118  For  an  earlier  study,  see  Michael  Oakes  Finkelstein,  Patricia  A.  Pickrel,  and  Gerald  J.  Glasser,  The 
Death of Childre
n: A Nonparametric Statistical Analysis of Compensation for Anguish, 74 Colum. L. Rev. 
884,  887  (1974)  (finding  median  award  of  $25,000  for  the  peri
od  1967-72).  The  closest  comparison  we 
could find is Danzon’s data on medical malpractice awards (not limited to adults) for 1970 ($18,770) and 
1974) ($52,575).
 Her sample size is very low, however (3 in 1970, and 17 in 1974), so we are doubtful that 

36 

and the life an adult as equivalent, although if agencies used VSLYs, a child’s life would 
be valued at a higher amount because the child has a longer life expectancy.119 What is 

the proper treatment? 

 

 

1. Parental Judgments 

One  possibility  is  to  rely  on  parental  judgments.  A  recent  study  attempts  to 

determine  the  VSL  of  children  by  examining  the  market  for  bicycle  safety  helmets  for 

children. Bicycle safety helmets reduce the probability of death by about 4/1,000,000 per 

year for children between the ages of 

5 and 9, and 6/1,000,000 for children between the 

ages  of

  10-14.  In  1997,  the  annualized  cost  of  a  helmet  was  about  $6.51.  The  authors 

found  that,  given  market  data  on  the  willingness of parents to buy helmets, the median 

parent implicitly attributed a VSL of $2.7 million for children between 5 and 9, and $2.6 

million for children between 10 and 14; by contrast, the VSL for the adults who bought 
helmets for themselves was $4.0 million (1997 dollars).120 

 

The  problem  with  the  study  is  that  it  does  not  even  purport  to  show  how  much 

children are willing to pay to reduce the risk of death; it shows what adults are willing to 

pay to reduce the risk of death to their children. The parent’s WTP for avo

iding a child’s 

d

eath  i

s  not  a  good

  proxy  for  the  child’s  welfare  loss  because  parents  are  not  pure 

altruists and are willing to trade off their children’s risk of death against other things such 

                                                                                                                                                 
any  comparisons  can be drawn. Patricia M. Danzon, Medical Malpractice: Theory, Evidence, and Public 
Policy 41 (1985). In the Verdicts and Settlements data set, the median and mean figures for adults are $1.5 
million  and  $2.8  million;  for  minors  $1  million  and  $3.7  million.  According  to  Current  Award  Trends, 
supra, at 30-32, the median and mean figures for adult males are $2.0 million and $4.4 million; for minor 
males  $1.2  million  and  $4.9  million  (compare  figures  for  adult  females  and  minor  females).  What  is 
striking here is that the mean for children is higher but the median is lower; the reason why can be seen in 
the maximum in each case: $55.4 million for adult males and $328 million [sic!] for minor males. As noted, 
these figures include punitive damages, and we suspect that, although on average juries value children less 
than adults, the deaths of children are more likely to provoke outrage and extreme awards. 
119  For  relevant  but  inconclusive  notations,  see  Circular  A-4,  supra  note,  at  31,  noting  that  “valuation  of 
health  outcomes  for  children  and  infants  poses  special  challenges,”  mentioning  “studies  that  examine 
parental  willingness  to  pay  to  invest  in  health  and  safety  for  their  children,”  and  concluding  that  “the 
monetary values for children should be at least as large as the values for adults (for the same probabilities 
and outcomes) unless there is specific and compelling evidence to suggest otherwise.” 
120 Robin R. Jenkins, Nicole Owens, and Lanelle Bembenek Wiggins, Valuing Reduced Risks to Children: 
The Case of Bicycle Safety Helmets, 19 Contemp. Econ. Policy 397, 404 (2001). See also Paul S. Carlin 
and Robert Sandy, E
stimating the Implicit Value of a Young Child’s Life, 58 So. Econ. J. 186, 197 (1991) 
(finding the parental value of the child 87 percent of adult VSL). Not all studies find lower parental VSLs 
for children, and indeed some actually find higher; see, e.g., Glenn C. Blomquist, Ted R. Miller, and David 
T.  Levy,  Values  of  Risk  Reduction  Implied  by  Motorist  Use  of  Protection  Equipment,  30  J.  Transport 
Econ.  &  Policy  55,  64  (1996)  (finding  $2  million  VSLs  for  adults  and  $3-5  million  parental  VSLs  for 
children (1991 dollars)). 

37 

as  their  own  utility  from  consumption.121  If  we  wanted  to  find  out  how  children  value 

mortality risks, we would need to look at the children’s own attitudes and behavior; but 

children do not usually have income, rarely make their own decisions about purchasing 

safety  equipment,  and  have  poor  judg

ment  about  risks.  For  these  reasons,  a  study  that 

attempt

ed to tease out children’s WTP to avoid risks would tell us little or nothing about 

the welfare loss from a child’s death. If a ten-year-old child is willing to pay $1 to avoid a 

risk  of  1/10,000,  we  would  know  nothing  about  how  tort  law  and  regulatory  policy 

should value his death. 

 

2. Children and welfare  

What should be done? The touchstone is welfare loss, and a child loses welfare as 

a  result  of  death.  Thus,  we  should  assign  some  WTP  for  a  child’s  death.  Some 

arbitrariness cannot be avoided, but one possibility is to follow current practice and to use 

the standard, uniform VSL used for adults. This approach h

as the advantage of not being 

clearly  inferior  to  the  alternatives.  Another  approach  would  be  to  take  the  VSLY  for 

adults,  and  multiply  it  by  the  expected  number  of  years  of  life.  This  approach  is 

consistent with the general interest, in many circles, in focusing on statistical life-years as 
well as or in addition to statistical lives.122 Yet another possibility would be to estimate a 

child victim’s future income, and then determine his VSL or his VSLYs by extrapolating 
from the figures of an adult who has that child’s future income.123 In the latter two cases, 

children  would  have  higher  valuations  of  life  than  adults  do,  which  appears  intuitively 
correct.124 We think that the second approach seems the most reasonable, but there is no 

simple way to establish its superiority. 

 

3. Offsetting parental behavior 

A  conclusion  in  favor  of  any  one  of  the  three  approaches  must  be  qualified, 

however.  The  risks  faced  by  children  are,  to  a  considerable  extent,  controlled  by  their 

                                                 
121 This seems to be the conclusion of Jenkins et al., supra, at 407, and puzzlingly they appear to reject the 
relevance of their own study and advocate use of adult VSLs for children. 
122  The  approach  owes  its  origins  to  Richard  Zeckhauser  and  Donald  Shephard,  Where  Now  For  Saving 
Lives, 40 L. & Contemp. Probs. 5 (1976). For an overview, see Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and 
Willingness to Pay, 104 Colum. L. Rev. 205 (2004). 
123 Cohen, supra. This approach strikes us as incorrect for the reasons given in Part III.B. 
124 This would not necessarily be the view of those who think that welfare is entirely subjective. But we do 
not  accept  this  view  about  welfare.  Few  people  outside  of  economics  think  it  is  correct,  and  even 
economists  do  not  believe  that  it  is  proper  for  children.  See  generally  Matthew  D.  Adler  and  Eric  A. 
Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis, 109 Yale L.J. 165 (1999). 

38 

parents,  and  one  must  be  careful  that  regulatory  policy  and  parental  autonomy  do  not 

clash, leading to perverse results. In a sense, this problem is not unique to the context of 
valuing  children’s  lives.  Offsetting  behavior  can  occur  in  many  contexts.125  But  the 

mechanisms here have distinctive features. 

 

To  see  the  problem,  consider  a  simple  case  where  the  household  that  benefits 

from a regulation also incurs its full costs. Suppose that Parent (P) is willing to pay $20 to 

avoid a 1/100,000 risk of death for his child (C). An agency issues a regulation that forces 

P  to  pay,  say,  $50  to  avoid  this  risk  by  buying  safety  helmets,  car  seats,  or  some  other 

child s

afety device. Although P must no

w pay $50 to reduce this risk in order to avoid a 

legal sa

nction, P retains the discretion to spend less money on C. If P can save money by 

reducing safety along some other margin, one not regulated by the agency, P will do so. 

For example, perhaps P will stop sending C to school on the (safe but expensive) bus and 

put him in a (cheap but riskier) car pool. And even if P cannot do this, P might spend less 

money on C in other ways: for example, purchasing fewer toys or clothes or food. Under 

the  stated  assumptions,  both  P’s  and  C’s  welfare  will  decline  as  a  result  of  the 
regulation.126 

 
These  problems  do  not  show  that  children’s  VSL  should  always  be  treated  as 
lower than that of adults, but they point out some difficulties with the contrary view.127 

The proper degree of adjustment is an empirical question on which information is absent. 

If parents adjust in the manner described, then it would be incorrect to base a child’s VSL 

on the VSLYs of adults. On the other hand, we do not know whether or to what extent 

parents adjust in this way, and it might 

seem implausible to some readers.  

 

We do not have a simple conclusion ab

out appropriate valuation of mortality risks 

faced  b

y  children.  Certainly  tort  law  errs  by  excluding  the  child’s  hedonic  loss  and 

including  only  the  distress  felt  by  parents.  For  regulators,  perhaps  the  best  approach 

would be to multiply VSLY by the number of remaining life-years, with a lower amount 

(perhaps in the range of the parental valuation of $2 to $3 million) used for regulations 
                                                 
125 See Gerald Wilde, Target Risk (1994) 
126 See, e.g., Theodore C. Bergstrom, Benefit Cost Analysis and the Entanglements of Love (unpublished 
m.s. 2003). 
127 There are numerous complications that we cannot discuss. For example, two parents; two parents who 
are  divorced  or  hostile  to  each  other;  and  parents  who  value  their  children  differently.  See  Bergstrom, 
supra, for discussion. In addition, we might not care that the child’s welfare declines if his safety increases; 
that is, it may be fine, or good, if the parent reduces toys but not safety

 in response to regulation. 

39 

for  which  parents  are  expected  to  adjust  (perhaps  child  safety  seats).  Tort  law  should 

award an amount within this range for the hedonic loss to the child from his death. 

 

D. Loss to Society 

 
Commentators sometimes argue that tort law undervalues the loss of life because 
it  ignores  the  cost  to  “society.”128  Most  people  produce  value  that  they  do  not  fully 

consume  or  give  to  dependents;  this  value  benefits  strangers  in  the  larger  society. 

Workers  produce  goods  that  consumers  value  more  than  the  price  that  they  pay; 

entrepreneurs start new businesses that employ people; people give to charity; inventors 

invent products whose value is greater than what the inventors can capture through patent 

law; the same is true of authors of books and the protections of copyright law; there are 

countless  Good  Samaritan  acts;  and  many  people  devote  their  lives  to  public  service. 

When these people die, isn’t there a loss to society beyond the loss to the person who dies 

and  his  immediate  family  and  friends?  Perhaps  oddly,  neither  tort  nor  regulatory  law 
counts these losses. 129 Here as elsewhere, there are obvious difficulties of monetization, 

but the failure to assign any value at all is puzzling. 

 

One re

sponse is that these benefits may be smaller than they first appear. Labor 

m

arket

s  are  vast,  and  the  cost  of  replacing  a  worker  who  dies  will  generally  be  trivial. 

(Recall  that  we  are  speaking  here  of  losses  of  society;  losses  to  the  worker  and 

dependents are assessed independently.) In addition, many people do bad things as well 

as good things, and presumably the hostile and aggressive acts must be subtracted from 

the Good Samaritan acts. Finally, to the extent that the size of the population is a concern 

for economic growth or national security purposes, the government has ma

ny tools at its 

disposal for adjusting it. Temporary visas can be issued for foreign workers; immigration 

can be increased; and other barriers against migration can be reduced or eliminated. And 

birth control policies can be adjusted to increase or decrease population as necessary. 

 

Still,  serious  thought  should  be  given  to  monetizing  the  loss  to  society  when  a 

person dies. Assume again that the legal system had a social hedometer, one that could 

measure that loss and turn it into m

onetary equivalents. It seems clear that if an accurate 

 
                               

                 
128 See, e.g., Miller, supra. 
129 In tort law, the doctrine of proximate causation prevents recovery by people whose injuries are remote 
from the tort. This doctrine seems to assume that the injuries to these people are likely to be small or hard 
to prove. 

40 

assessment of the loss could be made, those who subject people to mortality risks should 

be required to take that loss into account. The question is how to proceed in the absence 

o

f  a  he

dometer.  One  poss

ibility  would  be  to  try  to  determine  how  much  people  are 

willing to pay to avoid the deaths of casual acquaintances. This question raises some of 

the same issues as those involved in the monetization of grief. If the relevant amounts are 

likely to be low, current practice might be justified; but a great deal of additional work 

needs to be done on this topic. 

E. Foreigners 

 

 

 

Many wrongful acts kill people who are not citizens of the United States. Some of 

these people reside in the United States, either legally or illegally (“alien residents,” for 

our purposes); others live outside the United States (“alien nonresidents”). Some of these 

wrongful  acts  are  committed  by  Americans  or  firms  predominantly  run  or  owned  by 

Americans; others are committed by aliens or foreigners. All of these acts are potentially 

governed by American tort and regulatory law. 

Let  us  consider  two  examples,  one  from

  tort  and  one  from  environmental 

regulation.  In  Filartiga  v.  Pena-Irala,  a  case  involving  the  torture  and  murder  of  a 

Paraguayan citizen by a Paraguayan police official, the plaintiffs, who were the brother 

and  father  of  the  victim,  brought  a  claim  in  an  American  court  under  the  Alien  Tort 
Statute,  and  obtained  damages  of  more  than  $10  million.130  A  magistrate  had  initially 

awarded  them  $375,000  in  compensatory  damages  for  emotional  distress,  funeral  and 

medical expenses, and so forth; the district court also awarded punitive damages of over 

$9 million. The court claimed to base the compensatory awards mainly on the domestic 

law of the countries in which the torts took place. If so, the compensatory damages were 

probably low for the same reason that they are low in the U.S.: domestic law in foreign 

countries  does  not  award  damages  for  hedonic  loss,  but  only  for  lost  income  and 
ke.131

 However, as a result of the punitive award the damages were far in excess of what 

the 

li

                                                 
130 Filartiga v. Pena-Irala, 577 F. Supp. 860 (1984). 
131  We  lack  VSL  statistics  for  the  Paraguay  or  the  Philippines,  but  we  do  have  these  statistics  for  India, 
which range from $1 to $4 
million (2000 US$) (Viscusi and Aldy, supra, at 28); the Philippines’ per capita 
GDP is almost 80 percent higher than India’s (CIA World Factbook, http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/ 
factbook/rankorder/2004rank.html);  the  Philippines’  VSL  would  almost  certainly  be  in  that  range  if  not 
higher. 

41 

would  have  been  available  under  Paraguayan  law,  because  punitive  damages  are  not 
awarded in wrongful death cases in Paraguay.132 

 

Many toxic substances produced in the United States contaminate territory outside 

American borders. Chemicals such as PCBs migrate across borders through atmospheric 

processes, and may be ingested by people living far away. Most of the EPA’s regulatory 

work involves purely domestic statutes, and the EPA refuses to count foreign lives when 

evaluating regulations based on those statutes, even when the substance being regulated 
reign  environments.133  If  it  is  proper  to  count  the  lives  of 

crosses  borders  and  harms  fo

foreigners, then the cost-benefit analyses that EPA has relied on undervalue the benefits 

of regulations. 

 

These examples reflect an international version of the domestic tension between 

tort  and  regulatory  law.  Because  tort  law  in  other  countries,  like  in  the  U.S.,  is  mainly 

limited to compensating dependents, foreign tort awards usually undervalue the victim’s 

loss. Because American courts generally defer 

to foreign law in case of torts committed 

on  foreign  soil,  the  low  tort  awards  in  other  countries  are  implicitly  incorporated  into 

American  foreign  policy,  and,  in  particular,  American  VSLs  for  foreign  lives.  By 

contrast,  American  regulatory  policy  generally  ignores  foreigners.  Which  approach  is 

correct? 

Our argument so far has been that the VSL should reflect people’s willingness to 

pay to avoid risks. Because the willingness to pay to avoid risks increases with income, 
poorer  people  have  lower  VSLs  than  wealthier  people.134  Because  many  aliens  are 
substantially poorer than Americans, they will have very low VSLs.135 Reflecting cross-
national wealth differences, VSL is highly variable across nations.136 Studies find a VSL 

as low as $200,000 for Taiwan, $500,000 for South Korea, and $1.2 million for India—

 
                                                
132 Filartiga, 577 F. Supp., at 864. 
133 Ronald Fein, Note, Should the EPA Regulate Under TSCA and FIFRA to Protect Foreign Environments 
from Chemicals Used in the United States?, 55 Stan
. L. Rev. 2153, 2169-70 (2003). See also Thomas W. 
Merrill, Golden Rules for Transboundary Pollution, 46 Duke L.J. 931 (1997). 
134 For evidence, see Viscusi and Aldy, supra note.  
135 See id. 
136 Id. 

42 

but  $21.7  million  for  Canada  and  $19  million  for  Australia.137  Consider  the  following 
table138: 

 

 

Table 4: VSL Across Nations 

Nation and Year of Study 

VSL (in 2000 US$) 

Japan (1991) 

South Korea (1993) 

Canada (1989) 

India (1996/97) 

Taiwan (1997) 

Australia (1997) 

Hong Kong (1998) 

Switzerland (2001) 

$9.7 million 

$0.8 million 

$3.9-4.7 million 

$1.2-1.5 million 

$0.2-0.9 million 

$11.3-19.1 million 

$1.7 million 

$6.3–8.6 million 

 

 

United Kingdom (2000) 

$19.9 million 

 
In  addition,  some  aliens  may  have  lower  VSLs  than  Americans  because  of 

cultural  and  social  differences.  For  example,  if  people  in  a  foreign  culture  do  not  fear 

death  as  much  as  Americans  do,  they  will  have  lower  VSLs,  all  else  equal.  The 

conclusion  that  aliens  should  have  lower  VSLs  follows  from  the  argument  that  VSLs 

should reflect social costs. 

This  view  might  seem  offensive,

  but  certainly  as  a  general  rule,  it  is  more 

139

consistent with the well-being of aliens than the contrary view is. First, consider the case 

where a particular alien in a foreign country both enjoys the benefit and bears the cost of 

a  regulation  or  tort  rule.  For  example,  a  labor  regulation  requires  foreign  suppliers  of 

goods  for  the  American  market  to  provide  safety  devices  to  workers.  The  workers  are 

willing  to  pay  $20  to  avoid  a  1/100,000  risk  of  death;  the  safety  device  eliminates  that 

risk,  but  results  in  a  reduction  in  pay  of  $30.  Unless  the  willingness  to  pay  figure  is  a 
product of ignorance or some failure of rationality,140 the regulation harms rather benefits 

the workers. 

                                                 
 
137 See id. at 27-28. 
138 Drawn from id. at 26-27. 
139  Indeed,  courts’  discomfort  with  it  might  explain  their  willingness  to  awa
when  they  are  not  available  under  foreign  law,  an
resulting  in
$375,0
00 in compensatory damages). 
140 See Sunstein, Valuing Life, supra note. 

rd  punitive  damages  –  even 
d  thus  the  award  violates  choice  of  law  principles  – 
  very  high  levels  of  damages.  E.g.,  Filartiga,  supra  (awarding  $10  million  punitive  damages, 

43 

 

Second,  consider  the  case  where  one  nonresident  alien  enjoys  the  benefit  of  the 

regulation,  and  another  alien  (living  in  the  same  country)  bears  the  cost.  A  regulation 

requires factories to reduce levels of emissions: neighbors would be willing to pay $100 

to  r duce  the  risk  of  death  c

e

reated  by  the  emissions but loc

al consumers bear a cost of 

$200  from  higher  prices.  If  the  neighbors  and

  consumers  have

  equal  wealth,  the 

regulation  simp

ly  redistrib

utes  wealth  from  one  group  to  another:  it  does  not  increase 

welfare  but  reduces  welfare.  If  the  neighbor

s  are  poorer  than  the  consum

ers,  then  the 

regulation migh

t be justified, 

but what justifi

es it is the distr

ibutional benefit, not the use 

of inflated VSLs. If the U.S. wants to effect a redistribution of wealth between groups in 

other countries

, and seeks to 

use regulatory 

and tort law to d

o so, there is no reason to 

limit these rules to cases of death; they could be used for nonfatal harms as well. And the 

use of inflated 

(that is, American) V

SLs would only obscure the nature of the regulatory 

intervention. 

 

A further question is this: Even assuming that the redistribution would be in the 

right direction, why would the U.S. want to redistribute wealth in other countries through 

regulatory  and  tort  law?  One  problem  is  that,  unless  the  U.S.  seizes  control  of  the 

government  of  the  foreign  country,  the  government  will  be  able  to  undo  the  American 

redistribution  by  using  tax  and  other  instrum

ents.  In  any  case  it  would  normally  make 

m

ore  sense  for  the  U.S.  to  negotiate  with  the  governm

ent  for  redistributions  of  wealth, 

rather  than  unilaterally  intervening.  Finally,  if  unilateral  intervention  is  to  occur,  the 

courts (in the case of tort law) would seem to be a poor vehicle; better to rely on the state 

department and other executive branch agencies. That the U.S. has rarely concerned itself 

with the distribution of wealth in other countries—focusing instead on trade, security, and 

human rights—suggests that indirect redistribution through tort and regulatory law would 

not be politically sustainable. 

 

Third,  consider  the  case  where  nonresident  aliens  enjoy  the  benefit  of  the 

regulation,  and  Am

erican  citizens  bear  the  cost.  Suppose  that  regulation  that  reduces 

emissions  that  dam

age  the  ozone  layer  harms  mainly  Americans,  who  pay  the  higher 

prices,  while  benefiting  m

ainly  people  living  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  Consider  two 

versions  of  this  regulation:  the  first  (low  pollution  control)  is  based  on  a  cost-benefit 

analysis that values foreign lives lower than American lives. The second (high pollution 

44 

control) is based on a cost-benefit analysis that values foreign lives and American lives 

equally,  at  the  American  level.  Under  the  stated  assumptions,  the  second  redistributes 

resources  from  Americans  to  people  living  in  other  countries.  Which  regulation  is 

superior? 

 

In  the  abstract,  the  answer  is  hardly  clear,  and  the  question  cannot  be  sensibly 

approached  without  consideration  of  American  foreign  policy  toward  the  nations  that 

benefit from the regulation. Let us consider the relation between the U.S. and, say, India. 

The two states can gain a lot from each other by cooperating, but there is also a danger of 

conflict.  To  simplify,  suppose  that  the  U.S.  wants  three  things  from  India:  security 

cooperation (such as flyover rights); an open market for U.S. goods; and an improvement 

in  the  treatment  of  religious  minorities.  India  seeks  from  the  U.S.  similar  things: 

diplomatic assistance with its ongoing disputes with Pakistan; an open market for Indian 

goods; and an improvement of American treatment of Indian residents. Suppose that at a 

hypothetical stage 1, India and the U.S. achieve a balance between their aims: each gives 

a little of what the other wants. 

 

Now  at  stage  2,  an  American  regulatory  agency  issues  an  environmental 

regulation  that  happens  to  benefit  India  considerably,  and  at  great  cost  to  American 

citizens. At this point, the American diplomatic authorities might argue that because the 

U.S.  is  conferring  a  new  benefit  on  India  (say,  less  flooding  of  coastal  areas),  India 

should  respond  by  conferring  a  new  benefit  on  the  U.S.  (say,  more  trade).  India  could 

respond by saying thanks for reducing coastal flooding—that is important—but it is not 

more  important  to  us  than  preserving  our  domestic  X  industry.  In  short,  the  new 

regulation  disturbs  the  cooperative  equilibrium  between  the  U.S.  and  India:  the  U.S., 

perceiving itself as giving more than it is getting, will (in theory) respond by withdrawing 

some other benefits, and India

 will retaliate. The new equilibrium could involve a lower 

level of cooperation—one in which the U.S. gives India something of little value to India 

and so gets something of little value in return—unless the U.S. government can change 
the regulation in a way that benefits India less.141 

 

Our  point  is  that  under  certain  circumstances,  regulations  and  tort  rules  that  are 

based  on  inflated  foreign  VSLs  will  redistribute  wealth  from  Americans  to  foreign 

                                                 
141 Of course, that may be impossible, in which case cooperation should not decline. 

45 

governments. Such transfers would not be wildly popular in the abstract, at least among 

Americans.  They  may  nonetheless  be  desirable  for  reasons  of  foreign  policy  or  social 

justice, but they should be recognized as such; the use of the inflated VSL conceals the 

magnitude  of  the  transfer  and  even  its  nature.  Further,  transfers—whether  disguised 

through  inflated  VSLs  or  undisguised—should  cohere  with  foreign  policy;  otherwise, 

they will lead to perverse results or be ineffective. The simple conclusion is that in many 

imaginable  circumstances,  a  high  VSL,  for  people  in  other  countries,  will  produce 

perverse redistribution or redistribution for which there is no strong claim—and that even 

when  the  redistribution  through  a  high  VSL  seems  desirable  (because  it  benefits  poor 

people on balance), there are many questions about whether regulatory agencies should 

adopt it. It follows that as a general rule, both agencies and courts should use a VSL that 

attempts to match the figure in the relevant nation. 

 

 

IV. Proposals for Reform 

A. Use of VSL in Regul

ations 

Tort law offers two principal lessons for regulatory policy. The first involves the 

need for a greater degree of individuation. The second involves the need to pay attention 

to  the  interests  of  dependents.  A  properly  designed  system  of  valuation  would  move 

substantially in both directions.  

 

1. Individuation  

We have seen that under the theory that agencies now use, VSL is calculated on 

the basis of people’s willingness to pay. That very theory raises serious doubts about the 

government’s  use  of  a  uniform  number.  The  appropriate  value  varies  across  both  risks 

and  persons.  If,  for  example,  the  risk  is  accompanied  by  a  high  degree  of  pain  and 

suffering, it deserves more attention than if it is not—a conclusion that is supported by 
studies finding a kind of “premium” for bad deaths.142 Agencies should therefore provide 

a higher VSL for cancer risks than for other risks, a possibility that EPA has recognized 

                                                
142 See Revesz, supra note. 

 

46 

in  its  “sensitivity  analysis”  for  arsenic.143  A  great  deal  more  should  be  done  in  this 
vein.144 As tort law demonstrates, a uniform number is extremely difficult to defend.  

Variations  across  persons  are  important  as  well.  To  be  sure,  it  is  impractical  to 

think  that  regulators  should  fully  individuate  risks  across  persons,  in  part  because 

regulations  often  affect  many  people  at  once.  But  less  fine-grained  distinctions  are 

possible. For example, people over sixty tend to show a lower VSL than people between 
thirty and forty.145 Regulators might build on these figures to generate different numbers 

for  programs  protecting  people  at  different  points  along  the  age  spectrum.  Putting  the 

difficult  case  of  children to  one side, agency rules should have a lower value when the 

benefited  class  consists  largely  of  elderly  people.  A  movement  in  this  direction  would 

have significant consequences for valuation; it would drive down the monetized benefits 

of a number of programs delivering health gains largely to senior citizens.  

Additional  distinctions  are  possible.  If  a  program  would  benefit  largely  wealthy 

people, regulators might use

 an unusually high VSL—a point that would support a higher 

V

SL  fo

current

r  safety  decisions  involving  a
irlines  (the  exact  opposite,  not  incidentally,  of 
  practice,  which  involves  an  unusually  low  number  for  airline  safety146).  More 

controversially, programs protecting the poor might be given a lower VSL, in a way that 

tracks the approach of tort law, at least where those who benefit from regulation are also 

paying for it. A possible objectio

n to this approach is that in some circumstances, a high 

VSL, f

or the poor, might be ben

eficial to the poor, simply because they receive benefits 

for whi
ch they pay only a fragment. We do not resolve the obvious empirical and ethical 
complexities  here.147  We  note  simply  that  a  higher  degree  of  individuation  would  be 

desirable, that in most cases it would raise no serious ethical problems, and that tort law 

shows that a movement toward greater individuation is both feasible and consistent with 

longstanding practices and intuitions. 

 

 

 

                                                
143 See note supra. 
144 See Sunstein, supra note. 
145  Joseph  P.  Aldy  and  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Age  Variations  in  Workers’  Value  of  a  Statistical  Life  (2003), 
forthcoming. 
146 See Table 2, supra, show
147 See Sunstein, supra. 

ing a lower figure for the FAA than for the EPA. 

47 

 

 

2. Dependents. 

For regulatory policy, the most obvious gap is that agency numbers do not recognize the 

fact tha

t a death causes welfare losses to many people other than the victim. If a worker is 

killed as a result of carcinogens in the workplace, others will almost always be affected. 

Agency  failure  to  take  account  of  the  welfare  losses  results  in  numbers  that  are  far  too 

low.  

We have suggested the importance of distinguishing between two sets of losses: 

grief on the one hand and lost income on the other. Following tort law, full individuation 

would  take  account  of  the  fact  that  the  size  of  those  losses  very  much  depends  on  the 

particular situation. Other things being equal, the loss of a parent with six young children 

causes  more  serious  harm  than  the  loss  of  someone  without  dependents.  If  our  earlier 

calculations  are  correct,  several  million  dollars  would  be  added  to  the

  conventional 

assessm

ent of the benefits of a regulation that saved that parent’s statistical life. A serious 

difficulty here is that agency regulations protect broad classes of people and hence it is 

quite impractical to think that agencies should make fully individual judgments about the 

welfare losses. But it is not impractical to think that agencies should adjust their numbers 

in  a  way  that  ensures  that  serious  welfare  losses  are  not  ignored.  As  in  the  case  of 

statistical risks, contingent valuation studies and market evidence might be consulted to 

generate  appropriate  numbers  for  grief.  We  have  offered  some  suggestions  about  how 

this might be done. For regulations, individual assessments are of course impossible, but 

a  positive  number  is  better  than  no  number,  and  population-wide  means  would  be  a 

sensible place to start. 

 

In  the  regulatory  context,  there  is  a  cautionary  note.  Any  effort  at  individuation 

would have a high degree of political salience and would undoubtedly mobilize affected 

interests. Even if the social science w

ere less ambiguous than it now is, well-organized 

groups  would  undoubtedly  engage  in  special  pleading,  attempting  to  move  agency 

practices in their preferred directions. A uniform number helps to insulate agencies from 

the  relevant  pressures.  In  the  context  of  tort  suits,  individuation  does  not  face  those 

pressures,  and  hence  there  is  little  need

  for  insulation.  In  principle,  however, 

individuation is clearly desirable, and it seems quite pessimistic to think that the effort to 

48 

produce  greater  accuracy  should  be  rejected  because  of  the  possible  effects  of  interest-

group maneuvering. 

B. Use of VSL in Tort Law 

 

 

 

 

In wrongful death actions, damages should be calculated in the following way. 

 

1. The Hedonic Loss of the Victim  

For  deterrence  purposes,  the  tortfeasor  should  pay  the  amount  that  the  victim 

would 

be  willing  to  pay  to  avoid  the  risk  that  was  imposed  on  him  by  the  tortfeasor’s 

class of actions, divided by that risk (R/q). Damages should not be based on lost income; 

as  in  the  regulatory  context,  lost  income  is  at  best  a  proxy  for  the  victim’s  loss. 

Deterrence  can  be  satisfied  through  payment  to  the  government,  but  if  it  is  paid  to  the 

estate or dependents, then indirect compensation is also achieved.  

The  amount  can  be  calculated  in  two  ways.  First,  the  VSL  (or  VSLY)  used  by 

agencies could be used, with any adjustments as necessary to reflect individual factors: 

the defendant’s risk preference, life expectancy (if VSLY is used), wealth, quality of life, 

and so forth. Indeed, it is possible that the victim’s own wages will reflect his VSL, if he 

has  a  risky  job.  So  long  as  agencies  use  a  uniform  figure,  courts  might  start  with  the 

standard  $6  million  figure,  and  then  make  adjustments  as  appropriate.  If  agencies  used 

more refined figures, as we have argued that they should, then courts might begin with 

those  figures  instead,  and  make  appropriate  adjustments  from  that  amount.  Second,  the 

jury could be asked to determine the hedonic loss. However, the proper jury question is 

not  “what  is  the  value  of  the  life’s  pleasures  lost  by  the  victim?”  This  question  is  too 

abstract.  A  better  ques
tion  would  be:  “estimate  the  amount  of  money  that  the  victim 
would have paid to avoid the risk in question.”  148 Of course an abstract answer to that 

question  would  be  unreliable;  VSL  studies  should  be  used  to  educate  juries  about 
common valuations, so that their own estimates will be informed rather than arbitrary.149 

                                                 
148  Arlen  argues  that  courts  are  incapable  of  making  such  calculations,  claiming  that  “courts’  inaccurate 
calculations would come no closer to efficient recovery amounts than would legislation establishing a flat 
statutory  amount  for  wrongful  death  in  the  hope  that  the  results  would  be  efficient  on  average.”  Arlen, 
supra,  at  1134.  It  might  be  true  that  legislatures  can  do  better  than  courts,  but  that  is  no  argument  for 
awarding zero damages or an (arbitrary) constant amount instead. Recall too that we are not exploring the 
complex issues raised by the possible difference between willingness to pay and willingness to accept. 
149 Many courts have refused to admit testimony about VSL studies, arguing that the science does not meet 
the Daubert standard. See, e.g., Ayres v. Robinson, 887 F. Supp. 1049 (N.D. IL 1995). This seems to us a 
mistake.  For  a  discussion,  see  Reuben  E.  Slesinger,  The  Demise  of  Hedonic  Damages  Claims  in  Tort 
Litigation, 6 J. Legal Econ. 17 (1996). Some courts also reject VSL studies on the ground that these studies 

49 

To ensure consistent and rational awards, we would strongly prefer the first approach, on 

the ground that juries are not well-equipped to answer these questions; but if a strong role 

for  the  jury  is  deemed  important,  t

he  second  would  also  work  so  long  as  the  jury’s 

ju

dgme

nts are disciplined by expert witnesses and the court. 

This  reform  would  have  a  significant  imp

act  on  tort  awards,  especially  for  the 

elderly in non-hedonic loss states. We can already see the logic of our argument at work 
in  some  of  the  hedonic  loss  states.  Consider  Thomas  v.  Hilburn,150  in  which  the  jury 

awarded wrongful death damages of $300,000 to  the son of the 75 year old victim. On 

appeal, the defendant argued that damages should be reduced to $66,311 for lost income, 

plus  a  few  thousand  dollars  more  for  medical  expenses,  funeral  expenses,  and  property 

damage. The court rejected the argument because Mississippi was (

at the time) a hedonic 

loss sta

te. Although our approach would have suggested a verdict of a few million or so, 

depending  on  the  wealth  and  other  characteristics  of  the  victim,  the  court  clearly 

recognized the key point that the hedonic loss of an elderly man is much higher than his 
lost income.151 

In  the  tort  context,  there  is  an  additional  complication.  Valuation  of  statistical 

risks  has  occurred  for  risks  of  specified  magnitudes,  usually  ranging  from  1/10,000  to 
1/100,000.152 Insofar as tort law is dealing with risks in this range, use of agency figures 

is fully appropriate. But it should be clear that these numbers need not be taken to support 
a VSL that is independent of probability.153 Suppose that people would be willing to pay 

$60 to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000. From this it does not follow that people would be 

 th

willing to pay $6000 to eliminate a risk of 1/1000, or $60,000 to eliminate a risk of 1/100, 
                                                                                                                                                 
reflect the losses to other people, not to the victim who is
e subject of the tort dispute. However, courts 
frequently  use  statistics  about  other  people  in  order  to  award  damages  in  tort  cases.  For  example,  when 
courts calculate lost income in order to determine damages for dependents, they use mortality tables; these 
tables are based on the lives of other people, not on the victim’s own life, which would not make any sense. 
Just  as  courts  use  statistics  about  other  people  in  order  to  estimate  the  victim’s  life  expectancy,  courts 
should use statistics about other people in order to estimate how much the victim would have been willing 
to pay in order to avoid a risk of death. 
150 654 So. 2d 898, 903 (Miss. 1995). 
151  See  also  Motorola  Communications  and  Electronics,  Inc.  v.  Wilkerson,  555  So.  2d  713  (Miss.  1989) 
(allowing $150,000 award for the death of an 85 year old man); Marcotte v. Timberlane/Hampstead Sch. 
Dist.,  733  A.2d  394,  407-08  (N.H.  1999)  (allowing  $900,000  award  for  the  death  of  a  child  whose  lost 
future  income  was  about  $700,000).  New  Hampshire  also  recognizes  hedonic  losses  in  wrongful  d
eath 
cases. See supra. 
152 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 Ec. 
Inquiry 29, 33 (2004) (showing fatality risks ranging from about 1/100,000 to 45/100,000). 
153 See Richard Posner, Catastrophe: Risk and Reason (forthcoming 2004). 

50 

or  $600,000  to  eliminate  a  risk  of  1/10.  It  is  plausible  to  believe  that  people’s  WTP  to 
reduce  statistical  risks  is  nonlinear.154  As  the  probability  approaches  100%,  people 

become willing to pay an amount for risk reduction that rises nonlinearly to 100% of their 

income,  and—at  some  point—become  unwilling  to  accept  any  amount  in  return  for 
up their entitlement to life.155 From this it follows that if a defendant imposes risks 

giving 

that are far higher than those with which agencies deal, the agency figures are too low, 

and hence the tort system should use significantly higher ones. 

The sheer variety of wrongful death actions, in terms of both probability and kind 

of death, severely complicates the inquiry into appropriate damage awards. Insofar as the 

tort system is dealing with probabilities in the general range with which agencies deal, it 

can  build  on  (appropriately  reformed)  agency  practice.  Insofar  as  the  tort  system  is 

dealing  with  the  most  egregious  conduct—homicide,  for  example—the  regulatory 

analysis  of  WTP  does  not  apply  directly,  but  a  standard  amount  of  (say)  $6  million  at 

least provides an appropriate floor. Insofar as the conduct imposes high probability risks, 

as  through  gros

s  negligence,  a  similar  floor  is  appropriate,  supplemented  perhaps  by 

punitiv

e  damages.  These  suggestions  are  in  line  with  our  general  emphasis  on  the  fact 

that all mortality risks are not the same. What cannot be defended is the total exclusion of 

hedonic damages in wrongful death actions. 

 

 

                                                 
154 See id. 
155  There  is  a  great  deal  of  work  on  disparities  between  willingness  to  pay  and  willingness  to  accept 
(WTA). See, for an overview, Russell Korobkin, The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis, 97 Nw. U.L 
Rev. 1227 (2003). Such disparities are found in the context of risks. See, e.g., see W. Kip Viscusi et al., An 
Investigation of the Rationality of Consumer Valuations of Multiple Health Risks, 18 RAND J. Econ. 465 
(1987). It follows that people would pay less to eliminate a risk of 1/100,000 than they would demand to be 
subject to that same risk. See id. One advantage of the market data on which agencies currently rely is that 
the WTP/WTA disparity is essentially irrelevant. If workers and consumers who face a risk of 1/100,000 
receive  $60  in  compensation,  the  result  can  be  described  in  terms  of  either  WTA  or  WTP;  any  such 
description is simply a matter of framing
. But we lack reliable market data about how to value much higher 
risks -- say, risks of 1/50, 1/20, or 1/1
0. And for such risks, willingness to accept and willingness to pay 
figures  surely  diverge,  not  least  because  the  income  constraint  applies  to  WTP  but  not  to  WTA.  People 
would undoubtedly pay a great deal to eliminate a mortality risk of 1/20; but they would demand even more 
to be subject to that risk, and many people would not incur that risk for any amount. It is not entirely clear, 
in principle, whether WTP or WTA is appropriate, though our view is that willingness to accept is correct 
and therefore the 
appropriate compensatory award is either infinite or higher than anyone can pay. Thus, a 
billionaire  who  murders  someone  ought  to  forfeit  his  entire  wealth.  As  a  practical  matter,  however,  it 
probably does not make much difference that the tort system does not generate such high aw
ards, given that 
the entire wealth of most murderers is extremely limited. 

51 

 

2. Harm to Survivors  

As  we  have  seen,  calculating  the  loss  to  survivors  is  difficult  in  practice,  but 

conceptually straightforward. For deterrence purposes, survivors should recover for their 

welfare loss—this means grief, mental distress, loss of companionship, and the like. It is 

less clear what dependents should recover in terms of lost support (such as lost income 

attributable to their care). The conceptually proper recovery is the amount of money that 

would make the survivor just as well off (financially) as he would have been if the death 

had no

t occurred, which will usually be tied to the loss of household economies of scale 

and the breadwinner’s degree of altruism. This amount may be higher than lost income (if 

the victim does a lot of work for the household that is not compensated in the market). 

And it may be lower (if the survivor can easily get a job and the victim was never very 

generous in the first place). 

 

If our approach were adopted, tort damages would rise, especially for children and 

the elderly. As we have seen, damages for wrongful death are currently under about $3 

million, based on lost income, mental distress, and the like. Under our system, they are 

likely to be as much as $6 million or higher for the average person. As for children, tort 

damages  currently  should  be  low  in  jurisdictions  that  exclude  lost  income  (though  it  is 

not clear that this is the case); and for the eld

erly, tort damages currently should be (and 

apparently are) low even in jurisdictions that include lost income, given that their earning 

years  are  almost  over.  By  contrast,  under  our  approach  their  damages  are  likely  to  be, 
again, in the $6 million or higher range.156 For adults with dependents, we suspect that an 

additional several hundred thousands of dollars per dependent would be added to the $6 
million baseline. 157 

 

 

 
 
 

                                                 
156 Elderly people apparently have VSLs that are either equal to (or even higher than) or not much lower 
than those of younger people. See Aldy & Viscusi, supra. 
157 If the victim incurs unusual pain and suffering prior to death, including the distress of anticipating one’s 
own death in the near future, this cost may not be reflected in standard VSLs. Thus, additional damages 
should be awarded for them. Damages for medical and funeral expenses should also be awarded. See Mark 
Geistfeld, Placing a Price on Pain and Suffering: A Method for Helping Juries Determine Tort Damages for 
Nonmonetary Injuries, who suggests using WTP estimates, 83 Calif. L. Rev. 773 (1995). See also David 
W.  Leebron,  Final  Moments:  Damages  for  Pain  and  Suffering  Prior  To  Death,  64  N.Y.U.  L.  Rev.  256 
(1989). 

52 

V. Positive Questions 
 

 

Our  comparison  of  tort  law  and  regulatory  policy  raises  an  obvious  positive 

question. Why do these two areas of law take such different approaches to valuing lives? 

The beginning of an answer to this question is that even though the two areas of law have 

an  overlapping  purpose—the  deterrence  of  harmful  conduct—they  also  have  radically 

different historical origins and orientations: tort law is ex post and individualized, while 

regulatory  law  is  ex  ante  and  generalized.  As  a  result,  tort  law  is  naturally  more 

particularistic and less rule-bound. The ex ante focus of regulation pushes administrators 

away from case-specific standards and in the direction of rule-bound judgments. But this 

point raises many complexities. 

A. In General 

 

Tort law’s ex post and individualistic orientation has several consequences. First, 

the implicit (or explicit) valuation of human lives in the tort context is information-rich. 

Courts  have  access  to  a  great  deal  of  evidence  about  the  particular  parties  and 

circumstances.  Under  the  rules  of  evidence,  all  relevant  evidence  may  be  introduced  to 

the  court,  and  both  plaintiff  and  defendant  have  strong  incentives  to  take  advantage  of 

these rules. Given that the victim is a real, identifiable person, it is natural for the court to 

determine the actual loss, including losses to dependents, rather than to rely on statistical 

averages. In fact there is no need to rely on such averages, which provides less accurate 

information than the facts themselves. 

 

Second, tort remedies direct the decisionmaker to compare the victim’s post-tort 

state with her pre-tort state, and to ignore the rest of society. This approach works well 

e

nough  when  the  tort  causes  a  financial  loss  or  a  physical  injury,  but  when  it  kills  the 

v

ictim,  the  decisionmaker  has  no  way  to  compare  post-tort  and  pre-tort  well-being  in  a 

w

ay that can be reliably monetized. To determine the hedonic loss from death, one cannot 

look at the actual victim’s experience of death; one can rely only on statistical inference 

based  on  generalization  from  the  rest  of  society.  But  in  view  of  judicial  traditions,  this 

would be unfamiliar and even odd in the tort setting. 

 

Third,  and  following  from  the  first  two  points,  tort  damages  tend  to  be  highly 

variable.  Juries  lack  reference  points,  so  their  judgments  will  depend  heavily  on  the 

53 

presentation  of  evidence  by  lawyers,  and  on  whatever  anchors,158  prejudices,  and 

e

xpectations citizens bring to the jury box. Juries might also react emotionally to the case, 

or

 misu

nderstand jury instructions, and allow irrelevant factors (like a desire for revenge) 

to influence their determination of the award. 

 

Fourth,  tort  law  has  low  public  visibility,  at  least  at  the  system-wide  level. 

Individual awards may receive considerable public attention, but the system of awards—
the median award, the mean award, the variance—does not.159 Hence public scrutiny is 

relatively  weak  unless  and  until  a  salient  network  of  awards  (as  in  the  case  of  the 

September 11 fund) is announced. The difficulties of monetization, the variable figures, 

and the possible arbitrariness of many outcomes attract little in the way of scrutiny and 

review, not least because of the 

ex post nature of litigation and the fact that awards are 

issued 

one at a time. 

Compare  regulatory  law.  Regulatory  decisions  are  ex  ante  and  highly  abstract. 

The  victims  of  the  regulated  conduct  are  not  identified,  and  so  their  personal 

characteristics do not stand out (although sometimes a disaster or crisis may provoke the 
regulation160).  Whereas  court  cases  are  emotionally  rich,  regulatory  decisions  often 

(though not always) seem dry and technical, even though usually much more is at stake. 

The ex ante and general orientation of regulatory policy has several consequences. 

First, because one cannot identify the actual people benefited by a regulation, one must 

rely  on  averages.  The  usual  notion  is  that  although  all  individuals  are  different, 

differences will balance each other out,

 so that averages can be used. Thus, if a regulation 

protects people of type X with a VSL of $7 million and people of type Y with a VSL of 

$5 million, regulators use the average valuation of $6 million for a regulation that affects 

people evenly divided into the two types. 

 

 

 

                                                 
158 On the relevance of anchors, see Gretchen Chapman and Eric Johnson, in Heuristics and Biases: The 
Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (Thomas Gilovich et al. eds. 2002). 
159 Indeed, the extreme awards that receive media attention are, according to some, too rare to be a matter 
arry,  Is  the  Tort  System  in  Crisis?  New 
of  concern.  See  Deborah  Jones  Merritt  and  Kathryn  Ann  B
Empirical  Evidence,  60  Ohio  St.  L.J.  315  (1999).  A  similar
  argument  has  been  made  about  punitive 
da
 see Theodore Eisenberg, Neil LaFountain, Brian Ostrom, David Rottman, and Martin T. Wells, 
Juries, Judges, and Punitive Damages: An Empirical Study, 87 Cornell L. Rev. 743 (2002) (arguing that 
punitive damages are roughly correlated with compensatory damages); but see and Joni Hersch and W. Kip 
Viscusi, Punitive Damages, 33 J. Legal Stud. 1 (2004) (disputing this claim). 
160 See Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, Stan L Rev (1999). 

mages;

54 

 

This reasoning is not implausible, and sometimes averages are appropriate despite 

their crudeness; but they can lead regulators astray. Some regulations affect only persons 

of type X, and other regulations affect only persons of type Y; then different valuations 

should be used. Indeed, we know that some regulations protect people against cancer, a 

risk that people are willing to pay a premium to avoid, whereas other regulations protect 

people against sudden unanticipated death, a risk that occasions less in the way of public 
concern.161  So  too,  some  regulations  affect  the  poor  more  than  the  rich,  urban  people 

more  than  rural  people,  and  so  forth.  Under  the  very  theory  that  animates  current 

regulatory  practice,  individualized  VSLs,  taking  account  of  these  differences,  are 

important. 

 

Second, regulatory decisions affect more people than a tort award does, and thus 

are  more  politically  salient.  The  greater  political  salience  of  regulatory  decisions  may 

have good effects simply because public scrutiny can be a corrective against ill-motivated 

or  foolish  decisions;  but  here  we  focus  on  some  bad  or  troubling  effects.  The  most 

obvious  is  that  the  symbolism  of  sensible  and  disaggregated  regulatory  decisions  may 

bother people because such decisions seem in conflict with other values—here, we have 

in mind the controversy valuing human lives at all, or the likely more intense controversy
 
over valuing the lives of the rich more than the lives of the poor.162 The risks of public 

skepticism may also explain agencies’ failure to value the lives of children properly and 

openly.  

By  contrast,  the  isolation  of  tort  awards  suppresses  these  symbolic  concerns. 

Almost  no  one  complains  about  the  fact  that  poor  people  obtain  lower  damages  in  tort 

awards because they have lost less future income; and the existence of the disparity, and 

its  longstanding  character,  at  least  raises

  problems  for  those  who  believe  that  ethical 

p

rinciples require all deaths to be valued the same way. But it appears to be politically 

difficult to draw the logical conclusion that VSLs for poor people should be lower than 

VSLs for rich people in regulatory decisionmaking. 

 

                                                 
161 See Revesz, supra note; Hammit and Liu, supra note. 
162  Consider  the  controversy  over  the  idea  of  “life  years,”  an  idea  that  strikes  many  people  as  ethically 
problematic  because  it  treats  elderly  people  as  less  valuable  than  younger  people.  See  Ackerman  and 
Heinzerling, supra note. 

55 

 

We are unable to explain why agencies have neglected the losses to dependents. 

One  possible  answer  is  that  agencies  assume  that  victims’  WTPs  for  bearing  risks  of 

death  incorporate  these  costs;  but  as  we  have  explained,  it  is  unlikely  that  these  WTPs 

incorporate  these  costs  fully.  Another  possible  answer  is  lack  of  information;  it  is  not 

easy  to  generate  a  plausible  number  to  capture  the  costs  to  dependents  on  some 

population-wide basis. But this problem ought to be remediable. A probable contributor 

to the gap is that cost-benefit analysis and the use of VSLs is in its infancy—as a formal 
part  of  regulatory  law,  it  is  only  about  twenty-five  years  old163—and  agencies  have 

focused on the large problems while neglecting or overlooking more subtle issues. But it 

is now time for the VSL methodology to advance to a new stage of sophistication. 

B. September 11 and Compensation 

The  different  orientations  of  tort  and  regulatory  law  were  reflected  in  an 

interesting  way  by  the  decisionmaking  process  of  the  commission  that  was  set  up  to 

award compensation to victims of the 9/11 terrorist attack. We have briefly outlined the 

resulting  regulations.  Before  returning  to  this  topic,  let  us  conduct  two  thought 

 

 

experiments. 

First,  suppose  that  Congress  had  never  set  up  the  9/11  compensation  fund,  and 

instead the victims and survivors had sued under state tort law. Suppose they succeeded 

in establishing the liability of defendants such as the airlines. How would damages have 

been awa

rded? It is clear that wealth differences would have been seen in wrongful death 

and  su

rvivors’  awards.  The  dependents  of  investment  bankers  would  have  obtained 

awards far in excess of those obtained by the dependents of fire fighters. In addition, the 

awards  would  have  varied  significantly  in  light  of  the  different  characteristics  of  each 

victim. But there also would have been considerable inexplicable variance in the awards, 

variance  that  would  not  be  traceable  to  relevant  factors  but  to  the  vagaries  of  jury 

decisionmaking  and  the  law  of  tort.  Hence  inequalities  would  have  been  pervasive—

some a justified product of existing rules, others a re

sult of simple “noise” in the system. 

 

Second,  suppose  that  an  agency  had,  prior  to  the  9/11  attack,  issued  regulations 

designed to force the owners of buildings such as the World Trade Center to install safety 

devices that would have saved lives in case of 

a terrorist attack or similar disaster. Here, 

                                                 
163 See Executive Order 12291, supra. 

56 

we  can  be  sure  that  the  agency  would  have  used  uniform  valuations—such  as  $6.1 

million per life saved—that would have ignored wealth differences and other differences 

between victims. The agency would also have ignored dependents. 

 

How  did  the  9/11  commission  make  its  decisions?  On  the  one  hand,  the 

commission  was  directed  by  Congress  to  rely  on  tort  principles,  and  for  that  reason  it 
used formulas that took into account wealth differences.164 Estates of investment bankers 
did receive more compensation than estates of fire fighters.165 In addition, awards were 

an  increasing  function  of  the  number  of  dependents.  On  the  other  hand,  public  and 

political  discomfort  with  these  disparate  awards—which  seemed  to  dishonor  the  fire 

fighters, and also to distinguish victims along class lines—led the commission to adopt 
awards that were less dispersed than would have occurred under the tort system.166 

 

There is a lesson here. Because individual tort cases concern just one person or a 

few people, awards are unlikely to be politically salient or to be influenced by irrelevant 

political considerations. But because they are ex post and individualized, they usually fail 

to  take  advantage  of  information  that  is  accessible  only  at  the  level  of  the  general 

population.  T

he  9/11  Commission  combined  the  virtues  and  flaws  of  both  approaches. 

Because of the political salience of the task, and because awarding damages to thousands 

of  people  made  comparison  easy  and  obvious,  the  commission  was  constrained,  like 

regulatory agencies, to use relatively uniform numbers; recall that a standard number was 

used for noneconomic damages. At the same time, arbitrariness was therefore limited—in 

the  sense  that  people  in  similar  circumstances  received  similar  awards.  Because  the 

commission was directed to use tort principles, the numbers were not fully uniform, and a 

degree  of  individual  variation  was  properly  allowed.  But  the  use  of  tort  principles  also 

made it impossible to use figures for hedonic losses, and instead the commission relied 

on flawed figures such as lost income, with the result that average awards—in the $2 to 

 
for  Computing  Presumed  Economic  Loss,  available  at

                                                 
164  See  Explanation  of  Process 
http://www.usdoj.gov/victimcompensation/loss_calc_deceased.html. 
16

5  For  e
illion, 

xample,  the  spouse  of  a  40  year  old  with  an  income  of  $50,000  would  receive  a  little  over  $1 
m
whereas the spouse of a 40 year old with an income of $225,000 would receive about $3.5 million 
– not including non-economic loss. See Explanation of Process for Computing Presumed Economic Loss, 
supra. 
166 See Chen, Man Behind, supra, at B3 (“The statute suffered from two conflicting impulses: to follow the 
standards  of  lost  future  income  typical  in  tort  cases,  while  at  the  same  time  making  the  fund  fair  to  all 
income  groups,  Mr.  Feinberg  [the  special  master]  said.  He  ultimately  devised  the  program  to  prevent  it 
from favoring the wealthy over the fina

ncially disadvantaged, he said.”) 

57 

$3 million range—were less than the hedonic losses that actually occurred, according to 
the VSL methodology used by agencies.167  

 

In normal situations, significant improvements are possible. Courts can, and ought 

to,  take  advantage  of  information  about  average  persons  when  the  relevant  information 

about  a  particular  victim  is  lacking  (such  as  WTP  to  avoid  the  risk  that  produced 
death).168 And although politics will always constrain agencies, there are certainly many 

steps  that  agencies  can  take  to  improve  their  use  of  VSLs  without  running  afoul  of 

political constraints. At a minimum, we see no reason why agencies cannot estimate the 

losses to dependents of people who are killed by regulated conduct, and it seems likely to 

us that at least some kinds of individualization will be possible—by, for example, giving 

a premium for risks that are especially dreaded. 

 

 

Conclusion 

In the United States, two independent bodies of law assign dollar values to deaths. 

Regulatory  agencies, drawing on willingness to pay studies, use a uniform number that 

takes  no  account  of  losses  to  dependents  and  others.  In  wrongful  death  actions,  courts 

attempt  to  compensate  survivors,  failing  to  incorporate  the  loss  to  the  decedent  and 

ensuring a high degree of variability in awards. For both bodies of law, deterrence is an 

important goal, and from the standpoint of deterrence, both make serious blunders. And 

for both, a key question is how to combine accuracy and administrability. 

 

There are two central problems with regulatory law. First, the value of a statistical 

life is uniform rather than disaggregated. The very theory that underlies current practice 

calls for far more in the way of individuation. Second, agency figures do not include the 

losses to dependents and others; the result is underdeterrence. We have made suggestions 

about how agencies might remedy these two problems. The central problem with tort law 

is  that  it  does  not  include  the  welfare  loss  to  the  decedent;  its  current  reliance  on  the 

decedent’s  pre-death  losses  and  the  dependents’  losses  results  in  undervaluation  of 

 
                                      

          
167 And, bizarrely, death benefits for soldiers and public safety officials as the basis for non-economic, that 
is, mental distress, compensation for the dependents of victims. See Explanation of Process for Computing 
Presumed Economic Loss, supra. 
168 Compare the proposal of Baldus et al., supra. 

58 

morality  risks,  and  hence  underdeterrence.  We  have  also  made  suggestions  about  how 

both bodies of law should deal with the deaths of children and foreigners.  

 

If our recommendations were accepted, we would expect tort awards to become 

higher,  more  uniform,  and  less  arbitrary  than  they  currently  are.  We  would  also  expect 

VSLs used by regulatory agencies to be more variable—in many cases lower and in many 

cases  higher.  The  inclusion  of  losses  to  dependents  should  result  in  more  stringent 

regulations, as the effective benefit from a life saved would be increased.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Eric A. Posner 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 
 

csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 

eric_posner@law.uchicago.edu 

59 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

992) 

William  M.  Landes,  Copyright  Protection  of  Letters,  Diaries  and  Other  Unpublished  Works:  An 
Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of 
Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study 
(August 1992) 
Alan  O.  Sykes,  The  Welfare  Economics  of  Immigration  Law:  A  Theoretical  Survey  With  An 
Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial 
Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) 
(April 1993) 
Lucian  Arye  Bebchuk  and  Randal  C.  Picker,  Bankruptcy  Rules,  Managerial  Entrenchment,  and 
Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J.  Mark  Ramseyer,  Explicit  Reasons  for  Implicit  Contracts:  The  Legal  Logic  to  the  Japanese  Main 
Bank System (August 1993) 
William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economics  of  Anticipatory  Adjudication 
(September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 
William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settleme
Kenneth  W.  Dam,  Some  Economic  Considerations  in  the  Intellectual  Property  Protection  of 
Software (
August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulele
David Friedman, M
Daniel  Shaviro
(January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of C
Daniel  Kessler,  Thomas  Meites,  and  Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Explaining  Deviations  from  the  Fifty 
Percent Rule
Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Das  Kapital:  S
1995) 
Richard Craswe
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (Novem
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property i
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 

udget  Deficits  and  the  Intergenerational  Distribution  of  Lifetime  Consumption 

: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) 

olvency  Regulation  of  the  American  Business  Enterprise  (April 

n an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) 

: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 

ll, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 

ontract Damages (February 1995) 

ore Justice for Less Money

nt Escrows (August 1994) 

ssness, (October 1994) 

ber 1995) 

,  B

 
1.

 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7
. 
8
. 
9
. 

1

0. 

1
1
1

1. 
2. 
3. 

1
1

4. 
5. 

1

6. 

1

7. 

1

8. 

1
9. 
2
0. 
2
1. 
2
2. 
3. 
2
24. 
25. 
26
. 

27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31
. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
3
5. 
3
6. 

60 

37. 

38

. 

39. 
40. 

41. 

42.
 
43.
 

44.
 
45.
 
46.
 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 

66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 

70. 

53.  

f Financially 

ages (with Notes 

  Civil  Law  Regimes: 

plex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of 

eyer  and  Eric  B.  Rasmusen,  Judicial  Independence  in

niel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Dam

A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership 

nd  David  B.  Mustard,  Crime,  Deterrence,  and  Right-to-Carry  Concealed 

.  and  Kermit  Daniel,  Term  Limits  and  Electoral  Competitiveness:  Evidence  from 

996) 
osts  and  Property  Rights:  Or  Do  Good  Fences  Make  Good 

J.  Mark  Rams
Econometrics from Japan (January 1
Richard  A.  Epstein,  Transaction  C
Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) 
William M. Landes and Richard 
of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  a
Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics o
Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 
William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr
California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Com
Norms (June 1997) 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  Contracts  Small  and  Contracts  Large:  Contract  Law  through  the  Lens  of 
Laissez-Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Da
on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  
William  M.  Landes,  Lawrence  Lessig,  and  Michael  E.  Solimine,  Judicial  Influence:  A  Citation 
Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  A  Simple  Explanation  for  Why  Campaign  Expenditures  are  Increasing:  The 
Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  
Richard  A.  Posner,  Values  and  Consequences:  An  Introduction  to  Economic  Analysis  of  Law 
(March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better 
Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine  Jolls,  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  and  Richard  Thaler,  A  Behavioral  Appro
Economics (May 1998) 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  Does  a  Helping  Hand  Put  Others  At  Risk?:  Affir
Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on F
Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  How
Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmi
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Private  Broadcasters  and  the  Public  Interest:  Notes  Toward  A  “Third  Way” 
(January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) 
Yannis
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academ
Gertrud  M.  Fremling  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  Status  Signaling  and  the  Law,  with  Particular 
Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (M

th and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) 

  Dramatically  Did  Women’s  Suffrage  Change  the  Size  and  Scope  of 

 Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Informat

ic Enterprise (February 1999) 

ion Goods (February 1999) 

mative  Action,  Police 

ach  to  Law  and 

arch 1999) 

irm 

61 

e and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  

m M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-

Jonathan  M.  Karpoff,  John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  and  Graeme  Rankine,  Environmental  Violations,  Legal 
Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 
Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Willia
Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Privat
Lisa  Bernstein,  The  Questionable  Empirical  Basis  of  Article  2’s  Incorporation  Strategy:  A 
Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) 
William M. Landes, Winn
1999) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  David  Schkade,  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Do  People  Want  Optimal  Deterrence? 
(June 1999) 
Tomas  J.  Philipson  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Long-Run  Growth
Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999)
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel K
ahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? 
Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, No

ing the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 

ndelegation Canons (September 1999) 

  in  Obesity  as  a  Function  of 

 

Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Theory and  Practice  of  Citations  Analysis,  with  Special  Reference  to  Law 

and Economics (September 19

99) 

Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 

Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 

Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing 

and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case 

of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 

87. 

Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Ma

rket Signaling of Personal Characteristics 

(November 1999) 

88. 

Matthew D. Ad

ler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are 

Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 
1999) 
David  A.  Weisbach,  Should  the  Tax  Law  Require  Current  Accrual  of  Interest  on  Derivative 
Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts 
(January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift 
(February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Referen
Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised May 
2002)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  

ce to 

71. 

72. 
73. 

74. 

75. 
76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 
81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 
95. 

96. 

97. 
98. 
99. 

100.
 
101.
 
102. 
103. 
104.
 

62 

113.  William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An Economic Approach 

105. 

106.
 
107.
 

108. 

109.
 
110. 
111. 
112. 

114.
 
115.
 
116. 
117. 
118.
 
119. 

120.
 
121. 

122. 
123. 
124.
 
125. 

126. 
127. 
128. 
129. 

  

130. 

131. 

  

132.
 
133.
 

134. 

135.
136.

 
 

137. 

138. 
139. 

140. 

Jack  Goldsmith  and  Alan  Sykes,    The  Dormant  Commerce  Clause  and  the  Internet  (November 
2000) 
Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
Douglas  Lichtman,  Scott  Baker,  and  Kate  Kraus,  Strategic  Disclosure  in  the  Patent  System 
(November 2000) 
Jack  L.  Goldsmith  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  Moral  and  Legal  Rhetoric  in  International  Relations:    A 
Rational Choice Perspective (N
William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul L
Richard  A.  Epstein  and  Alan  O.  Sykes,  The  Assault  on  Managed  Care:    Vicarious  Liability,  Class 
Actions and

evmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) 

 the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 

ovember 2000) 

 

ge (April 2001) 

mer Finance (February 2001) 

l Reference to Law) (March 2001) 

f 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) 

, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal 

d  A.  Epstein,  In  and  Out  of  Public  Solution:    The  Hidden  Perils  of  Property  Transfer  (July 

(December 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 
Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consu
Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Specia
Eric  A.  Posner,  Controlling  Agencies  with  Cost-Benefit  Analysis:    A  Positive  Political  Theory 
Perspective (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital A
Douglas  G.  Baird  and  Robert  K.  Rasmussen,  Control  Rights,  Priority  Rights  and  the  Conceptual 
Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act o
Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) 
Christopher Avery
Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)  
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
Richar
2001) 
Randal  C.  Picker,  Pursuing  a  Remed
Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  David  Schkade,  and  Ilana  Ritov,  Predictably  Incoherent 
Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa  Bernstein,  Private  Commercial  Law  in  the  Cotton  Industry:    Creating  Cooperation  through 
Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 
Richard  A.  Epst
(August 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
Eric  A.  Posner,  Richard  Hynes,  and  Anup  Malani,  The  Political  Economy  of  Proper
Laws (September 2001) 
Eric  A.  Posner  and  George  G.  Triantis,  Covenants  Not  to  Compete  from an Incomplete Contracts 
Perspective (September 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law
Randall  S.  Kroszner  and  Philip  E.  Strahan,  Throwing  Good  Money  after  Bad?  Board  Connection
and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, an
2002) 

ein,  The  Allocation  of  the  Commons:  Parking  and  Stopping  on  the  Commons 

y  in  Microsoft:    The  Declining

d the Doha “Solution” (February 

  Need  for  Centralized 

 (November 2001) 

ty  Exemption 

s 

 

63 

Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) 
Daniel
Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 200

  N.  Shaviro  and  David  A.  Weisbach,  The  Fifth  Circuit  Gets  It  Wrong  in  Compaq  v. 

2) 

143.  Warren  F.  Schwartz  and  Alan  O.  Sykes,  The  Economic  Structure  of  Renegotiation  and  Dispute 

154.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) 
155. 

view) 

 Decades:  Success or Failure (March 

Resolution in the W
TO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal Studies 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, 
forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Re
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three
2002) 
Randal  C.  Picker,  Copyright  as  Entry  Policy:    The  Case  of  Digital  Distribution  (April  2002,  The 
Antitrust Bulletin) 
David  A.  Weisbach,  Taxes  and  Torts  in  the  Redistribution  of  Income  (April  2002,  Coase  Lecture 
February 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regula
Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  Steady  the  Course:  Property  Rights  in  Genetic  Material  (May  2002;  re
March 2003) 
Jack  Goldsmith  and  Cas
Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 

s  R.  Sunstein,  Military  Tribunals  and  Legal  Culture:  What  a  Difference 

vised 

002) 

tion?  

2) 

fusal and the 

ptember 2002) 

eptember 2002) 

ce  Markets:  A  Role  for  the  Government  as 

Anne  Gron  and  Alan  O.  Sykes,  Terrorism  and  Insuran
Insurer? (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Avoiding  Absurdity?  A  New  Canon  in  Regulatory  Law  (with  Notes  on 
Interpretive Theory) (August 200
Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Re
Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (Se
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract 
Law (S
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the 
File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Confo
Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) 
Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (Novemb
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) 
Avraham  D.  Ta
(November 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for the Regulation of 
Public Health (Decembe
Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxation a
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act of 
1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 

bbach,  Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis 

nd Risk-Taking with Multiple Tax Rates (December 2002) 

rmity and Dissent (September 2002) 

er 2002) 

r 2002) 

141. 
142. 

144. 

145. 
146. 

147. 

148. 

149. 
150. 

151. 
152. 

153. 

156. 
157. 
158. 

159. 

160. 
161 

162. 

163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 

170. 

171. 
172. 
173. 
174. 

175. 

64 

195.  William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memorie

176. 

177. 

178. 

179. 

180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 

187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191.  
192. 
193. 
194. 

196. 

197. 

198. 

199. 

200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 
204. 

205. 
206. 
207. 

208. 

209. 

210. 
211. 
212. 

tions: Iowa Utilities 

  Act  Come  with  the  1996 

i Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 

ndirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An 

David  A.  Weisbach,  Measurement  and  Tax  Depreciation  Policy:  The  Case  of  Short-Term  Assets 
(January 2003) 
Randal  C.  Picker,  Understanding  Statutory  Bundles:  Does  the  Sherman
Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunica
and Verizon (January 2003) 
William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, I
Economic Perspective (February 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 
Amita
Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein,
 The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein
Alan  O.  Sykes,  The  Economics  of  WTO  Rules  on  Subsidies  and 
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WT
Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) 
Richard A. Ep
Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of
Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) 
David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September 
2003) 

stein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) 

 and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) 

 Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) 

Countervailing  Measures  (May 

O Jurisprudence (May 2003) 

003) 

s: What Was the 
 Labor between 1985 

ry Investigation (September 2003)  

:  Unbundling  Advertising  and  Content  (September 

ce  Hold?  Of  Autonomy,  Desuetude,  Sexuality,  and  Marriage 

Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm
and 2000? (September 2003) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  What  Did  Lawren
(September 2003) 
Randal  C.  Picker,  The  Digital  Video  Recorder
2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts 
of Appeals: A Prelimina
Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure 
Time (October 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Tw
David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 
2004) 
David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  Liberty  versus  Property?  Cracks  in
2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Are  Poor  People  Worth  Less  Than  Rich  People?  Disaggregating  the  Value  of 
Statistical Lives (February 2004) 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  Disparities  and  Discrimination  in  Health  Care  Coverage
Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceu
Steady the Course on Hatch-Waxman (March 2004) 
Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Co
Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus
Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004) 

 John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) 

2003) 
ilight (October 2003) 

  the  Foundations  of  Copyright  Law  (April 

mplexity of Legal Rules (April 2004) 

 Ad Bellum (April 2004) 

;  A  Critique  of  the 

tical Patents: 

65 

 2004) 

e Legal Services Industry (April 2004) 

Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Labor 
within and between Law Firms (April 2004) 
Luis  Garicano  and  Thomas  N.  Hubbard,  Hierarchies,  Specialization,  and  the  Utilization  of 
Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from th
James  C.  Spindler,  Conflict  or  Credibility:  Analyst  Conflicts  of  Interest  and  the  Market  for 
Underwriting Business (July
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Hol
Shlomo  Benartzi,  Richard  H.  Thaler,  Stephen  P
Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Group  Judgments:  Deliberation,  Statistical  Means,  and  Information 
(August 2004) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Precautions  against  What?  The  Availability  Heuristic  and  Cro
Perceptions (August 2004) 
M. Todd Henderson and James C. Spindler, Corporate Herroin: A Defense of Perks (August 2004) 
Eric A

. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death (August 2004) 

ding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004) 

.  Utkus,  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Company  Stock, 

ss-Cultural  Risk 

Markets 

213. 

214. 

215. 

216. 
217. 
218. 

219. 

220.  

221. 
222. 
 

 

66 

