University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

2004

Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Environment
Cass R. Sunstein

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Environment" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No.
227, 2004).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 227 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Environment 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
October 2004 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html
Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper C
http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=604581 

and at the 

ollection: 

 

 

draft 9/27/04 
All rights reserved 

 
 
 
Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Environment 
 
Cass R. Sunstein*
 
Abstract 

 
This  review-essay  explores  the  uses  and  limits  of  cost-benefit  analysis  in  the 
 
context of environmental protection, focusing on three recent books: Priceless, by Frank 
Ackerman  and  Lisa  Heinzerling;  Cellular  Phones,  Public  Fears,  and  A  Culture  of 
Precaution,  by  Adam  Burgess;  and  Catastrophe:  Risk  and  Response,  by  Richard  A. 
Posner.  The  review-essay  emphasizes  three  principal  limitations  on  the  use  of  cost-
benefit  analysis.  First,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  the  easy  cases  for  cost-
benefit analysis, in which the beneficiaries of regulation pay all or almost all of its cost, 
from  the  harder  cases,  in  which  the  beneficiaries  pay  little  for  the  environmental 
protection  that  they  receive.  In  the  harder  cases,  net  welfare  gains  and  distributional 
advantages  are  possible  even  if  environmental  regulation  fails  cost-benefit  analysis. 
Second,  there  are  possible  uses,  in  the  environmental  context,  of  maximin  rather  than 
cost-benefit  analysis,  especially  when  regulators  are  attempting  to  control  catastrophic 
risks where probabilities cannot be assigned. An Anti-Catastrophe Principle makes sense 
for  such  situations.  Third,  human  beings  are  citizens,  not  merely  consumers,  and  this 
point requires abandonment of the willingness to pay criterion in some contexts. 
 

In the United States, cost-benefit analysis (CBA) is in the ascendancy. For over 

twenty  years,  American  presidents  have  required  agencies  to  perform  CBA  for  major 

regulations; indeed, they have told agencies to regulate only if the benefits of regulation 
justify  its  costs.1  Congress  has  also  shown  considerable  interest  in  CBA,  most 

prominently in the Safe Drinking Water Act, which asks agencies to produce quantitative 

assessments of both costs and benefits. For their part, federal courts have adopted a series 

of principles that promote CBA, saying that if Congress has not been clear, agencies may 

consider costs, take account of the substitute risks introduced by regulation, and exempt 

trivial risks from governmental control.  

                                                 
* I am grateful to Elizabeth Emens, Charles Larmore, Martha Nussbaum, and Richard Posner for extremely 
valuable comments on an earlier draft of this review. 
1  The  developments  discussed  in  this  paragraph  are  traced  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Risk  and  Reason 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). 

In  its  enthusiasm  for  cost-benefit  analysis,  the  United  States  provides  a  sharp 

ns
contrast  to  Europe, 
e  interest  in  a  quite  different  organizing 
principle  for  environmental  protection:  the  Precautionary  Principle.2  According  to  the 

which  has  shown  inte

Precautionary Princip

le, regulation is required even in the face of sci

entific uncertainty—

ta
even  if  it  is  not  yet  clear  that  environmen l  risks  are  serious.  A  central  point  of  the 

Precautionary  Principle  is  to  reco

 
gnize  the limitati

ons  of  existing  knowledge  and  to 

protect against harm that cannot yet be established as such. 

CBA and the Precautionary Principle can lead in radically different directions. For 

example,  many  Europeans  argue  that  the  consequences  of  genetic  modification  are 

uncertain,  that  real  harm  is  possible,  and  hence  that  stringent  regulation  is  readily 

justified.  By  contrast,  many  Americans  respond  that  the  likely  benefits  of  genetic 

modification are far greater than the likely harms and that stringent regulation is therefore 

unsupportable. Or consider global warming. Many European leaders have argued in favor 

of precautions, even extremely expensive ones, simply to reduce the risk of catastrophe. 

But  under  President  George  W.  Bush,  American  officials  have  called  for  continuing 

research on the costs and benefits of controlling greenhouse gas emissions. 

The  tension  between  CBA  and  the  Precautionary  Principle  raises  serious 

q

uestions about the theory and practice of environmental protection. To engage

 in cost-

benefit
 analysis, regulators must make difficult and often speculative judgments about the 
likely  effects  of  alternative  regulatory  strategies.3  The  easiest  task  is  often  the 

identification  of  costs,  but  even  here  there  are  formidable  empirical  problems.  It  is 

difficult to project the expense of regulations of different levels of stringency, especially 

because environmental protection often spurs technological innovation, greatly reducing 

the  cost  of  pollution  reduction.  The  identification  of  benefits  presents  even  harder 

empirical problems -- and knotty normative and conceptual ones as well. At a minimum, 

agencies  must  estimate  the  savings  that  are  likely  to  result  from  regulation,  including 

reductions  in  mortality  and  morbidity,  a

long  with  improvements  in  terms  of  visibility, 

 
                                                
2  See,  e.g.,  Arie  Trouwborst,  Evolution  and  Status  of  the  Precautionary  Principle  in  International  Law 
(Kluwer  Law  International,  2002);  The  Precautionary  Principle  in  the  20th  Century:  Late  Lessons  from 
Early Warnings (Poul Harremoes et al. eds.) (London: Earthscan, 2002). 
3 The Office of Management and Budget has issued gu
idelines to govern and to standardize the use of cost-
benefit balancing. See Office of Management and Budget, Regulatory Analysis, Circular A-4 (September 
17, 2003), available at http://www.whitehouse.gov

/omb/inforeg/regpol.html#rr 

2 

recreati

on,  aesthetics,  animal  welfare,  property  values,  and  more.  When  science  leaves 

room  for  doubt,  as  it  often  does,  agencies  typically  specify  a  range  of  possibilities, 

representing  low-end  estimates  and  high-end  estimates  in  addition  to  the  best  “point” 

estimate. Agencies might, for example, project that a certain regulation will save as many 
as  eighty  lives  each  year  and  as  few  as  zero,  with  a  preferred  estimate  of  twenty-five.4 

These numbers inevitably involve a degree of guesswork. 

After specifying the likely benefits, CBA requires a

gencies to engage in multiple 

acts  of

  conversion,  assigning  economic  values  to  human  lives,  human  morbidity,  and  a 

range of harms to the environment. Typically American agencies assign monetary values 
on  the  basis  of  private  “willingness  to  pay”  (WTP).5  For  example,  the  Environmental 

Protection Agency (EPA) values a human life at about $6.1 million, a figure that comes 
from real-world markets.6 In the workplace and for consumer goods, additional safety has 

a  price;  market  evidence  is  investigated  to  identify  that  price.  The  $6.1  million  figure, 

known as the value of a statistical life (VSL), is a product of studies of actual workplace 

risks, attempting to determine how much workers and others are paid to assume mortality 

hazards.  Suppose  that  people  must  be  paid  $600,  on  average,  to  eliminate  risks  of 

1/10,00

0; suppose, for example, that workers who face risks of that magnitude generally 

receive  $600  in  additional  wages  each  year.  If  so,  the  VSL  would  be  said  to  be  $6 

million.  Where  market  evidence  is  unavailable,  agencies  often  produce  monetary 

valuations on the basis of contingent valuation surveys, which ask people how much they 

are willing to pay to save coral reefs or endangered species, to eliminate a risk of chronic 

bronchitis  or  curable  lung  cancer,  and  much  more.  Drawing  on  market  evidence  and 

contingent valuation studies, the EPA has recently valued a case of chronic bronchitis at 

$260,000,  an  emergency  hospital  visit  for  asthma  at  $9,000,  hospital  admission  for 

pneumonia  at  $13,400,  a  lost  work-day  at  $83,  and  a  specified  decrease  in  visibility  at 
$14.7

 

 

                                                
4 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, in Risk and Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002). 
5 See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (New York: Oxford University Pres
6 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless: On Knowing the Price of Everything and the Value 
of Nothing (New York: The New Press, 2003). 
7 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State 145 (American Bar Association: W

ashington, DC 2002). 

s, 1993). 

3 

Once  a  CBA  is  produced,  what  should  be  done  with  it?  The  most  ambitious 

answer is that agencies should adopt regulations only when the likely benefits exceed the 

likely costs—and that if several regulations meet this test, agencies should select the one 

that “maximizes net benefits.” On this approach, CBA provides a clear rule of decision, 

one  by  which  regulators  should  be  bound.  A  more  cautious  response  would  be  that 

agencies should generally require benefits to exceed costs, and also seek to maximize net 

benefit

s, but that they need not do so; on this view, the outcome of the CBA provides a 

presumption  but  no  more.  The  presumption  could  be  rebutted  by  showing  that  the 

particular situation justifies a departure from the result indicated by CBA—as, plausibly, 

in  cases  in  which  poor  people  would  stand  to  gain  a  great  deal.  A  still  more  cautious 

approach would be that in deciding what to do, agencies should consider the outcome of 

CBA  alongside  such  other  variables  as  they  deed  relevant.  There  are  important 

differences  between  those  who  would  make  CBA  determinative  and  those  who  would 

merely  make  it  relevant.  But  even  on  the  most  cautious  understandings  of  the  role  of 

CBA,  government’s  choices  would  be  significantly  affected  by  the  translation  of 

environment benefits into monetary equivalents. 

To say the least, it is highly controversial to say that people’s protection against 

environmental risks is properly measured by their WTP to avoid those risks. It is at least 

equally controversial to use WTP as the basis for policies protecting endangered species, 

nature, and wildlife. But the Precautionary Principle raises serious problems of its own. 

How much precaution is the right level of precaution? Are costs relevant to the answer? 

In any case human beings face a number of risks, not simply one, and any effort to reduce 

one  risk  might  well  increase  another  risk.  Is  it  possible,  even  in  principle,  to  take 

precautions against all risks, rather than a subset? If all risks cannot be reduced at once, 

how should regulators set priorities? 

 

In this essay, I approach these questions through a discussion of three illuminating 

books  that  offer  radically  different  approaches  to  environmental  protection.  Frank 

Ackerman  and  Lisa  Heinzerling  believe  that  CBA  is  a  hopelessly  crude  tool,  one  that 
buries indefensible judgments of morality and politics.8 Drawing on the war on terrorism, 

they  argue  for  the  Precautionary  Principle  instead. By contrast, Adam

 Burgess uses the 

                                                 
8 See id. 

4 

controv
ersy  over  cell  phones  to  suggest  that  the  Precautionary  Principle  capitulates  to, 
and even promotes, baseless public fears.9 Objecting to what he sees as excessive fear of 

new  technologies,  Burgess  argues  for  careful  attention  to  scientific  evidence  and  for 

regulation  only  when  the  risk  is  real.  Richard  Posner  argues  for  CBA  and  economic 
analysis in a context in which it seems least promising: catastrophic risk.10 He contends 

that  global  warming,  and  other  potentially  catastrophic  problems,  cannot  sensibly  be 

approached without a disciplined effort to quantify and monetize both costs and benefits. 

But  where  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  see  CBA  as  an  excuse  for  regulatory  inaction, 

Posner  invokes  CBA  on  behalf  of  aggressive  controls  on  greenhouse  gases  and  other 

sources of potentially serious danger. Indeed his central goal is to draw private and public 

attention to catastrophic risks that are exceedingly unlikely to come to fruition. 

 

Building on the arguments made by Burgess and Posner, I shall mount a qualified 

defense of CBA here. Without some sense of both costs and benefits—both nonmonized 

and monetized—regulators will be making a stab in the dark. Human beings have a great 

deal  of  difficulty  in  assessing  risks,  making  them  prone  to  both  hysteria  and  neglect; 

CBA does not supply definite answers, but it can help to establish which risks are serious 
ich  are  not.11  By  contrast,  the  Precautionary  Principle  approaches  incoherence. 

and  wh

Because risks are on all sides of social situations, and because regulation itself increases 

risks of various sorts, the principle condemns the very steps that it seems to require.  

But  building  on  the  arguments  made  by  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling,  I  shall 

suggest that there are two serious problems with CBA. The first is that WTP is sometimes 

an  inappropriate  basis  for  environmental  policy.  Human  beings  are  citizens,  not  merely 

consumers, and their consumption choices, as measured by WTP, might be trumped by 

their reflective judgments as citizens. In any case, WTP is dependent on ability to pay; 

when the poorest members of societie

s stand to gain from environmental protection, they 

should  be  protected  even  if  their  poverty  ensures  that  their  WTP  is  low.  The  second 

problem is that regulators cannot always assign probabilities to environmental outcomes. 
                                                 
9 See Adam Burgess, Cellular Phones, Public Fears, and a Culture of Precaution (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2004). 
10 See Richard A. Posner, Catastrophe: Risk and Response (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004). 
11 See Allan Gibbard, Risk and Value, in Values At Risk 94 (Douglas MacLean ed.) (New Jersey: Rowman 
and  Allanheld,  1986),  for  an  exploration  of  “a    principal  rationale  for  wanting  something  like  risk-cost-
benefit  analysis:  for  seeking  a  way  to  regiment  our  judgments  about  risk,  and  so  to  avoid  the  blatant 
irrationali

ties of unaided common sense.” 

5 

If probabilities cannot be assigned, regulators are unable to engage in CBA; they might 

do  well  to  follow  the  maximin  principle,  taking  steps  to  avoid  the  worst-case  scenario. 

This  point  helps  pave  the  way  toward  a  narrower  and  more  refined  use  of  the 

Precautionary Principle, one that has important real-world applications and that provides 

a valuable complement to approaches based on CBA. 

 

 

I. Monetization and Its Discontents 

Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  do  not  object  to  efforts  to  specify  the  range  of 
outcomes  associated  with  alternative  courses  of  action.12  Their  principal  objection  is  to 

the  WTP  criterion.  Insisting  that  human  deaths  are  not  mere  “costs,”  Ackerman  and 

Heinzerling  contend  that  CBA  is  morally  obtuse.  They  argue  that  a  well-functioning 

d

emocr

acy  should  respect  the  informed  judgments  of  citizens,  rather  than  aggregating 

private consumption choices. Ackerman and Heinzerling much prefer the Precautionary 

Principle, which, in their view, is “a more holistic analysis ” that argues for regulation in 

the face of scientific uncertainty and that is “committed to fairness within and beyond this 

generation” (p. 234). 

 

Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  are  aware  that  many  people  have  turned  to  CBA 

because of widely publicized studies that purport to show a high level of arbitrariness in 
modern  regulation.13  According  to  such  studies,  regulations  in  the  United  States

  are 

wildly 

inconsistent.  Sometimes  the  United  States  spends  $100,000  (or  less)  to  save  a 

human life. Sometimes it spends tens of millions. Cost-benefit supporters ask: Shouldn’t 

nations be devoting their resources to serious health problems rather than trivial ones? If 

a  nation  can  spend  ten  million  dollars  to  save  one  thousand  lives,  shouldn’t  it  do  that, 

rather than wasting the money on a similarly priced program that saves only one or two 

people? In any case human beings make many errors in assessing risks, using heuristics 

and  demonstrating  biases  that  make  them  exaggerate  some  dangers  and  underestimate 

 

              

                                  
12  I  discuss  their  book  for  a  popular  audience  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Your  Money  or  Your  Life,  The Ne
Republic 27 (March 15, 2004); my treatment here borrows from that discussion. 
13 The most well-known is John F. Morrall III, A Review of the Record, Regulation, November/Decmebr 
1986, 25, 30, Table 4. For an updated treatment, see John F. Morrall III, Saving Lives: A Review of the 
Record, 27 J. Risk and Uncertainty 221 (20

03) 

w 

6 

others.14 These errors seem to be replicated in existing policies; CBA might be defended 

as  a  promising  corrective  to  blunders  in  citizens’  perception  of  risk.  In  these  ways, 

interest in CBA has been fueled less by contentious claims of value than by the pragmatic 
suggestion that it can assist in more intelligent priority-setting.15

Ackerman and Heinzerling believe that the attack on the current system is based 

o

n misleading studies, burying controversial and indeed implausible judgments of value. 

T

rue,  some  regulations 

do  not  prevent  many  deaths,  but  t

hey  do  prevent  serious 

(nonfat

al)  harms  to  human  health  and  also  harms  to  ecosystems.  The  resulting  benefits 

should not be disparaged. More fundamentally, Ackerman and Heinzerling argue that the 

key  studies  find  low  benefits  partly  because  they  greatly  “discount”  future  gains  to  life 

and  health.  Everyone  agrees  that  a  dollar  today  is  worth  more  than  a  dollar  in  twenty 

years;  economists  use  a  standard  “discount  rate”  (often  7%  annually)  to  convert  future 

dollars  into  current  equivalents.  In  calculating  the  benefits  of  regulation,  they  use  the 

same  discount  rate  for  lives  saved  and  illnesses  averted.  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling 

contend that this approach wrongly shrinks the value of regulations that will save people 

in the future. One of 

their central claims, then, is that the standard discount rate should 

not be applied to future savings in terms of life and health. 

 

Suppose  that  their  arguments  are  right—that  once  economic  values  are  properly 

assigned to environmental gains, few existing regulations will be condemned as requiring 

huge  investments  for  trivial  benefits.  Regulators  still  might  want  to  use  cost-benefit 
analysis to improve current decisions.16 Ackerman and Heinzerling complain that to do 

this, they will have to produce a dollar value for a human life—and any such effort will 

be  arbitrary,  offensive,  or  worse.  They  reject  the  view  that  WTP,  based  largely  on 

workplace studies, produces information that agencies should use. In their view, workers 

                                                 
14 A good collection is Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment (Thomas Gilovich et 
al. eds) (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). For use of this idea in (qualified) defense of cost-
benefit analysis, see Gibbard, supra note. 
15  David  M.  Driesen,  The  Economic  Dynamics  of  Environmental  Law  (Cambridge:  MIT  Press,  2003), 
offers  a  powerful  criticism  of  cost-benefit  analysis  insofar  as  it  offers  a  static  account  of  both  costs  and 
benefits  and  fails  to  see  that  regulation  and  other  forces  often  produce  innovation,  thus  reducing  the 
expense of environmental protection. I believe that this argument is best taken as a reason for skepticism 
about  existing  figures  about  likely  costs,  rather  than  as  an  attack  on  cost-ben
efit  analysis  as  such.  See 
Matthew Adler, Cost-Benefit Analysis, Static Efficiency, and the Goals of Environmental Law, 31 B. C. 
Environmental Affairs Law Review 591 (2004). 
16 See W. Kip Viscusi, Rational Risk Regulation

 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). 

7 

often  have  little  information  about  the  risks  that  they  face,  and  hence  they  cannot  be 

charged  with  consciously  trading  hazards  against  dollars.  Even  when  workers  are 

informed,  they  may  have  few  options  and  hence  little  choice.  If  they  accept  a  job  with 

significant hazards for a low premium, it is not because they are genuinely free to choose. 

Some anomalies in the empirical literature are highly relevant here. Nonunionized 

workers  have  sometimes  been  found  to  receive  little  or  nothing  for  the  reduction  of 

statistical risks, and African-Americans have been found to receive much less than white 
people do.17 Does it follow that regulators should treat the lives or nonunionized workers, 

or African-Americans, as worth especially little? Ackerman and Heinzerling add that the 

key studies ask only how much individuals care about risks to themselves. They ignore 

the fact that many of us value the lives of others too. I might be willing to pay only $60 to 

eliminate a 100,000 risk that I face, but I might be willing to pay much more than that to 

eliminate that risk from my child’s life, and substantial amounts to help reduce the risks 

of my friends. Altruism is ignored in the current calculations.  

 

Ackerman and Heinzerling also contend that statistically equivalent risks should 

not be treated the same, because people’s valuations of mortality risks depend not only on 

the probability of harm but also on their nature and their co

ntext. About 3000 people died 

fr

om  th

e  terrorist  attacks  of  9/11—a  much  smaller  number  than  die  each  year  from 

suicide (30,500), motor vehicle accidents (43,500), and emphysema (17,500). Ackerman 

and  Heinzerling  approve  of  the  fact  that  the  reaction  of  the  United  States  to  the  9/11 

attacks  was  not  based  on  simple  numerical  comparisons.  Drawing  on  work  by 
psychologist Paul Slovic,18 Ackerman and Heinzerling emphasize that the risk judgments 

of  ordinary  people  diverge  from  the  risk  judgments  of  experts—not  because  ordinary 

people are stupid or confused, but because they have a different normative framework for 

evaluating risks. While experts focus on the number of deaths at stake, most people are 

especially  averse  to  risks  that  are  unfamiliar,  uncontrollable,  involuntary,  irreversible, 

                                                 
17 John D. Leeth & John Ruser, Compensating Wage Differentials for Fatal and Nonfatal Injury Risk by 
Gender and Race, 27 J. Risk & Uncertainty 257 (2003). 
18 See Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (London: Earthscan, 2000). 

8 

inequitably distributed, man-made, or catastrophic.19 Diverse valuations of diverse risks 

should play a role in regulatory policy.  

For  example,  most  of  us  are  not  greatly  troubled  by  the  cancer  risks  associated 

with  x-rays,  partly  because  they  are  voluntarily  incurred.  By  contrast,  the  risks  of 

terroris

m  and  even  pesticides  and  air  pollution  are  more  alarming  because  individuals 

cannot easily control them. And when a risk is faced by an identifiable community—as, 

for example, when landfills with toxic chemicals are located in largely poor areas—the 
public is especially likely to object to what it will perceive as unfairness.20 Ackerman and 

Heinzeling  thus  complain  that  CBA  disregards  important  qualitative  differences  among 

quantitatively  identical  risks.  It  also  tends  to  ignore,  and  often  to  reinforce,  patterns  of 

social  inequality,  above  all  because  it  pays  no  attention  to  a  key  question,  which  is 

distributional: Who receives the benefits and who incurs the costs? For both domestic and 

international environmental issues, Ackerman and Heinzerling emphasize the importance 

of  fairness.  If  environmental  threats  mostly  burden  poor  peop

le,  regulators  should  take 

that point into account, whatever the cost-benefit ratio.  

 

Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  are  also  concerned  about  how  cost-benefit  analysts 

value  nature.  How  much  will  human  beings  pay  to  save  an  animal  or  a  member  of  an 

endangered  species?  Economists  have  tried  to  answer  the  question  by  actually  asking 

people. For example, one study find that the average American family is willing to pay 

$70 to protect the spotted owl, $6 to protect the striped shriner (an endangered fish), and 

as much as $115 per year to protect major parks against impairment of visibility from air 

pollution.  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  ridicule  these  numbers,  complaining  that  any 

precise  monetary  value  fails  to  provide  useful  information.  Bans  on  whaling,  for 

example, are rooted in a widely shared ethical judgment, not on cost-benefit analysis. A 

democracy  should  base  its  decisions  about  the  protection  of  nature  on  such  ethical 

judgments, rather than by aggregating people’s willingness to pay. 

 

 

                                                
19  But  see  Howard  Margolis,  Dealing  With  Risk  (Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1999),  for  a 
challenge to this account of the lay/expert division in risk perceptions. 
20 Note, however, that the Not In My Backyard Syndrome – known in the trade as NIMBY – suggests that 
many  people  will  make  self-serving  judgments  about  the  proper  location  of  environmentally  risky 
activities.  This  point  is  related  to  the  suggestion,  devel
oped  below,  that  people  tend  to  become  intuitive 
cost-benefit analysts when both the benefits and the costs of environmen

tal regulation are on-screen. 

9 

Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  offer  a  final  objection  to  cost-benefit  analysis:  the 

rights of future generations. I have noted that economists generally apply a discount rate 

to futu

re gains and losses. With a 7 percent discount rate, $1000 in twenty years is worth 

only $260 today. Cost-benefit analysts within the federal government have long applied 

the  usual  discount  rate  for  money  (7  percent)  to  the  benefits  of  safety  and  health 

regulation, so that prevention of 1000 fatal cancers in 2025 is equivalent to the prevention 

of  260  fatal  cancers  in  2005.  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  respond  that  lives  are  not  like 

money; they cannot be placed in a bank for the accumulation of interest. A discount rate 

of  7  percent  radically  shrinks  the  value  of  reductions  in  risk  for  those  born,  say,  one 

hundred  years  from  now.  But  current  generations  owe  obligations  to  the  future  and 

should not discount measures that protect people not yet born. 

 

Invoking  the  Precautionary  Principle,  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  argue  that 

nations are obliged to take action against serious threats even before there is a scientific 

consensus. Above all, they want regulators to make regulatory decisions by attending to 

the  worst-case  scenario.  If  the  worst  case  is  extreme

ly  bad,  aggressive  regulation  is 

desirable  even  if  it  might  result  in  wasted  money.  When  a  nation  spends  too  much  on 

regulatory  protection,  it  loses  limited  resources,  which  admittedly  is  undesirable;  but 

waste  is  far  better  than  catastrophe.  Hence  their  “preference  is  to  tilt  toward 

overinvestment  in  protecting  ourselves  and  our  descendents”  (p.  227).  Ackerman  and 

Heinzerling urge that this approach was taken in the context of the military spending of 

the  Cold  War,  arguing  that  the  nation  rightly  prepared  for  the  high-risk  case.  They  see 

protection  against  terrorism  in  similar  terms.  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  want  to  treat 

health and environmental risks in the same way.                                              

 

 
Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  do  not  focus  in  detail  on  any

  particular  regulatory 

II. Pointless Precautions? 

is

sue.  By  contrast,  Burgess  explores  the  idea  of  “precaution”  with  close  reference  to  a 

single  controversy:  the  health  risks  associated  with  cellular  phones.  Burgess  does  not 

explicitly discuss CBA, but he is highly skeptical of the Precautionary Principle, which, 

in his view, leads regulators to capitulate to baseless public fear. One of Burgess’ central 

claims  is  that  public  fears  are  often  manufactured  rather  than  found;  for  this  reason, 

10 

Burges

s  describes  himself  as  a  “social  constructivist”  (p.  11).  But  with  respect  to  risk, 

Burgess is no constructivist at all. He believes that some risks are serious and that others 

are not, and that science is the best way to tell the difference.  

 Burgess  contends  that  notwithstanding  countless  efforts,  no  reputable  study  has 

demonstrated  significant  health  risks  as  a  result  of  emissions  from  cell  phones  and  cell 
phone towers.21 To date, much of the so-called evidence comes from anecdotes of the sort 

provided  by  anti-cell  phone  activist  Debbie  Collins,  who  contended  that  her  daughter’s 

health had significantly improved after she was removed from a school near a cell phone 

tower. Rejecting expert opinion, Collins stated: “She’s a different child now—it’s all the 

proof I need to convince me there is a link between those wretched masts and the health 

of children” (p. 1). Another mother said, “I needed no more pr

oof than that. This term he 

started  at  a  new  school  and  I  can  already  see  the  change  in  him.  His  memory  has 

improved and his headaches have gone” (p. 2). Burgess is concerned that a precautionary 

approach, founded on statements of this kind, will both aggravate fear and impose costs 

for no good reason.  

Burgess’  tale  begins  with  a  media  campaign.  In  the  early1990s,  a  number  of 

newspaper stories in the United Kingdom contended, on the basis of little evidence, that 

mobile  phones  and  base  stations  were  producing  harmful  health  effects.  Apparently 

influenced  by  these  stories,  the  European  Commission  in  Brussels  began  an  official 

inquiry  in  1995,  ultimately  funding  future  research  and  concluding  that  adverse  effects 

could not be ruled out. Public fears intensified in 1996 after the issue received attention in 

a  consumer  health  program  on  the  BBC  and  a  widely  read  news  story  in  the  Sunday 

Times featuring the headline, “Mobile phones cook your brain.” In 1997, alar

mist reports 

grew  in  the  media,  suggesting  that  cell  phones  could  produce  illness  and  premature 

mortality  (and  also  reduce  sex  drives).  These  reports  helped  to  spur  citizen  action.  By 

1999,  l

ocal  political  campaigns  against  cell  phone  towers  became  prominent,  and  they 

received  favorable  coverage  in  local  and  regional  newspapers,  which  further  energized 

public concern.  

                                                 
21 A different set of issues is raised by the risks associated with use of cell phones while driving. Here there 
is much stronger evidence of serious hazards. For an overview, see Robert Hahn and James Prieger, The 
Impact  of  Driver  Cell  Phone  Use  on  Accidents  (July  2004),  available  at  http://www.aei-
brookings.org/publications/abstract.php?pid=806 

11 

These  campaigns  significantly  affected  both  private  and  public  institutions.  The 

London  Metropolitan  police  service  told  its  officers  to  limit  cell  phones  as  a  “purely 

precautionary measure” (p. 87). Harrods banned cell phones from its premises. Speaking 

in expl

icitly precautionary terms, entrepreneur Richard Branson recommended the use of 

safety devices  for his employees. Local governing councils across the United Kingdom 

attempted to ban or restrict mobile towers, particularly those near schools. At the national 

level,  the  Minister  for  Public  Health  legitimated  public  fears,  insisting  that  in  such  a 

context,  “it  is  very  important  that”  officials  “work  very  hard  to  keep  ahead  of  public 

anxiety” (pp. 88-89). In Burgess’ account, precautionary responses by official institutions 

helped to fuel that very anxiety. Thus it “is only through being taken seriously by state 

bodies that the allegations about hypothetical risks have been able to command authority 

and acquire momentum beyond the immediate reactions of some individuals” (p. 222).  

Burgess also makes some interesting and somewhat puzzling remarks about cross-

cultural  comparisons.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  there  was  intense  public  focus  on  cell 

phone  risks;  similar 

concerns  have  been  found  in  Australia,  Italy,  and  South  Africa.  In 

Italy, th

e Environment Minister established a “green hotline” asking people to state their 

complaints  about  “abusive”  siting  of  cell  phone  towers.  The  Australian  government 

funded a large-scale research project on potential adverse health effects. But in the United 

States, the brief burst of concern in the early 1990s rapidly dissipated, to the point where 

it is hard to find any serious private or public concern about health risks. And in Finland, 

no  discernible  public  fear  has  arisen  at  all,  even  though  Finland  has  the  highest 

percentage  of  cell  phone  users  in  the  world.  (The  fact  that  Nokia  is  Finland’s  biggest 

company  is  highly  relevant  here—a  point,  bearing  on  both  precautions  and  CBA,  to 

which I will return.) 

Burgess  thinks  that  the  cell  phone  controversy  is  merely  one  example  of  the 

misuse of precautionary thinking in domains in which scientific evidence fails to support 

people’s  fears.  For  example,  he  challenges  European  skepticism  about  genetically 

modified food, de

scribing it as “alarm” (p. 259); and he mounts a broader attack on what 

he  sees  as  the  unhelpful  belief  that  it  is  wrong  to  interfere  with  nature.  He  is  therefore 

troubled by a wide climate of sensitivity to small risks, especially those that are novel and 

12 

associa

ted  with  technological  innovation.  Precautionary  thinking,  he  believes,  helps  to 

create a culture of fear. 

 

 
 

III. Catastrophe, Costs, and Benefits 

Judge Richard Posner is one of the founders of the economic analysis of law, and 

he should be expected to be enthusiastic about CBA. In Catastrophe: Risk and Response, 

he does not disappoint that expectation. What makes the book noteworthy is its focus on 

the application of CBA to truly catastrophic risks—those that might threaten the survival 

of  the  human  race.  Posner  covers  an  extraordinarily  wide  range  of  hazards,  including 

genetically modified crops, robotics, and nanotechnology, but he focuses in particular on 

four: asteroid collisions, particle-accelerator disasters, global warming, and bioterrorism. 

Posner believes that none of these risks can be dismissed, and he thinks that cost-benef

it 

analysi

s should be applied to each of them. 

 

Consider,  for  example,  the  dangers  associated  with  very  powerful  particle 

accelerators.  It  is  extremely  unlikely,  but  not  impossible,  that  such  accelerators  will 

produce a highly compressed object called a “strangelet,” which has the ability to convert 

whatever  it  encounters  into  a  new  form  of  matter.  Posner  quotes  Sir  Martin  Rees, 

professor  of  physics  at  the  University  of  Cambridge,  who  writes,  “A  hypothetical 

strangelet disaster could transform the entire plant Earth into an inert hyperdense sphere 
about one hundred meters across.”22 Posner accepts the widely held view that a strangelet 

disaster is exceedingly improbable, but he insists that it cannot be ruled out. As a result, 

he  thinks  that  nations  should  at  least  be  willing  to  ask  whether  the  benefits  of  very 

powerful  particle  accelerators  justify  incurring  the  risk.  On  that  question,  he  is  quite 

doubtful. 

Posner’s  discussion  extends  over  a  wide  range.  Because  my 

 
is 
environmental  protection,  I  shall  focus  on  his  treatment  of  global  warming.23  Posner 

topic 

believes  that  the  associated  risks  should  be  taken  seriously,  above  all  because  of  the 

possibility of truly catastrophic harm. He acknowledges that the leading economic expert 

                                                 
22See Martin Rees, Our Final Hour 120 (New York: Basic Books, 2003). 
23  For  a  general  discussion,  see  Stephen  Gardiner,  Ethics  and  Global  Climate  Change,  114  Ethics  555 
(2004). 

13 

on  global  warming,  William  Nordhaus,  estimates  its  total  cost  at  $4  trillion24—a  high 

figure, to be sure, but hardly astronomical, and one that allows cost-benefit analysis to get 

off  the  ground.  (The  United  States  has  an  annual  GDP  of  $10  trillion,  and  as  Posner 

p

oints out, $4 trillion represe

nts present value, which might be compared with the present 

economic value of the United States, which is roughly $100 trillion.) Nordhaus produces 

his  $4  trillion  figure  essentially  through  the  methods  that  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling 

deplore—using WTP and discounting the future.  

Posner is concerned not with the objections made by Ackerman and Heinzerling, 

which  he  implicitly  rejects,  but  with  the  possibility  that  Nordhaus’  estimate  greatly 

understates  the  problem,  above  all  because  of  the  dangers  of  abrupt  warming,  which 

would be especially destructive. Thus Posner thinks that existing models do not rule out 

the possibility of (for example) very rapid changes in both temperature and sea levels, the 

evolution and migration of deadly pests, and

 even a runaway greenhouse effect, produced 

by

 mel

ting of tundras, thus releasing large quantities of additional greenhouse gases. One 

worst-case  scenario  is  “snowball  earth,”  covering  the  world  with  a  layer  of  ice  several 

kilometers  thick,  a  result  of  massive  increases in cloud cover, preventing sunlight from 

reaching the earth. Sounding very much like Ackerman and Heinzerling, Posner seeks to 

draw attention to the worst that might happen. 

 

Many scientists and economists, including Nordhaus, believe that global warming 

is  not  likely  to  create  catastrophic  harm,  and  that  the  real  costs,  human  and  economic, 

will be high but not intolerable. In their view, the worst-case scenarios can be responsibly 
described  as  improbable.25  Posner  disagrees.  He  believes  that  “no  probabilities  can  be 

attached  to  the  catastrophic  global-warming  scenarios,  and  without  an  estimate  of 

probabiliti

es  an  expected  cost  cannot  be  calculated.”  In  the  terms  of  decision  theory, 

Posner  contends  that  global  warming  presents  a  situation  of  uncertainty,  where 

probabilities  cannot  be  assigned  to  outcomes,  rather  than  risk,  where  such  probabilities 
can be assigned.26 In this way, global warming differs from other potentially catastrophic 

                                                 
24 See William Nordhaus and Joseph Boyer, Warming the World (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000). 
25  See  id.  at  88,  suggesting  a  1.2%  probability  of  a  catastrophic  impact  with  2.5  C  warming  and  of  6.8 
percent with 6 C warming. 
26  See  Frank  H.  Knight,  Risk,  Uncertainty,  and  Profit  (Boston:  Hou
ghton  Mifflin  Co.,  1933);  Paul 
Davidson, Is Probability Theory Relevant for Uncertainty? A Post-Keynesian Perspective, 5(1) J. of Econ. 
Perspect
ives 129 (1991). Some people object that uncertainty does not exist, because it is always possible 

14 

risks that Posner explores, such as the strangelet disaster, which everyone characterizes as 

exceedingly unlikely. 

In  general,  Posner  does  not  claim  that  responses  to  catastrophic  risks  should  be 

chosen solely by reference to CBA. But he proposes that CBA “is an indispensable step 

in rational decision making in this as in other areas of government regulation. Effective 

responses  to  most  catastrophic  risks  are  likely  to  be  extremely  costly,  and  it  would  be 

mad to adopt such responses without an effort to estimate the costs and benefits.” While 

favorin

g CBA, Posner rejects the Precautionary Principle because of its “sponginess.” He 

contends that once that principle becomes sensibly tempered, it turns into a form of CBA 

with  risk  aversion—that  is,  a  form  of  CBA  that  creates  a  margin  of  safety  to  protect 

against  those  dangers  that  produce  special  concern.  This  understanding  of  the 

Precautionary Principle, he believes, is perfectly reasonable, but it turns the principle into 

a version of CBA, not a rival (as Ackerman and Heinzerling claim). 

Posner  emphasizes  that  any  effort  to  apply  CBA  to  catastrophic  risks  requires  a 

great deal of guesswork. Consider the proposal to build a new and very powerful particle 

accelerator, Brookhaven’s Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. Posner is concerned about the 

remote  possibility  that  the  Brookhaven  Collider  will  destroy  the  earth;  he  wants  to 

evaluate  the  proposal  by  reference  to  CBA.  H

e  notes  that  no  effort  has  been  made  to 

m

oneti

ze its benefits, but he ventures a “wild guess” that they amount to $250 million per 

year. (It is extremely hard to produce a figure, monetized or nonmonetized, to capture the 

benefits  of  basic  research;  for  this  reason  Posner’s  guess  is  indeed  wild.)  With  that 

amount,  the  Collider  would  have  a  net  present  value  of  $400  million:  $21.1  billion  in 

benefits,  assuming  a  3%  discount  rate,  over  a  projected  ten-year  span,  minus  the 

accelerator’s  construction  and  operating  costs,  which  are  $1.1  billion.  But  what  is  the 

monetized value of the extinction risk? To answer that question, Posner needs to estimate 

both  the  probability  of  extinction  and  its  monetized  cost  if  it  comes  to  fruition.  For 

probability,  he  ventures  a  figure  of  1  in  ten  million—a  figure  that  he  also  deems 

“arbitrary,”  though  it  is  in  line  with  several  estimates  by  expert  risk  assessors.  For 

 
                                                                                                           
                                     
for  decisionmakers  to  produce  probability  assignments  by  proposing  a  series  of  lotteries  over  possible 
outcomes;  but  such  assignments  have  no  epistemic  credentials  if  unrooted  in  either  theory  or  repeated 
experiences, and some environmental problems, plausibly including global warming, are that sort of case. 

15 

monetized  cost,  based  on  WTP  to  reduce  statistical  risks27  and  a  3%  discount  rate,  he 

values the loss of the human race at $600 trillion. Doing the arithmetic, Posner believes 

that  the

  net  benefits  of  the  Brookhaven  Collider  are  negative:  –$100  million.  Thus  he 

concludes that the Collider should not be built. 

Posner acknowledges that “global warming is the poster child for the limitations 

of  cost-benefit  analysis”  (p.  222).  But  even  here,  he  thinks  that  it  is  possible  to  make 

progress  by  attempting  to  be  as  quantitative  as  possible.  Most  economists,  armed  with 

cost-benefit  analysis,  oppose  the  Kyoto  Protocol,  arguing  that  its  monetized  costs 

probably would exceed its monetized benefits. Recall that the monetized costs of global 

warming  are  estimated  at  around  $4  trillion.  For  the  world  as  a  whole,  the  monetized 

benefits  of  the  Kyoto  Protocol  are  estimated  at  far  less  than  those  costs:  only  $108 
billion.28 The reason is that the protocol would do relatively little about the problem of 

global warming. Greenhouse gases stay in the atmosphere for a long

 time, and the Kyoto 

Protoco

l  would  not,  of  course,  affect  those  emissions  that  have  already  occurred.  In 

addition,  its  provisions  do  not  limit  developing  nations,  primary  sources  of  greenhouse 

gases, at all (a primary complaint of the Bush Administration); and for the industrialized 

world,  it  would  merely  stabilize  emissions  modestly  below  1990  levels.  Hence  the 

benefits  of  the  Kyoto  Protocol  would  be  modest,  consisting  as  they  would  of  a  mere 

reduction  in  the  increase  of  global  warming  emissions.  At  the  same  time,  the  Kyoto 

Protocol  would  impose  significant  costs  on  those  subject  to  it,  producing  a  total  global 
cost  ranging  from  $59  billion  to  $884  billion.29  The  standard  view  is  that  the  Kyoto 

Protocol fails CBA, because it is likely, in its implementation, to inflict costs in excess of 

the $108 billion gains. 

Posner thinks this analysis is badly incomplete, because it ignores the possibility 

that government regulation will force technological innovation, thus producing dramatic 

decreases  in  greenhouse  gas  emissions;  and  dramatic  decreases  are  necessary  to  reduce 

the risk of catastrophe. Posner is particularly interested in the potentially desirable effects 
                                                 
27 To produce this number, Posner values an individual life at only $50,000, based on an assumption of a 
very low WTP for tiny risks. He emphasizes that this is a quite conservative assumption and that it would 
be reasonable to choose higher values. 
28 See Nordhaus and Boyer, supra note, at 167. 
29 Id. at 156. The low end of the range represents the cost with fully global emissions trading; the high end 
represents the cost without trading. If trading occurs within the nations listed in an annex to the protocol, 
the costs are estimated at $217 billion. 

16 

of significant taxes on carbon emissions. Such taxes would create economic incentives to 

develop  clean  fuels  and  better  methods  of  carbon  sequestration.  Posner  acknowledges 

that in view of existing uncertainty and the high costs of emissions controls, it is tempting 

simply to wait for more scientific information (as the Bush Administration has argued). 

One pr

oblem with this approach is that of irreversibility: Once greenhouse gases are in 

the atmosphere, they stay there for a long time. In a key passage, he argues that making 

“shallower cuts now can be thought of as purchasing an option to enable global warming 

to be stopped or slowed at some future time at a lower cost.”  

Posner does not offer a formal CBA for various approaches to the global warming 

problem.  The  reason  is  that  his  fundamental  concern  is  abrupt  warming,  to  which  he 

believes  that  no  probability  can  be  assigned.  In  contrast  to  his  quantitative  analysis  of 

particle  accelerators,  his  analysis  of  global  warming  does  not  offer  many  numbers. 

Indeed,  his  own  form  of  balancing  does  not  have  a  transparent  structure;  his  major 

argument involves the option analysis just described, with the suggestion that current cuts 

give us the flexibility to reduce warming in the future if that is what we choose to do. He 

thus  argues  in  favor  of  aggressive  emissions  taxes  on  greenhouse  gases,  above  all  to 

reduce the possibility of catastrophic risk. 

 

 

IV. Problems with Precautions 

These  three  books  cover  three  quite  different  issues:  the  idea  of  precaution;  the 

translation  of  environmental  harms  into  monetary  equivalents;  and  the  appropriate 

approach to environmental regulation in the face of scientific uncertainty. Let us explore 

these issues in turn.  

Ackerman and Heinzerling argue in favor of the Precautionary Principle. Burgess 

rejects  it  as  leading  to  nonsensical  outcomes.  Posner  believes  that  it  must  be  converted 

into a form of CBA, one that embodies an aversion to those risks that deserve particular 

concern.  At  first  glance,  it  is  tempting  to  say, with Burgess, that the idea of precaution 

will lead to excessive controls on small or nonexistent risks. It is equally tempting to say, 

with Posner, that the idea is simply too vague to provide guidance; how much precaution 

is  enough?  But  the  most  serious  pr

oblem  lies  elsewhere.  In  many  contexts,  the 

17 

Precautionary  Principle  is  incoherent.30  Risks  are  often  on  all  sides  of  social  situation, 

and  risk  reduction  itself  produce  risks.  Hence  the  Precautionary  Principle,  taken  for  all 

that  it  is  worth,  forbids  the  very  measures  that  it  requires.  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling 

neglect the fact that regulation can create dangers of its own, in a way that suggests that 

along  some  dimensions,  many  precautions  are  not  precautionary  at  all.  Advocates  of 

precaution often emphasize the costs associated with a product or process, without seeing 

that it may have benefit as well; and sometimes those benefits involve the environment 

itself. Why should regulators examine only one side of the ledger? 

For example, regulation often gives rise to substitute risks, in the form of hazards 

that  materialize,  or  are  increased,  as  a  result  of  regulation.  Consider  the  case  of  DDT, 

often  banned  or  regulated  in  the  interest  of  reducing  risks  to  birds  and  human  beings. 

From the standpoint of the Precautionary Principle, the problem with such bans is that in 

poor  nations,  they  eliminate  what  appears  to  be  the  most  effective  way  of  combating 
malaria—and thus significantly undermine public health.31 Or consider the United States 

Environmental Protection Agency’s effort to ban asbestos, a ban that, on health grounds, 

might  well  seem  justified  or  even  compelled  by  the  Precautionary  Principle.  The 

difficulty, from the standpoint of that very

 principle, is that substitutes for asbestos also 

c

arry risks. The problem is pervasive. The Precautionary Principle is often invoked as a 

re

ason for banning genetic m

odification of food, on the groun

d that genetic modification 

creates

  risks  to  human  health  and  to  the  environment.  The  problem  is  that  genetic 

modification of food also promises benefits to human health and the environment—and 

by eliminating those benefits, regulation itself threatens to run afoul of the Precautionary 

Principle. When the p

rinciple seems to give guidance, it is often because those who use it 

are foc

using on one aspect of risk-related situations and neglecting others. 

It is possible to go much further. A great deal of evidence suggests the possibility 
that  an  expensive  regulation  can  have  adverse  effects  on  life  and  health.32  It  has  been 

                                                 
30  I  develop  this  claim  in  some  detail  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Laws  of  Fear:  Beyond  the  Precautionary 
Principle (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2005). 
31 See Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle (Washington, DC: Cato, 2002). 
32Ralph Keeney, Mortality Risks Induced by Economic Expenditures, 10 Risk Anal. 147 (1990); Randall 
Lutter  &  John  F.  Morrall,  III,  Health-Health  Analysis:  A  New  Way  to  Evaluate  Health  and  Safety 
Regulation, 8(1) J. Risk & Uncertainty 43, 49 table 1 (1994).  

18 

urged  that  a  statistical  life  can  be  lost  for  every  expenditure  of  $7  million33;  one  study 
suggests  that  an  expenditure  of  $15  million  produces  a  loss  of  life.34  Another  suggests 

that  poor  people  are  especially  vulnerable  to  this  effect—that  a  regulation  that  reduces 

wealth for the poorest 20% of the population will have twice as large a mortality effect as 
a  regulation  that  reduces  wealth  for  the  wealthiest  20%.35  If  poor  people  are  paying  a 

significant amount for modest environmental benefits, their health might be made worse 

rather than better. To be sure, both the phenomenon and the underlying mechanisms are 
reasonably  disputed  (and  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  reasonably  dispute  it).36  For 

purpos

es  of  applying  the  Precautionary  Principle,  the  only  point  is  that  sensible  people 

believe  in  that  association.  It  follows  that  a  multimillion  dollar  expenditure  for 

“precaution” has -- as a worst case scenario -- significant adverse health effects, with an 

expenditure of $200 million possibly leading to perhaps as many as twenty or more lives 

lost.  

This point makes the Precautionary Principle hard to implement not merely where 

regulation introduces or increases substitute risks, but in any case in which the regulation 

costs a significant amount. If this is so, the Precautionary Principle, for that very reason, 

raises  doubts  about  many  regulations.  If  the  principle  argues  against  any  action  that 

carries a small risk of imposing significant harm, then we should be reluctant to spend a 

great deal of money to reduce risks, simply because those expenditures themselves carry 

risks. Here is the sense in which, the Precautionary Principle, taken for all that it is worth, 

is paralyzing: It stands as an obstacle to regulation and nonregulation, and to everything 
in between.37  

Ackerman and Heinzerling do not sufficiently appreciate this point. They neglect 

the  possibility  that  expensive  regulation  will  actually  hurt  real  people. 

Consider  their 

                                                 
33 See Keeney, supra note. 
34  See  Robert  W.  Hahn  et  al.,  Do  Federal  Regulations  Reduce  Mortality?  (Washington,  D.C.:  American 
Enterprise Institute, 2000). 
35 See Kenneth S. Chapman & Govind Hariharan, Do Poor People Have a Stronger Relationship Between 
Income and Mortality Than the Rich? Implications of Panel Data for Health-Health Analysis, 12 J. Risk & 
Uncertainty 51, 58-63 (1996). 
36See Randall Lutter & John F. Morrall, III, Health-Health Analysis: A 
Safety Regulation, 8 J. Risk & Uncertainty 43, 49 table 1 (1994). 
37 Posner’s distinctive concern involves catastrophic harms with a threat of extinction; here, of course, no 
equally  serious  risk  is  likely  to  be  on  the  other  side.  I  return  to  this  point  in  the  discussion  of  maximin 
below. 

New Way to Evaluate Health and 

19 

seemingly offhand remark about protection against workplace hazards: The “costs of the 

regulation would probably be borne by the employers who would be required to maintain 

safer  workplaces”  (p.  193).  But  the  costs  of  regulation  are  often  borne  not  only  by 

“employers,” but also by consumers, whose prices increase, and by workers, who might 

find  fewer  and  less  remunerative  jobs.  When  government  imposes  large  costs  on 

“polluters,”  consumers  and  workers  are  likely  to  pay  part  of  the  bill.  And  if  prices 

increase, some risks will increase as well. To be sure, some environmental regulations do 

increase  employment  and  decrease  prices.  But  as  a  general  rule,  there  is  no  reason  to 

believe that regulatory imposition of high costs will benefit workers and consumers; the 

opposite is more likely to be true. 

In the context of cell phones, this point helps illuminates a quite remarkable fact, 

one  to  which  Burgess  gives  too  little  attention:  Notwithstanding  the  popularity  of 

precautionary thinking, and the apparent intensity of public fears, those fears did not, in 

fact,  p

roduce  large-scale  controls  on  either  phones  or  towers.  Burgess  offers  no 

explanation of why such controls did not materialize, but his brief discussion of Finland 

provides a useful clue. Is it really a paradox, or an irony, that fears of cell phones were 

especially  weak  in  a  nation  that  has  the  largest  percentage  of  cell  phone  users  in  the 

world? I do not believe so. The Finnish economy is heavily dependent on Nokia and thus 

the cell phone industry; people in Finland do not want the Finnish economy to collapse. 

And  if  most  citizens  depend  on  cell  phones,  they  are  far  less  likely  to  accept 

sensationalistic claims of risk, simply because they have so much to lose from regulation. 

(Imagine, for e

xample, the likely public reaction to a current suggestion by an American 

politici

an  that  cell  phones  should  be  banned  because  they  pose  a  cancer  risk.)  If  the 

benefits of cell phone use are evident to all or most, then people will demand a great deal 

of evidence that the harm is real. In short, the very idea of precaution loses some of its 
 aware that precaution imposes costs and even risks of its own.38 

appeal when people are

When  people  are  aware  of  that  fact,  some  kind  of  balancing,  involving  both  costs  and 

benefits, is likely to emerge. 

                                                 
38 See the treatment of fungibility in Howard Margolis, Dealing with Risk (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1999). 

20 

In  a  brief  but  illuminating  discussion  of  another  environmental  issue,  Burgess 

strongly  supports  the  general  point.  He  refers  to  a  mining  town  in  Colorado  whose 

citizens were deemed, by the Environmental Protection Agency, to be at risk from toxic 

contamination.  The  town’s  citizens,  already  suffering  from  serious  economic  decline, 

responded not with fear, and much less with enthusiasm for a precautionary approach, but 

by demonizing the EPA, which it regarded as “the devil incarnate. Grimly they recounted 

how government bureaucrats had invaded their town uninvited, threatening residents with 

the  prospect  of  condemned  property,  involuntary  relocation,  and  unwelcome  new  legal 

requirements. . . . And all, they claimed, over a hazard ‘that doesn’t exist.’” (p. 272). Far 

from  succumbing  to  panic,  citizens  of  the  mining  town  were  well  aware  of  how  much 

they ha

d to lose from aggressive regulation; hence they sought to dismiss real evidence of 

harm.  Precautions  and  precautionary  thinking  seem  far  less  attractive  when  people 

believe that precautions would produce significant costs and risks. 

Burgess  does  not  draw  attention  to  one  of  the  remarkable  lessons  of  his  story, 

which is that the cell phone scare did not produce aggressive regulation not only because 

the evidence of harm was weak, but also and still more fundamentally because a growing 

number  of  people  use  cell  phones  and  would  be  inconvenienced,  or  far  worse,  by  such 

measures. (Consider the fact that cell phones are often used to obtain help in emergency 

situations.)  In  the  context  of  genetically  modified  food,  by  contrast,  the  costs  of 

regulation  are  not  highly  visible,  at  least  not  to  Europeans.  Precautionary  thinking,  in 

short, is most appealing when the costs and burdens of precautions are not visible. When 

both costs and benefits are on the public viewscreen, people become intuitive cost-benefit 

analysts,  and  they  tend  to  be  cautious  about  precautions—unless  the  evidence  in  their 

favor is strong. This point brings us directly to the questions raised by CBA. 

 

V. Costs and Benefits 

 

As  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  stress,  some  of  the  most  difficult  questions  for 

CBA involve the translation o

f risks into monetary equivalents. Recall that under current 

practice, the monetary values come mostly from involves real-world markets, producing 

evidence of compensation levels for actual risks. It is important to see that in basing cost-

benefit analysis on calculations of this kind, regulators are not, in fact, producing a “value 

21 

of a sta

tistical life.” In fact they are not “valuing life” at all. They are not saying that the 

average American would pay $6 million to avoid death, or that a human life is, in some 

metaphysical sense, worth that amount. Instead they are generating numbers that reflect 

the market value of statistical risks. Typically agencies are dealing with low-level risks, 

on  the  order  of  1/100,000,  and  when  they  “value  a  life”  at  $6  million,  they  are  really 

saying that the evidence suggests that people must be paid $60 to be subject to a risk of 

that  magnitude—and  that  government  will  build  on  that  evidence  in  making  regulatory 

decisions. 

 

A. The Argument for WTP 

Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  think  that  this  practice  is  a  form  of  madness,  and 

hence they do not pause to ask why regulators in a democratic society might care about 

market valuations of statistical risks. But there are two possible answers, both connected 

with  individual  choice,  and  both  growing  directly  out  of  promin

ent  strands  in  liberal 

theory.

 The first involves welfare; the second involves autonomy.  

To  clarify  the  point,  assume  a  society  in  which  people  face  multiple  risks  of 

1/100,000, and in which every person is both adequately informed and willing to pay no 

more and no less than $60 to eliminate each of those risks. Assume too that the cost of 

eliminating  these  1/100,000  risks  is  widely  variable,  ranging  from  close  to  zero  to 

hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars.  Assume  finally  that  the  cost  of  eliminating  any  risk  is 

borne  entirely  by  those  who  benefit  from  risk  elimination.  Under  that  assumption, 

regulation  imposes  the  equivalent  of  user’s  fee;  for  example,  people’s  water  bills  will 

entirely  reflect  the  costs  of  a  policy  that  eliminates  a  1/100,000  of  getting  cancer  from 

arsenic in drinking water. If the per-person cost is $100, each water bill will be increased 

by exactly that amount.  

At first glance, use of WTP, u

nder the stated assumptions, is easy to defend. W

hy 

should  people  be  forced  to  pay  an  amount

  for  regulation  that  exceeds  their  W

TP?  Of 

course 

we  might  believe  that  a  measure  of  redistribution  is  appropriate—that  private 

sources,  or  government,  should  provide  people  with  regulatory  protection  for  free.  But 

regulation need not, and often does not, amount to a subsidy to those who benefit from it. 

After the enactment of workers’ compensation regulation, nonunionized workers faced a 

dollar-for-dollar wage reduction, corresponding almost perfectly to the expected value of 

22 

the benefits they received.39 For drinking water regulation, something similar is involved. 
The cost of regulations is passed onto consumers in the form of higher water bills.40  

More particularly, those who are interested in welfare will insist on the relevance 
of WTP under the stated assumptions.41 If people are willing to pay $60, but no more, to 

eliminate  a  risk  of  1/100,000,  then  we  have  good  reason  to  think  that  their  welfare  is 

increased  by  asking  them  to  pay  that  amount—and  that  their  welfare  is  decreased  by 

asking  them  to  pay  more.  There  are  many  demands  on  people’s  budgets,  and  if  they 

refuse to spend more than $60 on a 1/100,000 risk, it may because they would like to use 

their  money  for  food,  shelter,  r

ecreation,  education,  or  any 

number  of  other  goods. 

tion can operate as a forced exchange , and by hypothesis, a forced exchange on 

egula

R
terms that people dislike will make them worse off.42  

For  purposes  of  evaluating  regulation,  it  does  not  matter  if  the  existing 

distribution of income is unjust or if poor people are, in an intelligible sense, coerced to 

run certain risks. The remedy for unjust distributions, and for that fo

rm of coercion, is not 

to requ

ire people to buy regulatory benefits on terms that they find unacceptable. Suppose 

that people are willing to pay only $60 to eliminate a 1/100,000 risk because they are not 

rich, and that if they had double their current wealth, they would be willing to pay $120. 

Even if this is so, government does people no favors by forcing them to pay the amount 

that  they  would  pay  if  they  had  more  money.  In  ridiculing  WTP,  Ackerman  and 

Heinzerling devote too little attention to this point.  

If we reject the argument from welfare, we might nonetheless rely on willingness 
to pay on grounds of personal autonomy.43 On this view, people should be sovereign over 

their own lives, and this principle means that government should respect personal choices 

about  how  to  use  limite

d  resources  (again  so  long  as  those  choices  are  adequately 

informe

d). When people decline to devote more than $60 to eliminate a 1/100,000 risk, it 

                                                 
39  Price  Fishback  and  Shawn  Everett  Kantor,  A  Prelude  to  the  Welfare  State  (Chicago:  University  of 
Chicago Press, 1998). 
40 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, in Risk and Reason, supra note.  
41 See Gibbard, supra note, at 97, for a valuable discussion of how cost-benefit analysis might be taken as 
“a    rough  surrogate  for  expected  total  intrinsic-reward  maximization.”  To  the  same  general  effect, 
defending  CBA  on  welfare  grounds,  see  Matthew  Adler  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  Implementing  Cost-Benefit 
Analysis  When  Preferences  Are  Distorted,  29  J.  Legal  Stud.  1105  (2000);  Matthew  Adler  and  Eric  A. 
Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis, 109 Yale L.J. 167 (1999). 
42 As we shall see, it matters a great deal whether it actually so operates; I explore this issue in detail below. 
43 See Ronald Dworkin, Sovereign Virtue (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2002). 

23 

is  because  they  would  prefer  to  spend  the  money  in  a  way  that  seems  to  them  more 

desirable.  If  regulators  reject  people’s  actual  judgments,  then  they  are  insulting  their 

dignity

. The use of willingness to pay therefore can claim a simultaneous defense from 

both utilitarian and deontological accounts. 

 When the assumptions just outlined are met, we have what might be described as 

easy cases for the use of the WTP criterion. Some people contend that money and health 

are incommensurable—that our reflective judgments do not permit us to line up dollars 
and risks along a single metric.44 Suppose that this is so. To see the easy cases as such, it 

is not necessary to make controversial arguments about commensurability or to venture 

into  controversial  philosophical  territory.  The  underlying  claim  is  a  simple  pragmatic 

one,  to  the  effect  that  people  are  willing  to  trade  mon

ey  against  decreases  in  statistical 

risks.  I

f  people  actually  make  those  trades,  then  government  might  well  build  on  their 

practices in designing policies. 

 
There  are  several  possible  objections.  Perhaps  the  most  obvious  would  point  to 

B. Objections 

people’s rights. On one view, people have a right not to be subjected to risks of a certain 

magnitude, and the use of WTP will violate that right. In fact it is fully reasonable to say 

that  whatever  their  WTP,  human  beings  have  a  right  not  to  be  subject  to  risks  above  a 

particular level. Imagine, for example, that poor people live in a place where they face a 

1/20 annual risk of dying from water pollution; it ma

kes sense to say that the government 

is requ

ired to reduce that risk even if people are willing to pay only $1 to eliminate it and 

the  per-person  cost  is  $5.  The  only  qualification  is  that  in  practice,  rights  are  resource-

dependent. What rights people are able to claim, against their government, is a product of 

the amount of available money, and hence people’s legitimate arguments for protection 

are inevitably affected by the level of resources in the society. But let us simply assume 

here that risks above a certain level should count as violative of rights.  

It might be 

added that people have a right not to be subjected to the intentional or 

reckless imposition of harm, whatever their WTP. If a company subjects the citizens of a 

town to a high danger, and it does so maliciously or without the slightest concern for their 

                                                 
44  See  Elizabeth  Anderson,  Value  in  Ethics  and  in  Economics  (Cambridge:  Harvard  University  Press, 
1994). 

24 

welfare, the rights of those citizens have been violated, even if their WTP is low. Indeed, 

some such systems impose strict liability for harms. Well-functioning legal systems make 

wrongdoers pay for the injuries they inflict.  

As  abstract  claims  about  people’s  rights,  these  objections  are  entirely  plausible. 

Someth

ing has gone badly wrong if people are exposed to serious risks and if their low 

WTP  prevents  them  from  doing  anything  in  response.  Things  are  even  worse  if 

government uses their low WTP to justify inaction in the face of those risks. It would be 

ludicrous  to  suggest  that  WTP  is  determinative  of  the  appropriate  use  of  government 

subsidies;  a  redistributive  policy  hardly  tracks  people’s  WTP.  (Would  it  make  sense  to 

say that government will give poor people a check for $100 only if they are willing to pay 

$100 for that check?)  

In  many  cases  of  environmental  regulation,  however,  rights  violations  are  not 

involved;  we  are  speaking  here

  of  statistically  small  risks.  Even  if  rights  are  involved 

when people are subject to small risks, p

eople should be

 permitted to waive those rights 

at an ag

reeable price (at least on the assumptions that I am making). The proper response 

to  an  apparent  rights  violation  is  not  to  force  people  to  buy  protection  that  they  do  not 

want, but to provide a subsidy that will give them the benefit for free or enable them to 

receive the benefit at what is, for them, an acceptable price. But regulation—and this is 

the key point—often does not such thing; and for the easy cases, the question is one of 

regulation under the stated assumptions. So long as that is the question, use of WTP does 

not violate anyone’s rights. 

What  about  environmental  wrongdoers?  If  a  company  has  intentionally, 

recklessly,  or  even  negligently  exposed  people  to  harm,  it  should  be  held  accountable 

through the payment of damages, even if the WTP of the affected population is low. It is 

possible  for  the  tort  system  to  go  much  further.  A  sensible  legal  system  might  well 

choose to force companies to internalize the costs of their activities by 

requiring them to 

pay for

 the harms they have caused, even if there has been neither intentional nor reckless 

wrongdoing.  Within  tort  theory,  there  is  an  active  debate  on  this  question,  and  it  is 
possible  to  support  strict  liability  by  reference  to  a  range  of  theoretical  positions.45 But 

                                                
45  See  Richard  A.  Epstein,  A  Theory  of  Strict  Liability,  2  J.  Legal  Stud.  151  (1973);  Richard  Posner, 
Econom

ic Analysis of Law 175-82 (New York: Aspen Publishers, 4th ed., 1992). 

 

25 

the subject here is regulation, not compensation via the tort system. It would be odd to 

say that people have a right to be required to pay more for risk reduction than they are 

willing to pay, at least if they are adequately informed. If people are willing to pay only 

$25 to 

eliminate a risk of 1/100,000, a reference to their “rights” cannot plausibly justify 

the conclusion that government should impose a regulation that costs them $75. 

An  independent  objection  would  stress,  as  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  do,  that 

people  are  citizens,  not  merely  consumers.  On  this  view,  regulatory  choices  should  be 

made  not  after  aggregating  WTP,  but  after  citizens  have  deliberated  with  one  another 

about their preferences and values. The argument against forced exchanges treats people 

as consumers; it sees their decisions about safety as the same as their decisions about all 

other  commodities.  F

or  some  decisions,  this  approach  is  badly  misconceived.  The 
an  constitutional  system  is  a  deliberative  democracy,46  not  a  maximization 

Americ

machine, and many social judgments should be made by citizens engaged in deliberative 

discussion  with  one  another  rather  than  by  aggregating  the  individual  choices  of 

consumers.  

In the context of racial and sex discrimination, for example, sensible societies do 

not aggregate people’s WTP. The level of permissible discrimination is not set by using 

market evidence to see how much people would be willing to pay to discriminate (or to 

be free from discrimination). Even if discriminators would be willing to pay a great deal 

to avoid associating with members of unpopular groups, such discrimination is banned. 

Nor  is  the  protection  of  en

dangered  species  chosen  on  the  basis  of  aggregated  WTP. 

Whethe

r and when to protect members of endangered species is a moral question to be 

resolved through democratic discussion, not through exercises in consumer sovereignty. 

In many environmental contexts, use of WTP would wrongly see people as consumers, 

purchasing  products,  rather  than  as  citizens,  deliberating  about  values.  Speaking  in  this 

vein,  Amartya  Sen  emphasizes  that  “discussions  and  exchange,  and  even  political 
arguments,  contribute  to  the  formation  and  revision  of  values.”47  He  urges  that  in  the 

particular context of environmental protection, solutions require us “to go beyond looking 

                                                
46 See William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992). 
47 Amartya Sen, Rationality and Freedom 287 (Cambridge: Harvard University Pre

ss, 2001). 

 

26 

only  for  the  best  reflection  of  existing  individual  preferences,  or  the  most  acceptable 
procedures for choices based on those preferences.”48

Sen’s  claims  identify  some  serious  limitations  on  the  use  of  WTP.  But  such 

objections  should  not  be  read  for  more  than  they  are  worth.  In  trading  off  safety  and 

health in our own private lives, we do not have static values and preferences. Much of the 

time, o

ur choices are a product of reflection, even if we are simply acting as consumers. 

To be sure, moral questions are not to be resolved by aggregating private willingness to 

pay. Some preferences, even though backed by WTP, are morally off-limits, and policy 

should not take account of them. In addition, many people are unwilling to pay a great 

deal  for  goods  that  have  strong  moral  justifications;  animal  welfare  is  an  example.  In 

these circumstances, the market model is inapplicable and WTP tells us very little.  

But  what  about  the  easy  cases?  Do  these  arguments  suggest  that  government 

should override individual choices about how much to spend to eliminate low-level risks, 

even  when  those  choices  are  adequately  informed?  For  environmental  protection 

generally, it 

is indeed important to go beyond “the best reflection of existing individual 

prefere

nces.” But this point does not establish that people should be required to pay (for 

example)  $100  to  eliminate  mortality  risks  of  1/100,000  when  they  are  willing  to  pay 

only  $75.  If  people’s  WTP  reflects  impulsiveness,  recklessness,  an  absence  of 

information,  or  insufficient  deliberation,  then  it  is  important  for  other  people,  in 

government as elsewhere, to draw their attention to that fact. And in some cases, a low 

WTP might be overridden on the ground that it is rooted in errors, factual or otherwise. 

But these points should not be taken as a general objection to my conclusion about the 

easy cases, and to suggest that government should force people to reduce statistical risks 

at an expense that they deem excessive.  

A final objection would emphasize the possibility that people’s preferences have 
adapted  to  limitations  in  existing  opportunities,  including  deprivation.49  Perhaps  people 

show  a  low  WTP  for  environmental  goods,  including  health  improvements,  simply 

because  they  have  adjusted  to  environmental  bads,  including  health  risks.  Perhaps 

people’s  WTP  reflects  an  effort  to  reduce  cognitive  dissonance  through  the  conclusion 

 
                                                
48 Id. at 289. 
49  See  Jon  Elster,  Sour  Grapes  (Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press,  1983);    Martha  Nu
Women and Human Development (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).  

ssbaum, 

27 

that risks are lower than they actually are.50 To generalize the objection, perhaps people 
suffer  from  a  problem  of  “miswanting”51;  they  want  things  that  do  not  promote  their 

welfare

, and they do not want things that would promote their welfare. If this is so, then 

WTP  loses  much  of  its  underlying  justification;  people’s  decisions  do  not  actually 
promote  their  welfare,52  and  their  autonomy,  properly  understood,  may  not  require 

respect  for  their  decisions,  which  may  be  nonautonomous.  In  other  words,  the  idea  of 

autonomy  requires  not  merely  respect  for  whatever  preferences  people  happen  to  have, 

but also social conditions that allow preferences to be developed in a way that does not 

reflect  coercion  or  injustice.  With  respect  to  some  risks,  the  relevant  preferences  are 

nonautonomous; consider the fact that many women face a risk of male violence under 

circumstances  in  which  they  believe  that  little  can  be  done  and  hence  ada

pt.  If 

govern

ment  can  be  confident  that  people  are  not  willing  to  pay  for  goods  from  which 

they would greatly benefit, government should probably abandon WTP.  

In  the  context  of  ordinary  regulatory  policy,  however,  this  objection  has  more 

theoretical than practical interest. Typically we are speaking of steps that would reduce 

low-level mortality risks (say, 1/50,000). Much of the time, there is no reason to believe 

that  the  use  of  informed  WTP  (say,  $100)  is  a  product  of  adaptive  preferences.  When 

there is such a reason, the judgment about the easy cases must be revised. 

 

 

C. Harder Cases 

There  is  an  obvious  artificiality  in  the  assumptions  behind  the  easy  cases.  Most 

important, people do not always bear the full social costs of the regulatory benefits they 

receive. Sometimes they pay only a fraction of those costs—or possibly even nothing at 

all. When this is so, the analysis is much 

more complicated. In the context of air pollution 

regulat

ion, for example, there is a complex set of distributional effects, and on balance, 

                                                 
50  See  George  A.  Akerlof,  An  Economic  Theorist’s  Book  of  Tales  123-37  (Cambridge:  Cambridge 
University Press 1984). 
51 Daniel T. Gilbert & T.D. Wilson, Miswanting, in Thinking and Feeling:  The Role of Affect in Social 
Cognition  178  (Joseph  P.  Forgas  ed.,  2000);  Timothy  D.  Wilson  &  Daniel  T.  Gilbert,  Affective 
Forecasting, A
52 For general discussion, see Daniel Kahneman, A Psychological Perspective on Economics, 93 Am. Econ. 
Rev.  (Papers  &  Proc.)  162  (2003);  Daniel  Kahneman  et  al.,  Back  to  Bentham?    Explorations  of 
Experienced Utility, 112 Q.J. Econ. 375, 379–80 (1997). 

dvances in Experimental Social Psychology, June 2003, at 345. 

28 

poor people, and members of minority communities, appear to be net gainers.53 A CBA, 

based  on  WTP,  might  not  produce  an  adequate  account  of  the  welfare  effects  of  air 
pollution regulation.54 And even if it does, an account of welfare effects would not end 

the normative question, because the distributional gains are important to consider. 

Suppose, for example, that beneficiaries of a proposed drinking water regulation 

are willing to pay only $80 to eliminate a risk of 1/50,000 in drinking water; that the per-

person cost of eliminating a 1/50,000 risk is $100; but that for every dollar of that cost, 

the  beneficiaries  pay  only  70  cents.  The  remaining  30  cents  might  be  paid  by  water 

companies  themselves,  in  the  form  of  reduced  profits,  or  by  employees  of  the  water 

companies, in the form of reduced wages and fewer jobs. In this example, the costs of the 

regulation exceed the benefits; it is inefficient. But by hypothesis, the regulation makes 

its beneficiaries of the regulation better off. If CBA provides the rule of decision, and if 

the WTP criterion is used, the fact that the monetized costs exceed the monetized benefits 

is  decis

ive.  But  as  a  normative  matter,  the  analysis  here  is  far  harder  than  in  the  easy 

cases. On what assumption should the WTP numbers be decisive?   

The  assumption  must  be  that  economic  efficiency  is  the  goal  of  government,  at 

least  in  the  context  of  environmental  regulation—that  in  order  to  know  what  to  do,  we 

should aggregate the benefits and costs of regulation, and act if and only

 if the benefits 

exceed the costs. When using the WTP numbers, government is acting as a maximization 

mac ine, aggregating all benefits and

h

 costs as measured 

by the WTP criterion. But this is 

an imp

lausible understanding of what government should be doing. In fact it represents a 

shift from the relatively uncontroversial Pareto criterion, exemplified in the easy cases, to 
a version of the far more controversial Kaldor-Hicks criterion,55 which assesses policy by 

asking  this  question:  Are  the  gainers  winning  more  than  the  losers  are  losing?  The 

Kaldor-Hicks criterion is sometimes described as potential Pareto superiority, because it 

asks whether in principle, the winners could compensate the losers, and a surplus could 

                                                 
53 See Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air Act Regulation, 24 Regulation 34 (2001). 
54 On the relationship between welfare and cost-benefit analysis, see Gibbard, supra note; Adler and Posner, 
supra note. 
55 It is only a version of that criterion, because it is measuring welfare in monetary equivalents. A direct 
assessment of welfare, if it were possible, might show that the regulation in question is justified on Kaldor-
Hicks grounds. 

29 

be left over. The difficulty of course is that Pareto superiority is merely potential. Some 

people really are losing and others are gaining.  

In  the  harder  cases,  the  gainers  are  gaining  less  (in  monetary  terms)  than  the 

losers  are  losing  --  and  hence  CBA  suggests  that  regulation  is  unjustified.  Under  the 

assump

tions  I  have  given,  the  regulation  is  indeed  inefficient:  Its  social  cost  is  higher 

than its social benefit. But is the regulation undesirable? This is not at all clear. The first 

problem  is  that  WTP  is  measuring  gains  and  loses  in  monetary  terms,  rather  than  in 

welfare  terms.  It  is  possible  that  those  who  gain,  in  the  harder  cases,  are  gaining  more 
welfare  than  the  losers  lose;  WTP  is  not  dispositive  on  that  question.56  The  second 

problem is distributional. Suppose that in terms of overall welfare, the regulation is not 

desirable; it makes aggregate welfare lower rather than higher. But suppose too that those 

who  benefit  are  poorer  and  more  disadvantaged  than  those  who  lose.  If,  for  example, 

those  who  are  willing  to  pay  $80  are  disproportionately  poor,  and  those  who  pay  the 

remainder  are  disproportionately  wealthy,  the  regulation  might  be  plausibly  justified 

despite the welfare loss.  

It is natural to respond here that if redistribution is what is sought, then it should 

be produced not through regulation but through the tax system, which is a more efficient 
way of transferring resources to those who need help.57 But suppose that redistribution is 

not going to happen through the tax system. If so, then the regulation in the harder cases 

cannot be ruled off-limits despite its inefficiency. The fact that a regulation is helpful to 

the most disadvantaged is not decisive in its favor. If it is trivially helpful, and if it inflicts 

huge  costs  on  everyone  else,  little  can  be  said  for  it.  But  everything  depends  on  the 

magnitude of the relevant effects. A program that produces large gains for the least well-

off would seem to be justified even if it imposes, in terms of WTP, slightly higher costs 

than benefits on balance. 

The  simple  conclusion  is  that  the  argument  for  using  WTP  is  most  plausible  in 

cases in which the beneficiaries of regulation pay all or most of its cost. In such cases, 

WTP  is  reasonably  used  so  long  as  people  are  adequately  informed  and  so  long  as  the 

                                                 
56 On CBA and welfare, and for a welfarist defense of CBA as a decision procedure, see Adler and Posner, 
supra note. 
57 See, e.g., Louis Kaplow & Steven Shavell, Why the Legal System is Less Efficient Than the Income Tax 
in Redistributing Income, 23 J. Legal Stud. 667, 667 (1994). 

30 

question is how much they should be forced to spend to avoid existing risks. The analysis 

must be different when the beneficiaries of regulation are paying only a small fraction of 

its cost

s. In such cases, it is possible that the regulation can be justified as a redistributive 

measure or on welfare grounds. To know whether it can be so justified, it is necessary to 
go  beyond  CBA  and  to  identify  the  winners  and  losers.58  Ackerman  and  Heinzerling 

neglect  to  distinguish  between  the  easy  cases  and  the  harder  ones,  and  thus  fail  to 

appreciate the arguments that lie behind use of WTP.  

 

 
 

D. On Individuation and Discount Rates 

Many of the most interesting arguments offered by Ackerman and Heinzerling are 

best  seen  as  attacks  on  CBA  as  currently  practiced, not on CBA as such. Consider, for 

example, their suggestion that it is foolish to extrapolate, from workplace studies, a single 

figure for the value of statistical risks. Ackerman and Heinzerling note that people care 

not only about the magnitude of the risk (is it 1/10,000 or 1/100,000?) but also about its 

nature and context. A risk

 of death from cancer might well be worse than a statistically 

equiva

lent  risk  of  a  sudden,  unanticipated  death.  A  risk  of  death  from  air  pollution,  or 

drinking water, might well produce a higher WTP than a statistically equivalent risk of 

death from a workplace accident. 

 

This  claim  is  plausible,  but  it  is  most  sensibly  taken  as  an  argument  for  a  more 

refined  version  of  CBA,  one  that  insists  on  variations  among  statistically  equivalent 
risks.59 A single number is genuinely obtuse; in fact it is inconsistent with the very theory 

that gives rise to the use of WTP in the first place. Recall that if WTP is relevant, it is 

because  its  use  promotes  welfare,  autonomy,  or  both.  If  this  is  so,  regulators  should 

consult actual WTP, which varies across risks, rather than a single or unitary WTP, which 

grows only out of one set

 of risks, and which (as Ackerman and Heinzerling say) cannot 

plausib

ly be applied to every risk of a given statistical magnitude. The real question is not 

whether to have more differentiated monetary values for qualitatively identical risks, but 

                                                 
58 A possible defense of CBA would be that individualized identification of winners and losers would be 
extremely difficult, that agencies would not make defensible distributional judgments, and that CBA works 
better,  on  balance,  that  any  approach  that  attempts  to  make  finer  distinctions.  A  great  deal  of  empirical 
work would be necessary to make this defense convincing. My goal here is to sort out the theoretical issues; 
CBA might look especially good, or especially bad, when we investigate empirical issues as well. 
59 I develop this point in Sunstein, Laws of Fear, supra note. 

31 

where to find reliable evidence on which to base those values. Economists are starting to 

fill the relevant gaps, in a way that supports the suggestion that a single WTP is far too 
crude.60 It would not be difficult to continue to use WTP, but to take account of the fact 

that it varies across risks, even if they are statistically identical. 

Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  also  object,  plausibly,  to  the  application  of  the 

standard  discount  rate  for  money  to  the  valuation  of  future  gains  in  terms  of  both 
mortality and morbidity.61 But suppose that no discount rate is appropriate -- that deaths 

in 2050 should be valued the same way as deaths in 2010. If so, the analysis of costs and 

b

enefits would not be the 

same; but it would remain possible to calcul

ate both costs and 

benefits.  In  any  case  the  analysis  of  discounting  must  make  a  distinction  to  which 
Ackerman  and  Heinzerling  devote  insufficient  attention.62  Sometimes  environmental 

regulation protects living people from latent harms -- risks that will come to fruition not 

now,  but  ten,  twenty,  or  thirty  years  from  now.  It  seems  clear  that  some  discount  rate 

should be applied to latent harms. Most people, intuitively and on reflection, would much 
prefer  to  face  a  harm  in  the  future  rather  than  immediately.63  Hence  some  kind  of 

discount rate  makes  a great  deal  of sense for harms that will not come to fruition for a 

long time (even if the discount rate for such harms does not turn out to be the same as the 

discount rate for money). But som

etimes environmental regulation protects members of 

fu

ture 

generations;  and  this  is  a  quite  different  problem.  If  a  program  would  save  one 

hundred  people  born  in  2020,  it  is  not  clear  that  it  deserves  less  enthusiasm  than  a 

program that would save one hundred people born in 2002.  

On the other hand, a refusal to use a discount rate creates a number of logical and 

practical conundrums, especially if it would impose high costs on current generations—a 

particular problem in light of the fact that if current generations face high costs, posterity 

                                                 
60 See id. 
61 See Tyler Cowen & Derek Parfit, Against the Social Discount Rate, in Justice Between Age Groups and 
Generations 144-45 (Peter Laslett & James S. Fishkin eds.) (New Haven: Yale University Press,1992). 
62 See the illuminating discussion in Richard L. Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, 
and the Discounting of Human Lives, 99 Colum. L. Rev. 941, 962–74 (1999). 
63 It is difficult to separate, in practice, the fact that people would prefer more life-years rather than fewer 
from the fact that people would prefer a distant death rather than an immediate one. If most people would 
much prefer a fatal illness in 2050 to a fatal illness in 2010, there may be no discounting; the choice might 
be based on the fact that the later date ensure more life-years. The question of morbidity present a simpler 
test of discounting: Most people would rather have a month of illness in 2010 than a month of i
llness in 
2005. 

32 

is likely to be hurt too. Hence aggressive regulation, at least if it is extremely costly, may 

not help future generations at all. It has also been argued that if regulators are indifferent 

as  between  lives  saved  now  and  lives  saved  in  the  future,  but  discount  costs  at  some 
positive rate, then it makes sense for them to delay life-saving expenditures indefinitely.64 

In  any

  case  it  has  been  suggested  that  instead  of  discounting  lives,  regulators  might 

simply use the future discounted (monetary) cost of saving lives at the time when lives 

are  saved—an  approach  that  is  mathematically  identical  and  hence  produces  the  same 
analysis.65

I cannot resolve here the complex questions raised by individuation of WTP and 
by discount rates.66 Ackerman and Heinzerling are right to raise questions about existing 
practice.67 It seems clear that greater individuation is justified for statistically equivalent 

risks that people consider different to be qualitatively different; it also seems clear that a 

discount rate should be used for latent harms. The appropriate approach to risks faced by 

future  generations  remains  unsettled.  The  simplest  point  is  that  if  these  questions  are 

properly answered, CBA will be mended, not ended. 

 

 
 

VI. Uncertainty, Catastrophe, and Maximin 

Thus far I have emphasized issues of monetization, as highlighted by Ackerman 

and Heinzerling. But as Posner’s discussion demonstrates, some of the most interesting 

problems raised by CBA have nothing to do with the translation of risks into monetary 

equivalents. Recall that Posner’s assessment of the risks of p

article accelerators contains 

what h

e himself describes as arbitrariness. Nor is the problem limited to unconventional 

problems  of  this  kind.  Consider  a  fairly  mundane  issue  under  the  Safe  Drinking  Water 

Act: If government reduces permissible levels of arsenic in drinking water from 50 parts 

 

                                                
64  Emmett  B.  Keeler  and  Shan  Cretin,  Discounting  of  Life-Saving  and  Other  Nonmonetary  Effects,  29 
Manageme
nt Science 300 (1983). Ackerman and Heinzerling discuss this claim and reject it (pp. 193-94), 
in  part  on  the  ground  that  allowing  numerous  current  deaths  would  be  politically  unacceptable;  but  the 
claim  is  one  of  the  logical  implication  of  refusing  to  discount,  and  the  fact  that  it  entails  a  politic
ally 
unacceptable outcome does not mean that it is wrong.  
65 See Morrall, supra note. Note that many people believe that because of tec
hnological advances, future 
risks are unlikely to come to fruition, simply because new technologies will permit us to prevent them. This 
is not, however, a point about discounting itself. 
66 An especially good discussion is Revesz, supra note. 
67  They  are  also  right  to  contend  that  regulators  should  consider  not  only  the  WTP  of  those  who  face 
mortality  risks,  but  also  that  of  others  who  care  about  them.  See  Eric  A.  Posner  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein, 
Dollars

 and Death, U Chi L Rev. (forthcoming 2005). 

33 

per  billion  (ppb)  to  10  ppb,  what,  exactly,  are  the  expected  benefits?  On  the  basis  of 
existing  evidence,  many  answers  are  scientifically  respectable.68  For  a  regulation 

mandating  that  reduction,  the  EPA  estimated  that  it  would  prevent  about  twenty-five 

premature deaths and roughly an equivalent number of nonfatal cancer cases. But on the 

basis  of  the  same  inconclusive  evidence  that  was  before  the  EPA,  it  would  have  been 

reasonable to project that the regulation would prevent as few as six deaths or as many as 

110. The evidence suggested a range, not a specific estimate. 

 

As  a  result,  critics  of  CBA  might  contend  the  method  gives  only  the  illusion  of 

precisio

n. Even before deaths are translated into monetary equivalents, regulators might 

well  be  required  to  make  judgments  of  value,  not  merely  fact,  in  projecting  the  likely 

effects  of  regulatory  protection.  But  this  point  should  not  be  read  for  more  than  it  is 

worth.  When  specific  estimates  are  not  feasible,  the  evidence  often  permits  agencies  to 

specify a range. For the arsenic rule, they could say, for example, that a 10 ppb standard 

is  likely  to  prevent  a  minimum  of  six  and  a  maximum  of  110  deaths,  and  they  might 

undertake cost-benefit analysis with reference to the

 range. Such an analysis would not 

resolve the question of what to do, but it would greatly discipline the inquiry. 

In  some  circ

umstances,  however,  existing  information  puts

  regulators  in  a  far 

m

ore  d

ifficult  situation.  These  are  cases  of  genuine  uncertainty,  in  which  probabilities 

cannot  be  assigned  to  the  expected  outcomes.  Posner  is  much  concerned  with  these 

situations. While he does not spell out the argument, his treatment of catastrophic risks 

points  to  a  promising  possibility  for  a  narrower,  and  more  appealing,  version  of  the 

Precautionary Principle, a kind of Anti-Catastrophe Principle. Suppose that citizens face 

catastrophic risks to which probabilities cannot be assigned; suppose, that is, that they are 

operating  under  conditions  of  uncertainty  rather  than  risk.  If  regulators  are  operating 

under such conditions, they might well do best to follow maximin, identifying the worst-

case  scenarios  and  choosing  the  approach  that  eliminates  the  worst  of  these.  It  follows 

that  if  aggressive  measures  are  justified  to  reduce  the  risks  associated  with  global 

w

arming, one reason is that those risks are po

tentially catastrophic and existing science 

does  not  enable  us  to  assign  probabilities  to  the  worst-case  scenarios.  Maximin  is  an 

appealing decision rule whenever uncertainty 

is present, but in the regulatory context, it 

                                                 
68 See Sunstein, supra note. 

34 

is particularly important for extremely bad outcomes. When Ackerman and Heinzerling 

suggest  the  value  of  focusing  on  the  worst  case,  they  are  offering  bad  advice  under 

circumstances of risk; but if they are understood to be speaking of uncertainty, they are 

on much firmer ground (see pp. 225–26). 

In an illuminating effort to recast the Precautionary Principle,69 Stephen Gardiner 

adapts  John  Rawls’s  argument  that  when  “grave  risks”  are  involved,  and  when 

probabilities  cannot  be  assigned  to  the  occurrence  of  those  risks,  maximin  is  the 

appropriate decision rule, at least if the chooser “cares very little, if anything, for what he 

might gain among the minimum stipend that he can, in fact, be sure of by following the 
maximin  rule.”70  Applying  Rawls’  claims  about  the  original  position  and  distributive 

justice  to  the  environmental  setting,  Gardiner  urges  that  maximin,  and  hence  a  “core” 

Precautionary  Principle,  is  justified  (1)  in  the  face  of  potentially  catastrophic  outcomes 

(2)  where  probabilities  cannot  be  assigned  and  (3)  when  the  loss,  from  following 

maximin,  is  a  matter  of  relative  indifference.  Gardiner  adds,  sensibly,  that  to  justify 

maximin, the threats that are potentially catastrophic must satisfy some minimal threshold 

of  plausibility.  If  they  can  be  dismissed  as  unrealistic,  then  maximin  sho

uld  not  be 

followe

d. Gardiner believes that the problem of global warming can be usefully analyzed 

in these terms and that it presents a good case for the application of maximin.  

This argument seems to me on the right track, but its conclusion, as stated, risks 

triviality, above all because of condition (3). If individuals and societies can eliminate an 

uncertain  danger  of  catastrophe  for  essentially  no  cost,  then  of  course  they  should 

eliminate  that  risk.  But  the  real  world  rarely  presents  problems  of  this  form.  In  real 

disputes, the elimination of uncertain dangers of catastrophe imposes both costs and risks. 

In  the  context  of  global  warming,  for  example,  it  is  implausible  to  say  that  regulatory 

choosers can or should care “very little, if anything,” for what might be lost by following 

maximin.  If  we  followed  maximin  for  global warming, we  would spend a great deal to 

reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and the result would almost certainly be higher prices 

for gasoline and energy, probably producing increases in unemployment and poverty.  

                                                 
69 See Stephen Gardiner, The Core Precautionary Principle (unpublished manuscript 2003). 
70 See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 134 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, revised edition 1999). 
Rawls draws in turn on Willi

am Fellner, Probability and Profit (Homewood, Ill., R.D. Irwin., Inc. 1965). 

35 

For environmental problems, does the argument for maximin provide help beyond 

the trivial cases? I believe that if properly reformulated, it does, for one simple reason: 

Condition  (3)  is  too  stringent  and  should  be  abandoned.  Even  if  the  costs  of  following 

maximin  are  significant,  and  even  if  choosers  care  a  great  deal  about  incurring  those 

costs, i

t makes sense to follow maximin when they face uncertain dangers of catastrophe. 

The hardest question here is: Under circumstances of uncertainty, how much cost does it 

make  sense  to  incur  in  the  service  of  maximin?  Consider  a  straightforward  case:  The 

catastrophic dangers associated with global warming could be eliminated if every nation 

contributed $2 million to a fund to combat that risk. Surely that cost would be acceptable. 

Consider a very different case: The catastrophic dangers associated with global warming 

could be eliminated only if every nation contributed enough resources to reduce standards 

of living by 50% world-wide, with a corresponding increase in global poverty. If global 

warming really does pose an uncertain danger of total catastrophe, the logic of maximin 

argues in favor of this extraordinary reduction in world-wide standards of living; but it is 

not clear that following that logic would be reasonable. To incur costs of this magnitude, 

we might want to insist that the danger of catastrophe rises above a minimal threshold—

that  there  be  demonstrable  probability,  and  a  not-so-low  one,  that  the  catastrophic  risk 

will occur. It would seem far more sensible to take less costly steps now and to

 engage in 

research, attempting to learn enough to know more about the probability that the 

further 
catastrophic outcomes will occur.71

                                                 
71  Sometimes  the  Precautionary  Principle  is  urged  in  situations  in  which  one  or  another  course  seems 
irreversible;  and  Posner  attends  to  issues  of  reversibility  in  discussing  global  warming.  But  the  issue  of 
irreversibility  raises  many  problems.  Any  death,  of  any  living  creature,  is  irreversible,  and  those  who 
invoke irreversibility do not intend the notion of irreversible harm to apply to each and every mortality risk. 
And because time is linear, every decision is, in an intelligible sense, irreversible. If I play tennis at 11 am 
today,  that  decision  cannot  be  reversed,  and  what  might  have  been  done  at  that  time  will  have  been 
permanently  lost.  If  government  builds  a  new  highway  in  upstate  New  York  in  May,  that  particular 
decision will be irreversible, even though the highway can be replaced or eliminated.  

Those who are concerned about irreversibility have something far more particular in mind. They 
mean something like a large-scale alteration in environmental conditions, one that imposes permanent, or 
ent 
nearly  permanent,  changes  on  those  subject  to  them.  But  irreversibility  in  this  sense  is  not  a  suffici
reason for a highly precautionary approach. At a minimum, the irreversible change has to be for the wor
se, 
and it must also rise to a certain level of magnitude. A truly miniscule change in the global temperature, 
even if permanent, would not justify expensive precautions if it is benign or if it imposes little in the way of 
harm. The idea of irreversibility is really important for two reasons. The first, referred to by Posner, draws 
on  the  analogy  to  stock  options,  and  suggests  that  it  is  worthwhile  to  spend  resources
  on  (bounded) 
precautions to wait for more information to emerge before incurring a substantial and irreversible loss. The 
second reason involves the relationship between irreversibility and catastrophic harm; a harm is unlikely 
to 

36 

 

For  global  warming,  Posner’s  interesting  recommendations  seem  vulnerable  for 

this  reason.  Though  a  firm  defender  of  quantification,  he  offers  too  little  in  the  way  of 

numbers  here.  To  evaluate  his  proposal  for  new  taxes  on  greenhouse  gas  emissions, 

designed  to  produce  technological  innovation,  it  would  be  valuable  to  know  both  the 

costs  of  that  initiative  and  the  likely  benefits.  Assessment  of  costs  would  not  be  easy, 

because  we  cannot  project  the  rate  of  technological  innovation;  but  if  the  taxes  are 

significant, large increases should be expected in the price of energy, including gasoline, 

with particularly serious effects on poor people. Because of the range of uncertainties in 

the  science  of  global  warming,  assessment  of  benefits  is  even  harder.  But  at  the  very 

least, it should be possible to measure the likely effects of such taxes on greenhouse gas 

emissions. If the relevant taxes can be projected to spur significant reductions, then the 

argument for them is certainly strengthened.  

Unlike  Posner,  I  suspect  that  the  likelihood  of  real  catastrophe  from  global 

warming is low, and hence that he is wrong to say that no probability can be assigned to 

it.  But  I  am  far  from  an  expert  on  the  underlying  science,  and  in  any  case  Posner 

convincingly argues that some kind of positive tax on carbon emissions would be cost-

justified. The larger point is that an Anti-Catastrophe Principle has a legitimate place in 

environmental regulation, applying to uncertain dangers of catastrophe, at least when the 

costs  of  reducing  those  dangers  are  not  huge  and  when  incurring  those  costs  does  not 

divert resources from more pressing

 problems. The Anti-Catastrophe Principle is not the 

Precautionary  Principle;  it  is  far  narrower  than  that,  and  it  covers  only  a  small  set  of 

environmental  problems.  But  it  nonetheless  deserves  to  play  a  role  in  environmental 

protection,  plausibly  including  global  warming—calling  for  significant  (but  not  hugely 

costly) steps now, accompanied by further research to obtain a better understanding of the 

likelihood of real disaster. 

Four  qualifications  are  important.  First,  the  Anti-Catastrophe  Principle  must  be 

attentive  to  the  full  range  of  social  risks;  it  makes  no  sense  to  take  steps  to  avert 

catastrophe if those very steps would create catastrophic risks of their own. Second, use 

of  the  principle  should  be  closely  attentive  to  the  idea  of  cost-effectiveness,  which 

                                                                                                                                                 
be  catastrophic  if  it  can  be  reversed.  For  discussion,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Laws  of  Fear:  Beyond  the 
Precautionary Principle (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2005). 

37 

requires regulators to choose the least costly means of achieving their ends. In the context 

of global warming, there are many methods by which to reduce the relevant risks. Both 

nations  and  international  institutions  should  choose  those  methods  that  minimize  costs. 

Third, distributional considerations matter. The principle should be applied in a way that 

reduces extreme burdens on those least able to bear them. For global warming, there is a 

particular need to ensure that citizens of poor nations are not required to pay a great deal 

to  contribute  to  the  solution  of  a  problem  for  which  wealthy  nations  are  most 

responsible—partly  because  the  latter  caused  the  problem  in  the  first  place,  but  also 

because poor people, faced with a global risk, need and deserve help from those who can 

provide it. Fourth, costs matter. The extent of precautions cannot reasonably be divorced 

from  their  expense.  Where  the  worst-case  scenario  is  truly  catastrophic  and  when 

probabilities cannot be assigned, a large margin of safety makes a great deal of sense. 

Conclusion 

Because  regulation  itself  often  introduces  new  hazards,  the  Precautionary 

Principle  risks  incoherence;  it  forbids  the  very  steps  that  it  requires.  For  its  part,  CBA 

runs into two serious difficulties. The first involves the specification of both probabilities 

and outcomes. The second involves the translation of environmental risks into monetary 

 

 
 

equivalents.  

For many of the problems involved in environmental regulation, it is possible to 

identify a range of outcomes, in a way that allows CBA to get off the ground. But where 

catastrophic  outcomes  are  possible  and  where  regulators  are  operating  under 

circumstances  of  uncertainty,  it  may  well  make  sense  to  follow  maximin.  Even  in  such 

circumstances,  however,  an  inquiry  into  costs  cannot  sensibly  be  avoided,  not  least 

because nations that impos

e high costs might increase mortality and morbidity risks as a 

result.  

With respect to monetization, I have suggested that it is important to distinguish 

between  the  easy  cases  for  using  WTP  and  the  harder  ones.  Where  the  beneficiaries  of 

environmental  regulation  pay  all  or  most  of  its  cost,  the  argument  for  using  WTP  is 

especially  strong.  In  such  cases,  beneficiaries  are  unlikely  to  be  helped  if  they  are 

required to pay more than they are willing to pay; and requiring them to do so is an insult 

38 

to their autonomy.72 But when the beneficiaries of environmental regulation pay little or 

none  of  the  costs,  the  regulation  might  be  justified  even  if  it  fails  CBA.  To  decide 

whether it is, it is necessary to identify the likely winners and losers. The most general 

conclusion is that CBA does not tell regulators all that they need to know; but without it, 

they will know far too little.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago
 
 
 
 

, IL  60637 
csunstei@m
 

idway.uchicago.edu 

                                                 
72 As I have emphasized, a low WTP does not mean that government should not subsidize the good; but 
regulation is not a subsidy.  

39 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An 
Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of 
Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study 
(August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An 
Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial 
Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) 
(April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and 
Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main 
Bank System (August 1993) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication 
(September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 
William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settleme
Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of 
Software (Au
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulele
David Friedman, 
More Justice for 
Daniel Shaviro, Bu
(January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Co
Daniel Ke
Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 
1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 

ssness, (October 1994) 
Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 

ssler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty 

dget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption 

ntract Damages (February 1995) 

nt Escrows (August 1994) 

gust 1994) 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5
. 
6
. 
7
. 
8
. 
9
. 

1

0. 

1
1
1

1. 
2. 
3. 

1
1

4. 
5. 

1

6. 

1

7. 

1

8. 

1
9. 
2
0. 
2
1. 
2
2. 
2
3. 
4. 
2
25. 
26
. 

27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31. 

3

2. 

33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 

40 

37. 

38

. 

39.
 
40. 

41. 

42.
43.

 
 

44.
 
45.
 
46.
 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 

66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 

70. 

53.  

 Financially 

ages (with Notes 

ics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership 

e Adoption of 

 Regimes: 

d Property Rig

hts: Or Do Good Fences Make Good 

plex World: A Generative Approach to th

er and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law

niel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Dam

David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry Concealed 

 and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from 

J. Mark Ramsey
996) 
Econometrics from Japan (January 1
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs an
Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Econom
of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and 
Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of
Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 
William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr.
California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Com
Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of 
Laissez-Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Da
on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  
William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation 
Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The 
Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law 
(March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowne
Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to La
Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Acti
Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm
Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dr
Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmi
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” 
(January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) 
Yannis
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academ
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular 
Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (M

amatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of 

 Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Informat

ic Enterprise (February 1999) 

ion Goods (February 1999) 

arch 1999) 

on, Police 

w and 

th and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) 

 
 1998) 

rs Better 

41 

71. 

72. 
73. 

74. 

75. 
76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 
81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 
95. 

96. 

97. 
98. 
99. 

100.
 
101.
 
102.
 
103.
 
104.
 

Legal 

e and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  

m M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right-to-

Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, 
Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1
999) 
Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Willia
Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Privat
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A 
Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 199
William M. Landes, Winni
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? 
(June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in 
Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999)
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 19
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Ka
Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, No

ndelegation Canons (September 1999) 

ng the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 

hneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? 

Obesity as a Function of 

9) 

 

99) 

Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to L

aw 

and Economics (September 19

99) 

Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 

Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 

Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing an

d Legal Decisionmaking: The Case 

of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 

87. 

Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Ma

rket Signaling of Personal Characteristics 

(November 1999) 

88. 

Matthew D. Ad

ler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are 

tive 

vember 

Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (No
1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Deriva
Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts 
(January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (Febru
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity
(February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Referen
Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised M
2002)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  

000)  

ay 

ce to 

ary 2000)  
 Shift 

42 

105.

 

106.
107.

 
 

108.

 

109.
 
110.
 
111. 
112.
 

113.

 

114.
 
115.
 
116.
 
117. 
118.
 
119.
 

120.
 
121. 

122.
 
123. 
124.
 
125. 

126. 
127.
 
128.
   
129. 

130. 

131.

   

132.
 
133.
 

134. 

135.
 
136.
 

137.

 

138. 
139. 

140. 

ach 

mer Finance (February 2001) 

 

:  A 

ovember 2000) 

 the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 

evmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) 

Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November
2000) 
Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System 
(November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations
Rational Choice Perspective (N
William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul L
Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious Liability, Class 
Actions and
William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An Economic Appro
(December 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 
Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consu
Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Specia
l Reference to Law) (March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost-Benefit Analysis:  A Positive Political Theory 
Perspective (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital A
ge (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the Conceptual 
Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act o
Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) 
Christopher Avery
Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)  
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
Richar
2001) 
Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Micr
Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent 
Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry:  Creating Cooperation through 
Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 
Richard  A.  Epst
(August 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property E
Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts 
Perspective (September 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law
Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections 
and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, an
2002) 

d A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 

, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal 

osoft:  The Declining Need for Centralized 

f 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) 

 (November 2001) 

xemption 

 

 

d the Doha “Solution” (February 

ein,  The  Allocation  of  the  Commons:  Parking  and  Stopping  on  the  Commons 

43 

141. 
142. 

144. 

145. 
146. 

147. 

148. 

149. 
150. 

151. 
152. 

153. 

156. 
157. 
158. 

159. 

160. 
161 

162. 

163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 

170. 

171. 
172. 
173. 
174. 

175. 

Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) 
Daniel
Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 200

 N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. 

2) 

143.  Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Disp

ute 

154.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) 
155. 

02, 

Decades:  Success or Failure (March 

view) 

TO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal Studies 2002) 

Resolution in the W
Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 20
forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Re
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three 
2002) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The 
Antitrust Bulletin) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture 
February 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulat
Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002; revised
March 2003) 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass
Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 

 R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference 

002) 

 

ion?  

2) 

sal and the 

ptember 2002) 

eptember 2002) 

 Markets: A Role for the Government as 

Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance
Insurer? (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on 
Interpretive Theory) (August 200
Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refu
Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (Se
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contra
Law (S
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperat
File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Confo
Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) 
Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (Novemb
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) 
Avraham D. Ta
(November 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for the Regulation o
Public Health (Decembe
Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxation a
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act o
1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 

bbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis 

nd Risk-Taking with Multiple Tax Rates (December 2002) 

rmity and Dissent (September 2002) 

er 2002) 

r 2002) 

ion on the 

f 

ct 

f 

44 

195.  William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: 

176. 

177. 

178. 

179. 

180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 

187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191.  
192. 
193. 
194. 

196. 

197. 

198. 

199. 

200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 
204. 

205. 
206. 
207. 

208. 

209. 

210. 
211. 
212. 

ns: Iowa Utilities 

ct Come with the 1996 

i Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 

rect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An Economic 

David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short-Term Assets 
(January 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman A
Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunicatio
and Verizon (January 2003) 
William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indi
Perspective (February 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 
Amita
Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein,
 The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Cou
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WT
Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) 
Richard A. Ep
Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of
Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) 
David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (Septembe
2003) 

stein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) 

 and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) 

 Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) 

O Jurisprudence (May 2003) 

ntervailing Measures (May 

003) 

r 

What Was the 
Labor between 1985 

ry Investigation (September 2003)  

nbundling Advertising and Content (September 

 Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage 

Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm 
and 2000? (September 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence
(September 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: U
2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts 
of Appeals: A Prelimina
Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure 
Time (October 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Tw
David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 
2004) 
David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in 
2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and
Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of 
Statistical Lives (February 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A 
Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceu
Steady the Course on Hatch-Waxman (March 2004) 
Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Co
Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus
Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004) 

 John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) 

2003) 
ilight (October 2003) 

the Foundations of Copyright Law (April 

mplexity of Legal Rules (April 2004) 

 Ad Bellum (April 2004) 

Critique of the 

tical Patents: 

45 

213. 

214. 

215. 

216. 
217. 
218. 

219. 

220.  

221. 
222. 
223. 
224. 

225. 
226. 
227. 

or 

 2004) 

een Law Firms (April 2004) 

e Legal Services Industry (April 2004) 

tkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, Company Stock, 

 Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004) 

Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Lab
within and betw
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of 
Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from th
James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the Market for 
Underwriting Business (July
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman and Eric
Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. U
Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Mark
(August 2004, revised October 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross-C
Perceptions (August 2004) 
M. Todd Henderson and James C. Spindler, Corporate Herroin: A Defense of Perks (August 200
Eric A
. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Cyber Security: Of Heterogenity and Autarky (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Unbundling Scope-of-Permission Goods: When Should We Invest in Reduci
Entry Barriers? (September 2004) 
Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing through Law (September 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of the Use of Citations in the 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Environment (October 2004) 
 

ultural Risk 

Law (2000) 

ets 

ng 

4) 

46 

