New School

Fear and Liberty 
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein 
Source: 
Social Research, Vol. 71, No. 4, FEAR: ITS POLITICAL USES & ABUSES (WINTER 2004), pp. 
967-996
 
Published by: 
Stable URL: 
Accessed: 22-10-2015 20:17 UTC

http://www.jstor.org/stable/40971987

New School

 

 

 

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

New School is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Social Research.

 

 

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass R. Sunstein 
Fear and Liberty 

INTRODUCTION 
When a nation's security is threatened, are civil liberties at undue 
risk? If so, why? Consider a plausible account. In the midst of external 
threats, public overreactions are predictable. Simply because of fear, 
the public and its leaders will favor measures that do little to protect 
security but that compromise important forms of freedom.1 The intern- 
ment of Japanese-Americans during World War II is perhaps the most 
salient example, but there are many more. Consider, for example, the 
McCarthy period, restrictions on dissident speech during World War 
I, Lincoln's suspension of habeas corpus during the Civil War, and the 
imposition of martial law in Hawaii in 1941. Many people believe that 
some of the actions of the Bush administration, in the aftermath of the 
September 11 attack, fall in the same basic category. Is it really neces- 
sary to hold suspected terrorists in prison in Guantánamo? For how 
long? For the rest of their lives? 

In explaining how public fear might produce unjustified intru- 
sions on civil liberties, I emphasize two potential sources of error: the 
availability heuristic and probability neglect. The availability heuris- 
tic, widely used by ordinary people, can lead to a grossly exaggerated 
sense of risk, as salient incidents make citizens think that a risk is far 
more serious than it actually is. When probability neglect is at work, 
people focus on the "worst case" and disregard the question whether 
it is likely that the worst case will occur - an approach that can also 
lead to excessive regulation. With an understanding of the availability 
heuristic and probability neglect, I believe that we are able to have a 
better appreciation of the sources of unsupportable intrusions on civil 

social research  Vol 71 : No 4 : Winter 2004 

967 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

liberties. But there is an additional factor, one that requires a shift from 
psychological dynamics to political ones. In responding to security 
threats, government often imposes selective rather than broad restric- 
tions on liberty. Selectivity creates serious risks. If the restrictions are 
selective, most of the public will not face them, and hence the ordinary 
political checks on unjustified restrictions are not activated. In these 
circumstances, public fear of national security risks might well lead to 
excessive restrictions of civil liberties. 

What is necessary, then, is a set of safeguards that will insure 
against those restrictions. In constitutional democracies, some of those 
safeguards are provided by courts, usually through interpretation of the 
Constitution. The problem is that courts often lack the information to 
know whether and when intrusions on civil liberties are justified. Civil 
libertarians neglect this point, tending to think that the meaning of the 
Constitution does not change in the face of intense public fear. This view 
is implausible. The legitimacy of government action depends on the 
strength of the arguments it can muster in its favor; and if national secu- 
rity is genuinely at risk, the arguments will inevitably seem, and will often 
be, unusually strong. In the context of safety and health regulation gener- 
ally, cost-benefit analysis is a partial corrective against both excessive and 
insufficient fear; and sometimes courts can use a form of cost-benefit anal- 
ysis as a check on overzealous and inadequate regulation. When national 
security is threatened, cost-benefit analysis is far less promising, because 
the probability of an attack usually cannot be estimated. 

But this does not mean that courts cannot play a constructive 
role. I suggest three possible approaches. First, courts should ordinarily 
require restrictions on civil liberties to be authorized by the legislature, 
not simply by the executive. Second, courts should give more skeptical 
scrutiny to measures that restrict the liberty of identifiable minorities, 
simply because the ordinary political safeguards are unreliable when 
the burdens imposed by law are not widely shared. Third, case-by-case 
balancing, by courts, might well authorize excessive intrusions into 
liberties- and hence clear rules and strong presumptions, for all their 
rigidity, might work better than balancing in the actual world. 

968 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

EXCESSIVE FEAR 
Why might the public show excessive fear, in a way that leads to unjus- 
tified responses to external threats or risks generally? Two mechanisms 
play a large role. 

A. Availability 
Begin with the availability heuristic. When presented with hard ques- 
tions, people often ask themselves easier questions, which serve to 
simplify their inquiry (Kahneman and Frederick, 2002; Jolis et al., 1998: 
1518-1519). The answer to the easier questions operates as a heuristic 
or a rule of thumb. Of these rules of thumb, the "availability heuris- 
tic" is probably the most important for purposes of understanding 
national security and risk regulation. Thus, for example, "a class whose 
instances are easily retrieved will appear more numerous than a class 
of equal frequency whose instances are less retrievable" (TVersky and 
Kahneman, 1986: 38, 55). The point very much bears on private and 
public responses to risks, suggesting, for example, that people will be 
especially fearful of the dangers of AIDS, crime, earthquakes, terror- 
ism, and nuclear power plant accidents if examples are easy to recall 
(Slovic, 2000a: 37-48). 

In this way, familiarity can affect the availability of instances. But 
salience is important as well. "The impact of seeing a house burning on 
the subjective probability of such accidents is probably greater than the 
impact of reading about a fire in the local paper" (Slovic, 2000a: 37-48). 
Similarly, earlier events will have a smaller impact than later ones. The 
point helps explain much about fear and about human behavior with 
respect to personal safety and risk. For example, whether people will 
buy insurance for natural disasters is greatly affected by recent experi- 
ences (Slovic, 2000a: 40). If floods have not occurred in the immedi- 
ate past, people who live on flood plains are far less likely to purchase 
insurance (Slovic, 2000a: 40). In the aftermath of an earthquake, insur- 
ance for earthquakes rises sharply- but it declines steadily from that 
point, as vivid memories recede (Slovic, 2000a: 40). For purposes of law 
and regulation, the problem is that the availability heuristic can lead to 

Fear and Liberty  969 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

serious errors of fact, in terms of both excessive controls on small risks 
that are cognitively available and insufficient controls on large risks 
that are not. 

What, in particular, produces availability? An illuminating study 
attempts to test the effects of ease of imagery on perceived judgments 
of risk (Sherman et al., 2002: 82). The experimenters asked subjects to 
read about an illness (Hyposcenia-B) that "was becoming increasingly 
prevalent" on the local campus. In one condition, the symptoms were 
concrete and easy to imagine -  involving muscle aches, low energy, and 
frequent severe headaches. In another condition, the symptoms were 
vague and hard to imagine, involving an inflamed liver, a malfunc- 
tioning nervous system, and a vague sense of disorientation. Subjects 
in both conditions were asked both to imagine a three-week period 
in which they had the disease and to write a detailed description of 
what they imagined. After doing so, subjects were asked to assess, on 
a 10-point scale, their likelihood of contracting the disease. The basic 
finding was that likelihood judgments were very different in the two 
conditions, with easily imagined symptoms making people far more 
inclined to believe that they were likely to get the disease (Sherman et 
al., 2002: 88). 

There are several implications for fear, policy, and law. The public 
demand for law should be much higher if people can easily imagine 
the harm in question; in such cases, the law might well reflect a kind 
of hysteria. But if the harm is difficult to imagine, we might well see 
a pattern of neglect. We would therefore predict that easily imagin- 
able harms will lead to relatively greater private precautions and rela- 
tively greater governmental concern. Well-organized private groups 
should, and do, take advantage of this fact, attempting to publicize 
visible examples of harms to which they seek to draw attention. Many 
such groups work as "availability entrepreneurs," invoking particular 
events in order to drive public fear in their preferred directions (Kuran 
and Sunstein, 1999). Terrorists might be seen, in this light, as extreme 
examples of availability entrepreneurs, using vivid examples to harm 
to suggest that people "cannot be safe anywhere." 

970 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Because safety is always a matter of degree, the idea of "being 
safe" is itself preposterous; but when an incident is highly salient, 
people are likely to exaggerate the likelihood of its occurrence. And 
when exaggerations occur, excessive precautions are likely, in a way 
that might well lead to unjustified restrictions on liberty. The McCarthy 
period is an example. In fact, communist agents, most famously Alger 
Hiss, were in the government in the 1930s and 1940s, but a few avail- 
able incidents, including the Hiss case, led, in many circles, to a kind of 
fear-driven witch hunt that could not be justified by the reality of the 
1950s. 

B. Probability Neglect 
The availability heuristic can produce an inaccurate assessment of prob- 
ability. But sometimes people will attempt to make little assessment of 
probability at all, especially when strong emotions are involved. Fear 
can be impervious to the fact that it is highly unlikely that the risk 
will come to fruition. In such cases, large-scale variations in probabili- 
ties matter little - even when those variations unquestionably should 
make a big difference. The point applies to hope as well as fear; vivid 
images of good outcomes can crowd out consideration of probability 
too. Lotteries are successful partly for this reason, and state govern- 
ments make strategic use of probability neglect to convince people to 
play. Governmental responses to fear are often driven by probability 
neglect too. 

Probability neglect has received its most direct empirical confir- 
mation in a striking study of people's willingness to pay to avoid elec- 
tric shocks.2 The central purpose of the study was to test the relevance 
of probability in "affect rich" decisions. One experiment investigated 
whether varying the probability of harm would matter more, or less, 
in settings that trigger strong emotions than in settings that seem rela- 
tively emotion-free. In the relatively emotion-free setting, participants 
were told that the experiment entailed some chance of a $20 penalty. 
In the "strong emotion" setting, participants were asked to imagine 
that they would participate in an experiment involving some chance 

Fear and Liberty  971 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

of a "short, painful, but not dangerous electric shock" (Rottenstreich 
and Hsee, 2001: 181). Participants were asked to say how much they 
would be willing to pay to avoid participating in the relevant experi- 
ment. Some participants were told that there was a 1 percent chance 
of receiving the bad outcome (either the $20 loss or the electric shock); 
others were told that the chance was 99 percent; and still others were 
told that the chance was 100 percent. 

The key result was that variations in probability affected those 
facing the relatively emotion-free injury, the $20 penalty, far more 
than they affected people facing the more emotionally evocative 
outcome of an electric shock. For the cash penalty, the difference 
between the median payment for a 1 percent chance and the median 
payment for a 99 percent chance was predictably large and indeed 
broadly consistent with standard theories of economic rationality: $1 
to avoid a 1 percent chance, and $18 to avoid a 99 percent chance. 
For the electric shock, by contrast, the difference in probability made 
little difference to median willingness to pay: $7 to avoid a 1 percent 
chance, and $10 to avoid a 99 percent chance. Apparently people will 
pay a significant amount to avoid a small probability of a hazard that 
is affectively laden - and the amount that they will pay will not vary 
greatly with changes in probability. 

To investigate the role of probability and emotions in responses 
to risk, I conducted an experiment, asking 83 University of Chicago 
law students to describe their maximum willingness to pay to reduce 
levels of arsenic in drinking water (Sunstein, 2002a). Participants were 
randomly sorted into four groups, representing the four conditions 
in the experiment. In the first condition, people were asked to state 
their maximum willingness to pay to eliminate a cancer risk of 1 in 
1,000,000. In the second condition, people were asked to state their 
maximum willingness to pay to eliminate a cancer risk of 1 in 100,000. 
In the third condition, people were asked the same question as in the 
first, but the cancer was described in vivid terms, as "very gruesome 
and intensely painful, as the cancer eats away at the internal organs of 
the body." In the fourth condition, people were asked the same ques- 

972 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

tion as in the second, but the cancer was described in the same terms 
as in the third condition. The central hypothesis was that the probabil- 
ity variations would matter far less in the highly emotional conditions 
than in the less emotional conditions. More specifically, it was predicted 
that differences in probability would make little or no difference in 
the highly emotional conditions - and that such variations would have 
real importance in the less emotional conditions. It was also expected 
that the tenfold difference in probabilities - between 1/100,000 and 
1/1,000,000 - would not, in either condition, generate a tenfold differ- 
ence in willingness to pay. 

The result for the central hypothesis was confirmed. With an 
unemotional description, the difference in probability produced a 
statistically significant difference in mean willingness to pay; with an 
emotional description, the difference was smaller and was not statisti- 
cally significant. The second hypothesis was also supported. Consistent 
with other work on probability neglect, varying the probability had 
a relatively weak effect on people's willingness to pay: The tenfold 
increase in the risk produced barely more than a doubling of mean will- 
ingness to pay. From this experiment, there is one other noteworthy 
result. By itself, making the description of the cancer more emotional 
had a large effect on mean willingness to pay. 

For an example of probability neglect in the particular context of 
risks of terrorism, consider an illuminating study by W. Kip Viscusi and 
Richard Zeckhauser (2003). The authors used surveys to see how much 
people are willing to pay to reduce stated risks of terrorism. The median 
willingness to pay (WTP) to decrease the current risk to 1/1,000,000 was 
$25; the median WTP to decrease the current risk to 1/10,000,000 was 
$27; the median WTP to reduce to current risk to zero was $50 (Viscusi 
and Zeckhauser, 2003: 116). Thus a tenfold difference in risk- from 
1/1,000,000 to 1/10,000,000- produced no significant difference in 
WTP. This finding is clear evidence of probability neglect, caused by the 
emotional valence of the idea of terrorism risk. As the authors state: 
"Whether the terrorism risk is reduced to 50% of its current level, 1 in 1 
million per flight, or 1 in 10 million per flight or zero," does not produce 

Fear and Liberty 973 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

"significantly different" willingness to pay, and hence "[d]oing something 
about terrorism risks that is incomplete but beneficial consequently has 
a fairly similar attractiveness across" options (Viscusi and Zeckhauser, 
2003: 116). Here too a form of probability neglect seems to be at work. 

An understanding of probability neglect casts new light on the 
finding that visualization or imagery matters a great deal to people's 
reactions to risks (Slovic et al, 2000b). When an image of a bad outcome 
is easily accessible, people will become greatly concerned about a risk, 
holding probability constant (Loewenstein, 2001). And when people are 
asked how much they will pay for flight insurance for losses result- 
ing from "terrorism," they will pay more than if they are asked how 
much they will pay for flight insurance from all causes (see Johnson et 
al., 1993). The evident explanation for this peculiar result is that the 
word "terrorism" evokes vivid images of disaster, thus crowding out 
probability judgments. Note also that when people discuss a low-prob- 
ability risk, their concern rises even if the discussion consists mostly of 
apparently trustworthy assurances that the likelihood of harm really is 
infinitesimal (Alkahami and Slovic, 1994: 1094). The reason is that the 
discussion makes it easier to visualize the risk and hence to fear it. 

The implication for restrictions on civil liberties should be clear. If 
an external threat registers as such, it is possible that people will focus 
on the worst-case scenario, without considering its (low) probability. The 
result will be steps that cannot be justified by reality. The internment 
of Japanese-Americans during World War II undoubtedly had a great 
deal to do with probability neglect. A vivid sense of the worst case - of 
collaboration by Japanese-Americans with our enemy, producing a kind 
of Pearl Harbor for the West Coast - helped to fuel a step that went far 
beyond what was necessary or useful to respond to the threat. 

Both the availability heuristic and probability neglect can be 
connected to "dual process" approaches of the sort that have received 
considerable recent attention in psychology (see generally Kahneman 
and Frederick, 2002). According to such approaches, people use two 
cognitive systems. System I is rapid, intuitive, and error-prone; System 
II is more deliberative, calculative, slower, and more likely to be error- 

974 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

free. Heuristic-based thinking is rooted in System I; it is subject to over- 
ride, under certain conditions, by System II (Kahneman and Frederick, 
2002).3 For purposes of policy and law, an important task is to develop 
institutions and rights that create a kind of System II corrective to 
heuristic-driven judgments and probability neglect, simply because 
these produce errors and serious risks of their own. 

C. Social  Dimensions 
My emphasis thus far has been on individual thinking about risks. But 
of course social influences are quite important. Sometimes availability 
and salience spread through social bandwagons or cascades, in which 
apparently representative anecdotes and gripping examples move 
rapidly from one person to another. In fact, a process of this sort played 
a large role in the 2002 Washington area sniper attacks, in the 2001 
anthrax attacks, and in many other sets of social processes produc- 
ing public fear. Consider a stylized example. Andrew hears of a social 
risk, which he finds to be revealing or illustrative. (The event might 
involve crime, environmental hazards, or threats to national security.) 
Andrew tells Barry, who would be inclined to see the event as not terri- 
bly informative, but who, seeing Andrew's reaction, comes to believe 
that the event does indeed reveal a great deal. Once Carol hears from 
Andrew and Barry, she is likely to find it revealing as well. Deborah will 
require a great deal of private information to reject the shared opinion 
of Andrew, Barry, and Carol (Hirschleifer, 1995). Stylized though it is, 
the example shows that once several people start to take an example 
as probative, many people may come to be influenced by their opinion, 
giving rise to cascade effects. For example, vivid examples, alongside 
social interactions, account for decisions to purchase insurance against 
natural disasters (Gersen, 2001). In the domain of social risks, "avail- 
ability cascades" are responsible for many social beliefs (Kuran and 
Sunstein, 1999). The point is amplified by the fact that fear-inducing 
accounts, with high emotional valence, are peculiarly likely to spread. 
There is a closely related phenomenon. Processes of social delib- 
eration typically lead like-minded people to accept a more extreme 

Fear and Liberty  975 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

version of the views with which they began (Sunstein, 2000). This is the 
process known as group polarization (Moscovici and Zavalloni, 1969). If 
several people fear global warming, and speak to one another, their fear 
is likely to increase as a result of internal discussions. If group members 
believe that the United States cannot be trusted in its dealings with 
other nations, that very belief is likely to be heightened after members 
have started to talk. Group polarization has not been studied in connec- 
tion with the availability heuristic. But the clear implication is that 
the effect of certain available examples will become greatly amplified 
through group discussion. 

Suppose, for example, that several people are discussing a recent 
wave of sniper attacks, or cases involving the kidnapping of young 
girls, or situations in which the government has wrongly ignored a seri- 
ous foreign threat. If the particular examples are mentioned, they are 
likely to stick. And if the group has a predisposition to think that one 
or another risk is serious, social dynamics will lead the group to believe 
that the example is highly revealing. So too if the group is fearful. An 
initial predisposition toward fear is likely to be aggravated as a result of 
collective deliberations. 

It should be clear that in the real world, some voices are more 
important than others, especially when availability and salience are 
involved. In particular, the behavior and preoccupations of the media 
play a large role. Many perceived "epidemics" are in reality no such 
thing, but instead a product of media coverage of gripping, unrepre- 
sentative incidents (Best, 1999). Attention to those incidents is likely 
to ensure availability and salience, promoting an inaccurately high 
estimate of probability and at the same time some degree of probabil- 
ity neglect. And in the face of close media attention, the demand for 
governmental responses will be significantly affected. 

EXCESSIVE  FEAR  AND  NATIONAL  SECURITY 

A. Bad Balancing 
We are now in a position to make some general claims about why indi- 
viduals and governments might overreact to perceived social risks, 

976 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

including the risks of terrorism. A readily available incident is likely to 
lead people to exaggerate the threat. If the media focuses on one or a 
few incidents, public fear might be grossly disproportionate to reality. 
And if one or a few incidents are not only salient but emotionally grip- 
ping, people might not think about probability at all. Both private and 
public institutions will overreact. It is easy to think of examples. This 
is almost certainly what happened in the case of the anthrax attacks in 
the United States of 2001, in which a few incidents led both private and 
public institutions to exaggerate a small threat. 

Now suppose that in any situation there is some kind of balanc- 
ing between security and civil liberty. Suppose, that is, that the degree of 
appropriate intrusion into the domain of liberty is partly a function of the 
improved security that comes from the intrusion. The problem is that if 
people are more fearful than they ought to be, they will seek or tolerate 
incursions into the domain of liberty that could not be justified if fear 
were not disproportionate. 
If there is an optimal tradeoff among the relè 
vant variables, the availability heuristic and probability neglect, combined 
with social influences, will inevitably produce a tradeoff that is less than 
optimal- that unduly sacrifices liberty at the expense of security. In the 
context of threats to national security, it is predictable that governments 
will infringe on civil liberties without adequate justification. 

B. Better Balancing? Dual Processing, System II, and Cost-Benefit Analysis 
Are institutional correctives possible? In the context of ordinary risk 
regulation, cost-benefit analysis, understood as an effort to catalogue 
the consequences of both risk and risk reduction, is a possible remedy. 
In fact cost-benefit analysis can be understood as an institutionalized 
System II safeguard against System I errors on the part of ordinary citi- 
zens and even public officials. If the government attempts to assess the 
costs and benefits of regulation, it can provide a measure of protection 
against both public hysteria and public torpor (Sunstein, 2002b). Such 
an assessment might show that a risk that is causing a great deal of fear 
is actually low; it might demonstrate that the public is neglecting a 
danger that threatens to kill many people. 

Fear and Liberty  977 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Of course a large problem is how to quantify the variables 
involved. In the context of risks to national security, cost-benefit anal- 
ysis runs into especially formidable obstacles, because calculation of 
the expected benefits of risk reduction is at best guesswork. Frequently 
regulators are operating in circumstances of uncertainty rather than 
risk. They cannot calculate the probability that harm will occur - an 
informational gap that confounds formal analysis of the benefits of 
regulation. In its 2003 report to Congress, the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) lists no fewer than 69 regulations related to home- 
land security, including regulations governing agricultural bioterror- 
ism, screening aliens and others seeking flight training, requiring 
identification cards for border crossing, registering and monitoring 
certain nonimmigrants, and governing terrorism risk insurance. For 
almost all of these 69 regulations, neither costs nor benefits were quan- 
tified. OMB emphasizes that "the difficulty in estimating the likely 
benefits from a particular regulatory action" is a product not only of 
the difficulty of predicting a terrorist attack, but also of the fact that 
terrorists "can react and respond to the security and other counterter- 
rorism measures that the government and private sector adopt" (OMB 
report to Congress, 2003: 83). 

But even when deciding about how to reduce risks associated 
with terrorism, an informal version of cost-benefit analysis is unques- 
tionably at work. The risk of terrorist attacks could surely be reduced if 
the nation eliminated all airline flights, but the costs of eliminating all 
airline flights is simply too high. So too, it would be possible to require 
all those who attend baseball games to present their identification in 
order to gain admission, but the benefits of this requirement would 
be far too low to justify the (admittedly low) costs. When restrictions 
are imposed, a rough assessment of both benefits and costs is necessar- 
ily involved. In fact, the OMB has shown considerable interest in more 
formal analyses of antiterrorism measures, even recognizing the formi- 
dable informational barriers to such analyses (OMB report to Congress, 
2003: 85). To say the least, it is exceptionally difficult not only to esti- 
mate probabilities but also to monetize some of the relevant costs (for 

978 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

example, curtailment of civil rights and liberties); but the effort to do so 
can be seen as an institutional check on cognitive processes that might 
produce either hysteria or neglect. 

C. Worse Balancing: Selective Restrictions 
In the context of national security, and indeed more generally, an 
understanding of the problem of excessive fear must make an impor- 
tant distinction. We can imagine restrictions on liberty that apply to all 
or most - as in, for example, a general increase in security procedures 
at airports, or a measure that subjects everyone, citizens and nonciti- 
zens alike, to special scrutiny when they are dealing with substances 
that might be used in bioterrorism. We can also imagine restrictions 
on liberty that apply to some or few - as in, for example, restrictions 
on Japanese-Americans, racial profiling, or the confinement of enemy 
aliens at Guantánamo. When restrictions apply to all or most, political 
safeguards provide a strong check on unjustified government action. If 
the burden of the restriction is widely shared, it is unlikely to be accept- 
able unless most people are convinced that there is good reason for it; 
and for genuinely burdensome restrictions, people will not be easily 
convinced unless a good reason is apparent or provided. (I put to one 
side the possibility that because of the mechanisms I have discussed, 
people will think that a good reason exists whether or not it does.) But 
if the restriction is imposed on an identifiable subgroup, the political 
check is absent. Liberty-reducing 
intrusions can be imposed even if they 
are difficult to justify. 

These claims can be illuminated by a glance at the views of 
Friedrich Hayek about the rule of law. Hayek (1960) writes, "If all that 
is prohibited and enjoined is prohibited and enjoined for all without 
exception," then "little that anybody may reasonably wish to do is 
likely to be prohibited." Hence "how comparatively innocuous, even 
if irksome, are most such restrictions imposed on literally everybody, 
as ...  compared with those that are likely to be imposed only on 
some!" Thus it is "significant that most restrictions on what we regard 
as private affairs, such as sumptuary legislation, have usually been 

Fear and Liberty  979 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

imposed only on selected groups of people or, as in the case of prohibi- 
tion, were practicable only because the government reserved the right 
to grant exceptions." Hayek urges, in short, that the risk of unjustified 
burdens dramatically increases if they are selective and if most people 
have nothing to worry about. The claim is especially noteworthy in situ- 
ations in which public fear is producing restrictions on civil liberties. 
People are likely to ask, with some seriousness, whether their fear is 
in fact justified if steps that follow from it impose burdensome conse- 
quences on them. But if indulging fear is costless, because a select few 
face the relevant burdens, then the mere fact of "risk," and the mere 
presence of fear, will seem to provide a sufficient justification. 

D. Tradeoff Neglect 
Consider in this light Howard Margolis's (1996) effort to explain why 
experts and ordinary people sharply diverge with respect to certain 
risks. Margolis thinks that in some cases, ordinary people are alert to 
the hazards of some activity, but not much alert to its benefits, which 
are cognitively "off-screen." In such cases, people will tend to think, 
"Better safe than sorry," and they will have a highly negative reaction 
to the risk. In such cases, they will demand aggressive and immedi- 
ate regulation. In other cases, the benefits of the activity will be very 
much on people's minds, but not the hazards - in which case they will 
tend to think, "Nothing ventured, nothing gained." In such cases, they 
will think that regulators are overzealous, even fanatics. In still other 
cases - in Margolis's view, the cases in which observers are being most 
sensible- both benefits and risks will be "on-screen," and people will 
assess risks by comparing the benefits with the costs. 

Margolis offers a nice example to support this prediction. The 
removal of asbestos from public schools in New York City was initially 
quite popular, indeed demanded by fearful parents, even though experts 
believed that the risks were statistically small. But when it emerged that 
the removal would cause schools to be closed for a period of weeks, and 
when the closing caused parents to become greatly inconvenienced, 
parental attitudes turned around, and asbestos removal seemed like a 

980 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

really bad idea. When the costs of the removal came on-screen, parents 
thought much more like experts, and the risks of asbestos seemed like 
the risks of X-rays: Statistically small, not a source of significant fear, 
and on balance worth incurring. In this light it is both mildly coun- 
terintuitive and reasonable to predict that people would be willing to 
pay less, in terms of dollars and waiting time, to reduce low-probability 
risks of an airplane disaster if they are frequent travelers. A preliminary 
study (Harrington, 2002) finds exactly that effect. 

It is only natural, in this light, that those concerned about civil 
liberties try to promote empathetic identification with those at risk 
or to make people fearful that they are themselves in danger. The 
point of the effort at identification is to place the relevant burdens or 
costs "on-screen," and hence to broaden the class of people burdened 
by government action, if only through an act of imagination. Pastor 
Martin Niemoller's remarks about Germany in the 1940s have often 
been quoted by civil libertarians: "First they came for the socialists, and 
I did not speak out because I was not a socialist. Then they came for the 
trade unionists, and I did not speak out because I was not a trade union- 
ist. Then they came for the Jews, and I did not speak out because I was 
not a Jew. Then they came for me, and there was no one left to speak 
for me." In many situations, the apparent lesson of this tale is empiri- 
cally doubtful. If "they" come for some, it does not at all follow that 
"they" will eventually come for me. Everything depends on the nature 
of "they" and of "me." But the tale is psychologically acute; it attempts 
to inculcate, in those who hear it, a fear that the risks of an overreach- 
ing government cannot easily be cabined. 

The danger of unjustified infringement is amplified when the 
victims of the infringement can be seen as an identifiable group that 
is readily separable from "us." Stereotyping of groups significantly 
increases when people are in a state of fear; and if people are primed 
to think about their own death, they are more likely to think and act 
in accordance with group-based stereotypes (von Hippel et al., 2003). 
Experimental findings of this kind support the intuitive idea that when 
people are afraid, they are far more likely to tolerate government action 

Fear and Liberty  981 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

that abridges the freedom of members of some "out-group." And if this 
is the case, responses to social fear, in the form of infringements on 
liberties, will not receive the natural political checks that arise when 
majorities suffer as well as benefit from them. The simple idea here is 
that liberty-infringing 
action is most likely to be justified if those who 
support that action are also burdened by it; in that event, the political 
process contains a built-in protection against unjustifiable restrictions. 
In all cases, it follows that government needs some methods for ensur- 
ing against excessive reactions to social risks, including unjustified 
intrusions on civil liberties. 

PROTECTING LIBERTY 
It would be possible to take the arguments just made as a reason for an 
aggressive judicial role in the protection of civil liberties, even when 
national security is threatened. But there are real complications here.4 
Taking a page from the environmentalists' book, let us notice that the 
availability heuristic and probability neglect might be leading people 
not to overstate risks but to take previously overlooked hazards seri- 
ously - to pay attention to hazards that had not previously appeared on 
the public viewscreen. In the environmental context, the point seems 
right; readily available incidents help to mobilize people formerly 
suffering from torpor and indifference. The cognitive processes that 
produce excessive fear can counteract insufficient fear. 

The same might well be true of risks to national security. Indeed, 
lax airline security measures before 9/11 were undoubtedly a product 
of the "unavailability" of terrorist attacks. Availability bias, produced 
by the availability heuristic, is accompanied by unavailability bias, 
produced by the same heuristic. If an incident does not come to mind, 
both individuals and institutions should be expected to take insuffi- 
cient precautions, even in the face of expert warnings (as in fact were 
commonly voiced about the absence of careful security measures before 
the 9/11 attacks). Probability neglect can produce intense fear of low- 
probability risks; but when risks do not capture attention at all, they 
might be treated as zero, even though they deserve considerable atten- 

982 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

tion. Much of the time, public fear is bipolar: either dangers appear 
"significant" or they appear not to exist at all. The mechanisms I have 
discussed help explain hysterical overreactions, but they can provide 
corrections against neglect as well. 

There is also an institutional point. Courts are not, to say the least, 
in a good position to know whether restrictions on civil liberty are defen- 
sible. They lack the fact-finding competence that would enable them to 
make accurate assessments of the dangers. They are hardly experts on 
the question whether the release of a dozen prisoners at Guantánamo 
would create a nontrivial risk of a terrorist attack. It is quite possible 
that an aggressive judicial posture in the protection of civil liberties, 
amid war, would make things far worse rather than better. In any case, 
courts are traditionally reluctant to interfere with publicly supported 
restrictions on civil liberties; they do not like simply to "block" restric- 
tions that have both official and citizen approval (Rehnquist, 1998). 

I suggest that courts should and can approach the relevant 
issues through an institutional lens, one that plays close attention to 
the underlying psychological and political dynamics. There are three 
points here. The first and most important is that restrictions on civil 
liberties should not be permitted unless they have unambiguous legis- 
lative authorization. Such restrictions should not be allowed to come 
from the president alone. The second point is that in order to protect 
against unjustified responses to fear, courts should be relatively more 
skeptical of intrusions on liberty that are not general and that burden 
identifiable groups. The third and final point is that constitutional 
principles should reflect second-order balancing, producing rules and 
presumptions, rather than ad hoc balancing. The reason is that under 
the pressure of the moment, courts are likely to favor the government, 
even when they should not. 

A. The Principle of Clear Statement 
For many years, Israel's General Security Service has engaged in certain 
forms of physical coercion, sometimes described as torture, against 
suspected terrorists. According to the General Security Service, these 

Fear and Liberty  983 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

practices occurred only in extreme cases and as a last resort, when 
deemed necessary to prevent terrorist activity and significant loss of 
life. Nonetheless, practices worthy of the name "torture" did occur, 
and they were not rare. Those practices were challenged before the 
Supreme Court of Israel on the ground that they were inconsistent 
with the nation's fundamental law. The government responded that 
abstractions about human rights should not be permitted to overcome 
real-world necessities so as to ban a practice that was, in certain circum- 
stances, genuinely essential to prevent massive deaths in an area of 
the world that was often subject to terrorist activity. According to the 
government, physical coercion was justified in these circumstances. A 
judicial decision to the opposite effect would be a form of unjustified 
activism, even hubris. 

In deciding the case, the Supreme Court of Israel refused to resolve 
the most fundamental questions (Association for Civil Rights in Israel v. The 
General Security Service, 1999). It declined to say whether the practices of 
the security forces would be illegitimate if expressly authorized by a 
democratic legislature. But the court nonetheless held that those prac- 
tices were unlawful. The court's principal argument was that if such 
coercion were to be acceptable, it could not be because the General 
Security Service, with its narrow agenda, said so. At a minimum, the 
disputed practices must be endorsed by the national legislature, after a 
full democratic debate on the precise question. "[T]his is an issue that 
must be decided by the legislature branch which represents the people. 
We do not take any stand on this matter at this time. It is there that 
various considerations must be weighed." 

It is worthwhile to pause over a central feature of this deci- 
sion. Instead of deciding the fundamental issue, the court relied on 
the inadequacy, from the democratic point of view, of a judgment by 
the General Security Service alone. To say the least, members ofthat 
organization do not represent a broad spectrum of society. It is all too 
likely that people who work with the General Security Service will 
share points of view and frames of reference. When such people delib- 
erate with one another, group polarization is likely to be at work; the 

984 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

participants will probably strengthen, rather than test, their existing 
convictions, very possibly to the detriment of human rights. A broader 
debate, with a greater range of views, is a necessary precondition for 
coercion of this sort. The Supreme Court of Israel required clear legis- 
lative authorization for this particular intrusion on liberty; it insisted 
that executive action, under a vague or ambiguous law, would not be 
enough. 

We can generalize from this decision to suggest that as a rule, the 
legislative branch of government must explicitly authorize disputed 
infringements on civil liberty. The reason for this safeguard is to ensure 
against inadequately considered restrictions - and to insist that politi- 
cal safeguards, in the form of authorization from a deliberative branch 
of government with diverse members, are a minimal precondition for 
intrusions on civil liberties. A special risk is that group polarization, 
within the executive branch, will lead to steps that have not been subject 
to sufficiently broad debate. Deliberation within the legislative branch 
is more likely to ensure that restrictions on liberty are actually defen- 
sible. Precisely because of its size and diversity, a legislature is more 
likely to contain people who will speak for those who are burdened, 
and hence legislative processes have some potential for producing the 
protection that Hayek identifies with the rule of law. In these ways, 
the requirement of clear legislative statement enlists the idea of checks 
and balances in the service of individual rights - not through flat bans 
on government action, but through requiring two, rather than one, 
branches of government to approve. 

In the United States, a good model here is the remarkable deci- 
sion in Kent v. Dulles (1958), decided at the height of the Cold War. In that 
case, the Supreme Court was asked to consider whether the secretary of 
state could deny a passport to Rockwell Kent, an American citizen who 
was a member of the Communist Party. Kent argued that the denial 
was a violation of his constitutional rights and should be invalidated 
for that reason. The court responded by refusing to rule on the consti- 
tutional question. Instead it said that, at a minimum, any denial of a 
passport on these grounds would have to be specifically authorized by 

Fear and Liberty  985 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Congress. The court therefore struck down the decision of the secretary 
of state because Congress had not explicitly authorized the executive to 
deny passports in cases of this kind. 

Kent v. Dulles has been followed by many cases holding that the 
executive cannot intrude into constitutionally sensitive domains unless 
Congress has squarely authorized it to do so. What I am adding here is 
that because of the risk of excessive or unjustified fear, this is a salutary 
approach whenever restrictions on civil liberty follow from actual or 
perceived external threats. If congressional authorization is required, 
courts have a simple question to ask in cases in which the Bush admin- 
istration is alleged to have violated civil liberties: Has Congress specif- 
ically authorized the president to engage in the action that is being 
challenged? 

Of course, requiring specific authorization is no panacea. It 
is possible that Congress, itself excessively fearful, will permit the 
president to do something that cannot be justified in principle. It 
is also possible that Congress will fail to authorize the president to 
act in circumstances in which action is justified or even indispens- 
able. What I am suggesting is that as a general rule, a requirement of 
congressional permission is probably the best way to reduce the rele- 
vant dangers - those of excessive and insufficient protections against 
security risks. 

B. Special  Scrutiny of Selective Denials of Liberty 
I have emphasized that public fear might well produce excessive reac- 
tions from Congress. The risk is especially serious when identifiable 
groups, rather than the public as a whole, are being burdened. 

Consider in this regard an illuminating passage from a famous 
opinion (Railway Express Agency v. New York, 1949) by Justice Robert 
Jackson: 

The burden should rest heavily upon one who would 
persuade us to use the due process clause to strike down 
a substantive law or ordinance. Even its provident use 

986 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

against municipal regulations frequently disables all 
government -  state, municipal and federal -  from deal- 
ing with the conduct in question because the require- 
ment of due process is also applicable to State and Federal 
Governments. Invalidation of a statute or an ordinance on 
due process grounds leaves ungoverned and ungovernable 
conduct which many people find objectionable. 

Invocation of the equal protection clause, on the other 
hand, does not disable any governmental body from deal- 
ing with the subject at hand. It merely means that the 
prohibition or regulation must have a broader impact. I 
regard it as a salutary doctrine that cities, states and the 
Federal Government must exercise their powers so as not 
to discriminate between their inhabitants except upon 
some reasonable differentiation fairly related to the object 
of regulation. This equality is not merely abstract justice. 
The framers of the Constitution knew, and we should 
not forget today, that there is no more effective practical 
guaranty against arbitrary and unreasonable government 
than to require that the principles of law which officials 
would impose upon a minority must be imposed generally. 
Conversely, nothing opens the door to arbitrary action so 
effectively as to allow those officials to pick and choose 
only a few to whom they will apply legislation and thus to 
escape the political retribution that might be visited upon 
them if larger numbers were affected. Courts can take 
no better measure to assure that laws will be just than to 
require that laws be equal in operation. 

Justice Jackson is making two points here. The first is that when 
the court rules that some conduct cannot be regulated at all, it is inter- 
vening, in a major way, into democratic processes, making that conduct 
essentially "unregulable." The second is that when the court strikes 

Fear and Liberty  987 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

government action done on equality grounds, it requires the govern- 
ment to increase the breadth of its restriction, thus triggering political 
checks against unjustified burdens. With a modest twist on Jackson's 
argument, we can see a potential approach for courts faced with claims 
about unlawful interference with civil liberties. If the government is 
imposing a burden on the citizens as a whole, or on a random draw of 
citizens, then the appropriate judicial posture is one of deference to 
the government (at least if free speech is not involved; an exception for 
free speech makes sense in light of the fact that democratic processes 
cannot work well without it). But if the government imposes a burden 
on an identifiable subclass of citizens, a warning flag should go up. The 
courts should give careful scrutiny to that burden. 

Of course, these general propositions do not resolve concrete 
cases; everything turns on the particular nature of the constitutional 
challenge. But an appreciation of the risks of selectivity suggests the 
proper orientation. In Korematsu v. United States (1944), challenging the 
internment of Japanese-Americans, the court should have been far 
more skeptical of the government's justification, simply because the 
internment was peculiarly immune from political checks on liberty. 
Most Americans had nothing to fear from it. The same point holds for 
the contemporary war on terrorism. Some of the relevant restrictions 
have been limited to noncitizens in a way that creates a real risk of 
overreaching. Courts should take a careful look at the legitimacy of the 
government's justifications for imposing burdens on people who are 
unable to protect themselves in the political process. Consider in this 
regard one of President George W. Bush's less circumspect remarks in 
defense of the idea that enemy combatants might be tried in special 
military tribunals. President Bush suggested that whatever procedures 
are applied, the defendants will receive fairer treatment than they gave 
to murdered Americans on 9/11. The problem with this suggestion is 
that it begs the question, which is whether the defendants were, in fact, 
involved in the 9/11 attack. Here is an illustration of the extent to which 
fear, and the thirst for vengeance, can lead to unjustified infringements 
of civil liberties. 

988 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

C. Balancing and Second-Order Balancing 
Thus far I have operated under a simple framework, supposing that in 
any situation, there is some kind of balancing between security and 
civil liberty - something like an optimal tradeoff. As the magnitude 
of the threat increases, the argument for intruding on civil liberties 
also increases. If the risk is great, government might, for example, 
increase searches in airports; ensure a constant police presence on 
public places, with frequent requests for identification; permit mili- 
tary tribunals to try those suspected of terrorist activity; and allow the 
police to engage in practices that would not be permitted under ordi- 
nary circumstances. 

Under the balancing approach, everything turns on whether 

public fear is justified. What is the extent of the risk? If, in short, we 
believe that there is an optimal tradeoff among the relevant variables, 
excessive fear will inevitably produce a tradeoff that is less than opti- 
mal - that unduly sacrifices liberty at the expense of security. This 
approach to the relationship between liberty and security is standard 
and intuitive, and something like it seems to me correct. But it is not 
without complications. There might be, for example, a "core" of rights 
into which government cannot intrude and for which balancing is 
inappropriate. Consider torture. Some people believe that whatever 
the circumstances, torture cannot be justified; even the most well- 
grounded public fear is insufficient to justify it. In one form, this argu- 
ment turns on a belief that consequentialist 
justifications are never 
enough to authorize this kind of intrusion. I believe that in this form, 
the argument is a kind of moral heuristic - one that is far too rigid, 
even fanatical. Is it sensible to ban torture when torture is the only 
means of protecting thousands of people from certain death? 

But another, more plausible form of the argument is rule utilitar- 
ian: a flat prohibition on torture, one that forbids balancing in indi- 
vidual cases, might be justified on the basis of a kind of second-order 
balancing. It might be concluded not that torture is never justified in 
principle, but that unless torture is entirely outlawed, government will 
engage in torture in cases in which it is not justified, that the benefits 

Fear and Liberty  989 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

of torture are rarely significant, and that the permission to torture in 
extraordinary cases will lead, on balance, to more harm than good. 
Under certain assumptions, this view is entirely plausible. And if it is, 
we might adopt a firm prohibition on torture, even when public fear is 
both extreme and entirely justified. 

Can other rights be understood similarly? Consider the area of 
free speech law in the United States, and the relationship between fear 
and restrictions on speech. In the Cold War, government attempted to 
regulate speech that, in its view, would increase the influence of commu- 
nism. The Smith Act, enacted in 1946, made it a crime for any person "to 
knowingly or willingly advocate, abet, advise, or teach the duty, neces- 
sity, desirability, or propriety of overthrowing or destroying any govern- 
ment in the United States by force or violence, or by the assassination 
of any officer of such government/' In Dennis v. United States (1951), the 
government prosecuted people for organizing the Communist Party of 
the United States, an organization that was said to teach and advocate the 
overthrow of the United States government by force. The court held that 
the constitutionality of the Smith Act would stand or fall on whether the 
speech in question "created a 'clear and present danger' of attempting 
or accomplishing the prohibited crime." In its most important analytic 
step, the court concluded that this test did not mean that the danger 
must truly be clear and present; it denied "that before the Government 
may act, it must wait until the putsch is about to be executed, the plans 
have been laid and the signal is awaited." When a group was attempting 
to indoctrinate its members and to commit them to a course of action, 
"action by the Government is required." 

Following the distinguished court of appeals Judge Learned Hand, 
the court conceived the clear and present danger test, in these circum- 
stances, to involve a form of balancing, so that "In each case [courts] 
must ask whether the gravity of the 'evil,' discounted by its improb- 
ability, justifies such invasion of free speech as is necessary to avoid the 
danger." The court said that it would "adopt this statement of the rule." 
Having done so, the court upheld the convictions. It recognized that 
no uprising had occurred. But the balancing test authorized criminal 

990 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

punishment in light of "the inflammable nature of world conditions, 
similar uprisings in other countries, and the touch-and-go nature of our 
relations with countries with whom [defendants] were in the very least 
ideologically attuned." 

Dennis sees the clear and present danger test as one of ad hoc 
balancing, at least in cases that involve a potentially catastrophic harm. 
But many people have been skeptical of such balancing, which no 
longer reflects the law. Instead, the court understands the idea of clear 
and present danger to require that the danger be both likely and immi- 
nent (Brandenburg v. Ohio, 1969). This approach is quite different from 
Judge Hand's balancing test. It does not ask courts to discount the evil 
by its probability - an approach that would permit speech regulation 
if an extremely serious evil has (say) a 20 percent chance of occurring. 
Under the court's current standard, speech is protected if harm is not 
"likely." And even if a risk has a 70 percent chance of occurring, and is 
therefore likely, regulation is apparently unacceptable unless the risk 
is imminent. How should we choose between a balancing approach 
and one that requires both likelihood and imminence? At first glance, 
the Dennis approach seems much better, at least on consequentialist 
grounds. If a risk is only 10 percent likely to occur, but 100,000 people 
will die if the risk comes to fruition, government should not simply 
stand by until it is too late. In the environmental context, balancing 
is surely preferable to a rule that would require both likelihood and 
imminence. 

What, then, can be said in favor the requirements of likelihood 
and imminence? Perhaps the requirements have institutional justifica- 
tions; perhaps they are a response to a judgment that in the real world, 
the Dennis approach will produce excessive regulation of speech. If 
balancing is entirely accurate, we should balance. But where speech is 
unpopular, or when people are frightened of it, government might well 
conclude that "the gravity of the 'evil,' discounted by its probability," 
justifies regulation, even though it actually does not. 

In the context of speech, there are independent considerations. 
Public disapproval of the content of speech might result in a judgment 

Fear and Liberty  991 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

that it is likely to cause harm even if the real motivation for censorship 
is disagreement with the underlying ideas. And if the harm is not immi- 
nent, disagreement and dissent might well prevent it from occurring. 
The imminence requirement can therefore be understood as a recogni- 
tion of the idea that more speech, rather than censorship, is the appro- 
priate response to anticipated harm. In these circumstances, we can see 
the clear and present danger test as reflecting a kind of second-order 
balancing, one that distrusts official judgments about risks and harms 
and that requires government to provide an unusually high burden of 
proof. 

As I have suggested, a general prohibition of torture can be 

understood in similar terms. The justification need not be that torture 
can never be defended by reference to consequences. A less contentious 
justification would be that a government that is licensed to torture will 
do so when torture is not warranted - and that the social costs of disal- 
lowing torture do not, in the end, come close to the social benefits. I am 
not suggesting that this judgment is necessarily correct. But I do believe 
that aggressive protection of civil liberties and civil rights is often best 
defended on these grounds, as a safeguard against mass fear or hyste- 
ria that would lead to steps that cannot be justified on balance. In a 
sense, liberties are "overprotected," compared to the level of protection 
that they would receive in a system of (optimal) case-by-case balancing. 
Because optimal balancing is not likely to occur in the real world, rule- 
based protection is a justifiable second best. 

Aggressive protection of free speech has been justified on the 
ground that courts should take a "pathological perspective," one 
suited for periods in which the public, and hence the judiciary, will be 
tempted to allow indefensible restrictions in the heat of the moment 
(Blasi, 1985). The argument is that free speech law builds up strong, 
rule-like protections, eschewing balancing and sometimes protecting 
speech that ought not to be protected. The reason for the "pathologi- 
cal perspective" is to create safeguards that will work when liberty is 
under siege. Such a perspective creates an obvious problem: It might be 
that when liberty is under siege, public necessity requires it to be. The 

992 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

pathological perspective runs the risk of overprotecting liberty. But if 
the argument here is correct, there is reason to believe that public fear, 
heightened by worst-case scenarios, will result in selective burdens on 
those who are unable to protect themselves. In such cases, constitu- 
tional law operates best if it uses not balancing but rules or presump- 
tions, allowing government to compromise liberty only on the basis of 
a compelling demonstration of necessity. 

CONCLUSION 
I have attempted to uncover some mechanisms that can lead a fear- 
ful public to support unjustified risk-reduction policies, including 
unjustified intrusions on civil liberties. The availability heuristic and 
probability neglect often lead people to treat risks as much greater 
than they in fact are, and hence to accept risk-reduction strategies 
that do considerable harm and little good. Civil liberties may be jeop- 
ardized for precisely this reason. And when the burdens of govern- 
ment restrictions are faced by an identifiable minority rather by the 
majority, the risk of unjustified action is significantly increased. The 
internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II is only one 
salient example; some aspects of the current war on terrorism might 
be similarly understood. 

What can be done in response? I have suggested three possibili- 
ties. First, courts should not allow the executive to intrude on civil liber- 
ties without explicit legislative authorization. Second, courts should 
usually be deferential to intrusions that apply to all or most; they should 
be more skeptical when government restricts the liberty of a readily 
identifiable few. Third, courts should avoid ad hoc balancing of liberty 
against security; they should develop principles that reflect a kind of 
second-order balancing, attuned to institutional considerations and the 
risk of excessive fear. These three strategies are unlikely to provide all 
of the protection sought by civil libertarians against the adverse effects 
of excessive public fear. But when the risks to national security are real, 
courts are properly reluctant to be as aggressive as in ordinary times. 
The task is not to authorize courts to adopt a role to which they are ill- 

Fear and Liberty 993 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

suited, but to develop approaches that counteract the risk that public 
fear will lead to unjustified restrictions. 

NOTES 
1. This view is illuminatingly described and criticized in Posner and 

Vermeule (forthcoming 2004). 

2. See Rottenstreich and Hsee (2001), which finds that when emotions 

are triggered, variations in probability matter relatively little. 

3. The two systems need not be seen as occupying different physical 
spaces; they might even be understood as heuristics(!) See Kahneman 
and Frederick (2002). There is, however, some evidence that different 
sectors of the brain can be associated with Systems I and II. See the 
discussion of fear in LeDoux (1996), and the more general treatment 
in Lieberman (2003). 

4. For valuable discussion, see Posner and Vermeule (forthcoming 2004). 

REFERENCES 
Alkahami, A. S., and Paul Slovic. "A Psychological Study of the Inverse 
Relationship Between Perceived Risk and Perceived Benefit." Risk 
Analysis 14:6 (December 1994). 

Best, Joel. Random Violence. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999. 
Blasi, Vincent. "The Pathological Perspective and the First Amendment. 

Columbia Law Review 85:3 (April 1985): 449. 

Gersen, Jacob. "Strategy and Cognition: Regulating Catastrophic Risk." 

Unpublished manuscript, 2001. 

Harrington, Matthew. "People's Willingness to Accept Airport Security 
Delays in Exchange for Lesser Risk." Unpublished manuscript, 
2002. 

Hayek, Friedrich. The Constitution 

of Liberty. Chicago: University of Chicago 

Press, 1960. 

Hirschleifer, David. "The Blind Leading the Blind." The New Economics of 
Human Behavior. Eds. Marianno Tommasi and Kathryn Ierulli. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1995. 

994 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Johnson, E. J., et al. "Framing, Probability Distortions, and Insurance 
Decisions." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 7:1 (August 1993). 

Jolis, Christine, et al. "A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics." 

Stanford Law Review 50:5 (May 1998). 

Kahneman, Daniel, and Shane Frederick. "Representativeness Revisited: 
Attribute Substitution in Intuitive Judgment." Heuristics and Biases: 
The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment. Eds. Thomas Gilovich, Dale 
Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002. 

Kuran, Timur, and Cass R. Sunstein. "Availability Cascades and Risk 

Regulation." Stanford Law Review 51:4 (April 1999): 683. 

LeDoux, Joseph. The Emotional Brain. New York: Simon and Schuster, 

Lieberman, Matthew. "Reflexive and Reflective Judgment Processes: A 
Social Cognitive Neuroscience Approach." Social Judgments. Eds. 
Joseph P. Forgas, Kipling D. Williams, and William von Hippel. 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003. 

Loewenstein, George. "Risk As Feelings." Psychological Bulletin 127:2 (March 

Margolis, Howard. Dealing With Risk. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 

1996. 

2001). 

1996. 

Moscovici, S., and M. Zavalloni. "The Group as a Polarizer of Attitudes." 

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 12:2 (1969). 

Office of Management and Budget. "Informing Regulatory Decisions: 

2003 Report to Congress" <http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/ 
inforeg/regpol-reports_congress.html>. 

Posner, Eric, and Adrian Vermeule. "Accommodating Emergencies." 

Stanford Law Review (forthcoming 2004). 

Rehnquist, William. All the Laws but One. New York: Knopf, 1998. 
Rottenstreich, Yuval, and Christopher Hsee. "Money, Kisses, and Electric 
Shocks: On the Affective Psychology of Risk." Psychological Science 
12:3 (May 2001): 185. 

Sherman, Steven J., et al. "Imagining Can Heighten of Lower the Perceived 
Likelihood of Contracting a Disease: The Mediating Effect of Ease 

Fear and Liberty 995 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

of Imagery." Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment. 
Eds. Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griffin, and Daniel Kahneman. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 

Slovic, Paul. The Perception of Risk. Sterling, Va.: Earthscan Publications, 

2000a. 

Slovic, Paul, et al. "Violence Risk Assessment and Risk Communication/' 

Law and Human Behavior 24:3 (June 2000b). 

Sunstein, Cass R. "Deliberative Trouble? Why Groups Go To Extremes." 

 

Yale Law Journal 110:1 (October 2000). 
. "Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law." Yale Law 
Journal 112:1 (October 2002a). 
 
. Risk and Reason. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002b. 
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. "Judgment Under Uncertainty: 

Heuristics and  Biases." Judgment and Decision Making: An 
Reader. Eds. Hal R. Arkes and Kenneth R. Hammond. 
Interdisciplinary 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986. 

Viscusi, W. Kip, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. "Sacrificing Civil Liberties 
to Reduce Terrorism Risks." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 26:2-3 
(March-May 2003). 

von Hippel, William, et al. "Attitudinal Process Versus Content: The Role 
of Information Processing Biases in Social Judgment and Behavior." 
Social Judgments. Eds. Joseph P. Forgas, Kipling D. Williams, and 
William von Hippel. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003. 

996 

social research 

This content downloaded from 128.255.6.125 on Thu, 22 Oct 2015 20:17:34 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

