University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? The
Relevance of Life-Life Tradeoffs
Cass R. Sunstein

2005

Adrian Vermeule

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein & Adrian Vermeule, "Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? The Relevance of Life-Life Tradeoffs" ( John M. Olin
Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 239, 2005).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 239 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? 
The Relevance of Life‐Life Tradeoffs 
 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
March 2005 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=691447  

 

Preliminary draft 3/22/05 
Not for citation, circulation, or quotation without express permission 
All rights reserved 

 
 

 

Is Capital Punishment Morally Required?  
The Relevance of Life-Life Tradeoffs 
 
 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
Adrian Vermeule** 

Abstract 

 
Recent evidence suggests that capital punishment may have a significant deterrent effect, 
preventing as many eighteen or more murders for each execution. This evidence greatly unsettles 
moral  objections  to  the  death  penalty,  because  it  suggests  that  a  refusal  to  impose  that  penalty 
condemns  numerous  innocent  people  to  death.  Capital  punishment  thus  presents  a  life-life 
tradeoff,  and  a  serious  commitment  to  the  sanctity  of  human  life  may  well  compel,  rather  than 
forbid,  that  form  of  punishment.  Moral  objections  to  the  death  penalty  frequently  depend  on  a 
distinction between acts and omissions, but that distinction is misleading in this context, because 
government  is  a  special  kind  of  moral  agent.  The  familiar  problems  with  capital  punishment—
potential error, irreversibility, arbitrariness, and racial skew—do not argue in favor of abolition, 
because the world of homicide suffers from those same problems in even more acute form. The 
widespread failure to appreciate the life-life tradeoffs involved in capital punishment may depend 
on cognitive processes that fail to treat “statistical lives” with the seriousness that they deserve.  

 
 
Many people believe capital punishment is morally impermissible. In their view, 
executions are inherently cruel and barbaric.1 Often they add  that capital  punishment is 
not, and cannot be, imposed in a way that adheres to the rule of law.2 They contend that 

as administered, capital punishment ensures the execution of (some) innocent people, and 

also  that  it  reflects  arbitrariness,  in  the  form  of  random  or  invidious  infliction  of  the 
ultimate penalty.3 

                                                 

*Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  The  University  of  Chicago  Law 

School, Department of Political Science and the College.  

**Bernard D. Meltzer Professor of Law, The University of Chicago. The authors thank Robert Hahn, Dan 
Kahan, Steven Levitt, Richard Posner, and Eugene Volokh for helpful suggestions, and Blake Roberts for 
excellent research assistance and valuable comments.  

1 See, e.g., Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 371 (1972) (Marshall, J., concurring). 
2 See Stephen B. Bright, Why the United States Will Join the Rest of the World in Abandoning Capital 

Punishment, in DEBATING THE DEATH PENALTY 152 (Hugo Bedau & Paul Cassell eds. 2004). 

3 See, e.g., JAMES LEIBMAN  ET AL., A BROKEN SYSTEM: ERROR RATES IN CAPITAL CASES, 1973 – 1995 

(Columb. L. School, Pub. L. Res. Paper No. 15, 2000). 

Defenders  of  capital  punishment  come  in  two  different  camps.  Some  are 
retributivists.4  Following  Kant,  they  claim  that  for  the  most  heinous  forms  of 

wrongdoing,  the  penalty  of  death  is  morally  justified  or  perhaps  even  required.  Other 
defenders  of  capital  punishment  are  consequentialists  and  often  also  welfarists.5  They 

contend  that  the  deterrent  effect  of  capital punishment is significant and that it justifies 

the  infliction  of  the  ultimate  penalty.  Consequentialist  defenses  of  capital  punishment, 

however,  tend  to  assume  that  capital  punishment  is  (merely)  morally  permissible,  as 

opposed to being morally obligatory. 

Our goal here is to suggest that the debate over capital punishment is rooted in an 

unquestioned  assumption,  and  that  the  failure  to  question  that  assumption  is  a  serious 

moral  error.  The  assumption  is  that  for  governments,  acts  are  morally  different  from 

omissions. We want to raise the possibility that an indefensible form of the act-omission 

distinction  is  crucial  to  the  most  prominent  objections  to  capital  punishment—and  that 

defenders of capital punishment, apparently making the same distinction, have failed to 

notice that on the logic of their theory, capital punishment is morally obligatory, not just 

permissible. We want to suggest, in other words, that capital punishment may be morally 
required not for retributive reasons, but in order to prevent the taking of innocent lives.6  

The  suggestion  bears  not  only  on  moral  and  political  debates,  but  also  on 

constitutional questions. In invalidating the death penalty for juveniles, for example, the 

Supreme  Court  did  not  seriously  engage  the  possibility  that  capital  punishment  for 

juveniles  may  help  to  prevent  the  death  of  innocents,  including  the  deaths  of  juvenile 
innocents.7 And if our suggestion is correct, it is connected to many questions outside of 

                                                 

4  See,  e.g.,  Luis  Pojman,  Why  the  Death  Penalty  is  Morally  Permissible,  in  DEBATING  THE  DEATH 

PENALTY 51, 55-58 (Hugo Bedau & Paul Cassell eds. 2004). 
5 Arguments along these lines can be found in id. at 58-73. 
6 In so saying, we are suggesting the possibility that states are obliged to maintain the death penalty, not 
that they must inflict that penalty is every individual case of a specified sort; hence we are not attempting to 
enter into the debate over mandatory death sentences, as invalidated in Woodson v North Carolina, 428 US 
280 (1986); Lockett v. Ohio, 438 US 586 (1978). For relevant discussion, see Martha Nussbaum, Equity 
and Mercy, 22 Phil & Pub Aff 83 (1993). 

7 Roper v. Simmons, 125 US 1183 (2005). Here is the heart of the Court’s discussion: “As for deterrence, 
it is unclear whether the death penalty has a significant or even measurable deterrent effect on juveniles, as 
counsel for the petitioner acknowledged at oral argument. . . . [T]he absence of evidence of deterrent effect 
is of special concern because the same characteristics that render juveniles less culpable than adults suggest 
as  well  that  juveniles  will  be  less  susceptible  to  deterrence.  .  .  .  To  the  extent  the  juvenile  death  penalty 
might have residual deterrent effect, it is worth noting that the punishment of life imprisonment without the 
possibility of parole is itself a severe sanction, in particular for a young person.” These are speculations at 

2 

the context of capital punishment. If omissions by the state are often indistinguishable, in 

principle, from actions by the state, then a wide range of apparent failures to act—in the 

context not only of criminal and civil law, but of regulatory law as well—should be taken 

to raise serious  moral and legal problems. Those who accept our arguments in favor of 

the  death  penalty  may  or  may  not  welcome  the  implications  for  government  action  in 

general.  In  many  situations,  ranging  from  environmental  quality  to  highway  safety  to 

relief  of  poverty,  our  arguments  suggest  that  in  light  of  imaginable  empirical  findings, 

government is obliged to provide far more protection than it now does, and that it should 

not be permitted to hide behind unhelpful distinctions between acts and omissions. 

The  foundation  for  our  argument  is  a  large  and  growing  body  of  evidence  that 

capital  punishment  may  well  have  a  deterrent  effect,  possibly  a  quite  powerful  one.  A 
leading study suggests that each execution prevents some eighteen murders, on average.8 

The  particular  numbers  do  not  much  matter.  If  the  current  evidence  is  even  roughly 

correct, then a refusal to impose capital punishment will effectively condemn numerous 

innocent people to death. States that choose life imprisonment, when they might choose 
capital  punishment,  are  ensuring  the  deaths  of  a  large  number  of  innocent  people.9  On 

moral  grounds,  a  choice  that  effectively  condemns  large  numbers  of  people  to  death 

seems objectionable to say the least. For those who are inclined to be skeptical of capital 

punishment for moral reasons—a group that includes one of the current authors—the task 

is to consider the possibility that the failure to impose capital punishment is, prima facie 

and all things considered, a serious moral wrong.  

Judgments  of  this  sort  are  often  taken  to  require  a  controversial  commitment  to 

either  a  consequentialist  or  a  deontological  view  about  the  foundations  of  moral 

                                                                                                                                                 
best, and they do not engage with the empirical literature; of course, that literature does not dispose of the 
question whether juveniles are deterred by the death penalty. 

8  See  Hashem  Dezhbakhsh  et  al.,  ,  Does  Capital  Punishment  Have  a  Deterrent  Effect?  New  Evidence 
from Postmoratorium Panel Data, 5 AM. L. & ECON. REV 344, 344 (2003). In what follows, we will speak 
of  executions  saving  eighteen  lives  on  average.  We  are  of  course  suppressing  many  issues  in  that 
formulation,  simply  for  expository  convenience.  For  one thing,  that  statistic  is  a  national  average,  as  we 
emphasize in Part IV. For another thing, future research might find that capital punishment has diminishing 
returns: if the first 100 executions deter 1800 murders, it does not follow that another 1,000 executions will 
deter  another  18,000  murders.  We  will  take  these  and  like  qualifications  as  understood  in  the  discussion 
that follows.  

9 In recent years, the number of murders in the United States has fluctuated between 15,000 and 24,000. 
Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,  Crime  in  the  United  States:  2003  Tabl.1  (2003),  available  at 
http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/03cius.htm.  

3 

evaluation.  One  of  our  principal  points,  however,  is  that  the  choice  between 

consequentialist and deontological approaches to morality does not seem crucial here; we 

will  suggest  that  on  certain  empirical  assumptions,  theorists  of  both  stripes  might 

converge on the idea that capital punishment is morally obligatory. On consequentialist 

grounds,  the  death  penalty  seems  morally  obligatory  if  it  is  the  only  or  most  effective 

means  of  preventing  significant  numbers  of  murders;  and  much  of  our  discussion  will 

emphasize  this  point. For deontologists, a killing  is a wrong under most  circumstances, 

and its wrongness does not depend on its consequences or its effects on overall welfare. 

Many deontologists (of course not all) believe that capital punishment counts as a moral 

wrong. But in the abstract, any deontological injunction against the wrongful infliction of 

death  turns  out  to  be  indeterminate  on  the  moral  status  of  capital  punishment  if  it  is 

necessary to prevent significant numbers of killings. 

An  unstated  assumption  animating  much  opposition  to  capital  punishment, 

especially  among  self-conscious  or  intuitive  deontologists,  is  that  capital  punishment 

counts as an “act,” while the refusal to impose it counts as an “omission,” and that the 

two are altogether different from the moral point of view. We shall investigate this claim 

in some detail. But we doubt that the act-omission distinction can bear the moral weight 

given  to  it  by  the  critics  of  capital  punishment.  Whatever  its  value  as  a  moral  concept 

where  individuals  are  concerned,  the  act-omission  distinction  misfires  in  the  general 

setting of government regulation. If government policies fail to protect people against air 

pollution, occupational risks, or racial discrimination, it is inadequate to put great moral 

weight  on  the  idea  that  the  failure  to  act  is  a  mere  “omission.”  No  one  believes  that 

government  can  avoid  responsibility  to  protect  people  against  serious  dangers,  as  for 

example  by  refusing  to  enforce  regulatory  statutes,  simply  by  contending  that  such 
refusals  are  unproblematic  omissions.10  If  state  governments  impose  light  penalties  on 

offenders, or treat certain offenses (say, domestic violence) as unworthy of attention, they 

should  not  be  able  to  escape  public  retribution  by  contending  that  they  are  simply 

refusing to act. Where government is concerned, failures of protection, through refusals 

                                                 

Monte, 72 Notre Dame L Rev 157 (1996). 

10  Indeed,  agency  inaction  is  frequently  subject  to  judicial  review.  See  Ash  Bhagwat,  Three-Branch 

4 

to punish and deter private misconduct, cannot be justified by pointing to the distinction 

between acts and omissions. 

It has even become common to speak of “risk-risk tradeoffs,” understood to arise 

when  regulation  of  one  risk  (say,  the  risks  associated  with  use  of  DDT)  gives  rise  to 
another  risk  (say,  the  spread  of  malaria,  against  which  DDT  has  been  effective).11  Or 

suppose that an air pollutant creates adverse health effects but also has health benefits, as 
appears to be the case for ground-level ozone.12 No one believes that for moral reasons, 

social planners should refuse to take account of such tradeoffs; there is general agreement 

that whether a particular substance ought to be regulated depends on the overall effect of 

regulation on human well-being.  

As an empirical matter, criminal law is pervaded by its own risk-risk tradeoffs. If 

the deterrent signal works, a failure to impose stringent penalties on certain crimes will 

increase  the  number  of  those  crimes.  A  refusal  to  impose  such  penalties  is,  for  that 

reason, problematic from the moral point of view. The very idea of “equal protection of 

the laws,” in its oldest and most literal sense, attests to the importance of enforcing the 
criminal and civil law so as to safeguard the potential victims of private violence.13 What 

we are suggesting is that the death penalty produces a risk-risk tradeoff of its own, indeed 

what  we  will  call  a  life-life  tradeoff,  to  the  extent  that  a  refusal  to  impose  capital 

punishment yields a significant increase in the number of deaths of innocent people.  

Of course this point does not resolve the capital punishment debate. By itself, the 

act of execution may be a wrong, in a way that cannot be said for an act of imposing civil 

or  criminal  penalties  on  (say)  environmental  degradation.  But  the  existence  of  life-life 

tradeoffs  raises  the  possibility  that  for  those  who  oppose  killing,  a  rejection  of  capital 

punishment  is  not  necessarily  mandated.  On  the  contrary,  it  may  well  be  morally 

compelled.  At  the  very  least,  those  who  object  to  capital  punishment,  and  do  so  in  the 

name of protecting life, must come to terms with the fact that the failure to inflict capital 

punishment  might  fail  to  protect  life—and  must,  in  our  view,  justify  their  position  in 

                                                 

11 See generally RISK VERSUS RISK: TRADEOFFS IN PROTECTING HEALTH  AND THE ENVIRONMENT (John 

D. Graham & Jonathan Baert Wiener eds.1995). 

12 See Am. Trucking Assocs., Inc. v. E.P.A., 175 F.3d 1027, 1051 – 53 (D.C. Cir. 1999). 
13 See Randall Kennedy, Race, Crime, and the Law (1997). 

5 

ways that do not rely on question-begging claims about the distinction between acts and 

omissions. 

We  begin,  in  Part  I,  with  the  facts.  Contrary  to  widely-held  beliefs,  based  on 

partial  information  or  older  studies,  a  wave  of  recent  evidence  suggests  the  possibility 

that  capital  punishment  saves  lives.  One  study  finds  that  as  a  national  average,  each 

execution  deters  some  eighteen  murders.  Our  question  whether  capital  punishment  is 

morally  obligatory  is  motivated  by  these  findings;  our  central  concern  is  that  foregoing 

any given execution may be equivalent to condemning some eighteen unidentified people 

to a premature and violent death. Of course social science can always be disputed in this 

contentious domain, and we mean to outline, rather than to defend, the relevant evidence 

here. But the current findings do provide evidence of deterrence, and we think that it is 

illuminating to take those findings as given for purposes of analysis of the moral issues. 

Those who would like to abolish capital punishment, and who reject the social science, 

might find it useful to ask whether they would maintain their commitment to abolition if 

they were persuaded that capital punishment does have a strong deterrent effect; that is 

the principal issue that we mean to raise here. 

In  Part  II,  the  centerpiece  of  the  paper,  we  offer  a  few  remarks  on  moral 

foundations and examine some standard objections to capital punishment that might seem 

plausible even in light of the current findings. We focus in particular on the crucial view 

that  capital  punishment  is  objectionable  because  it  requires  affirmative  and  intentional 

state  “action,”  not  merely  an  “omission.”  That  distinction,  we  suggest,  systematically 

misfires  when  applied  to  government,  which  is  a  moral  agent  with  distinctive  features. 

The act-omission distinction may not even be intelligible in the context of government, 

which  always  faces  a  choice  among  policy  regimes,  and  in  that  sense  cannot  help  but 

“act.” 

Even if the distinction between acts and omissions can be rendered intelligible in 

regulatory  settings,  its  moral  relevance  is  obscure.  Some  acts  are  morally  obligatory, 

while  some  omissions  are  morally  culpable.  If  capital  punishment  has  significant 

deterrent  effects,  we  suggest  that  for  government  to  omit  to  impose  it  is  morally 

blameworthy,  even  on  a  deontological  account  of  morality.  Deontological  accounts 

typically recognize a consequentialist override to baseline prohibitions; if each execution 

6 

saves eighteen lives, on average, then it is plausible to think that the override is triggered, 

in turn triggering an obligation to adopt capital punishment. 

Once  the  act/omission  distinction  is  rejected  where  government  is  concerned,  it 

becomes clear that the most familiar, and plausible, objections to capital punishment deal 

with  only  one  side  of  the  ledger:  the  objections  fail  to  take  account  of  the  exceedingly 

arbitrary  deaths  that  capital  punishment  apparently  deters.  We  consider  rule-of-law 

concerns  about  the  irreversibility  of  capital  punishment  and  its  possibly  random  or 

invidious administration; a strict-scrutiny principle that capital punishment should not be 

permitted  if  other  means  for  producing  the  same  level  of  deterrence  are  available;  and 

concerns  about  slippery  slopes  from  capital  punishment  to  other  practices.  We  suggest 

that while some of these complaints have merit, they do not count as decisive objections 

to  capital  punishment,  because  they  embody  a  flawed  version  of  the  act-omission 

distinction,  and  generally  overlook  the  fact  that  the  moral  objections  to  capital 

punishment apply even more strongly to the murders that capital punishment deters. 

In  Part  III,  we  conjecture  that  various  cognitive  and  social  mechanisms,  lacking 

any  claim  to  moral  relevance,  cause  many  individuals  and  groups  to  subscribe  to 

untenable versions of the distinction between acts and omissions, or to underestimate the 

life-saving benefits of capital punishment while exaggerating the harms that it causes. An 

important  concern  here  is  a  sort  of  misplaced  concreteness,  stemming  from  heuristics 

such  as  salience  and  availability.  The  single  person  executed  is  often  more  visible  and 

more  salient  in  public  discourse  than  are  the  (on  average)  eighteen  abstract  statistical 

persons whose murders a single execution would deter. If those people, and their names 

and  faces,  were  highly  visible,  we  suspect  that  many  of  the  objections  to  capital 

punishment would at least be shaken. As environmentalists have often argued, “statistical 
persons”  should  not  be  treated  as  irrelevant  abstractions.14  The  point  holds  for  criminal 

justice no less than for pollution controls. 

Part IV expands upon the implications of our view and examines some unresolved 

puzzles.  Here  we  emphasize  that  we  hold  no  brief  for  capital  punishment  across  all 

contexts,  or  in  the  abstract.  The  crucial  question  is  what  the  facts  show  in  particular 

domains. We mean to include here a plea for a disaggregated approach. The evidence that 

                                                 

14 Lisa Heinzerling, The Rights of Statistical People, 24 HARV. ENV. L. REV. 189, 189 (2000). 

7 

capital  punishment  strongly  deters  murder  is  aggregate  evidence  based  on  national 

averages; future research and resulting policies would do well to take separate account of 

various regions and of various classes of offenders and offenses. We also emphasize that 

our argument is limited to the setting of life-life tradeoffs—settings in which the taking of 

a  life  by  the  state  will  reduce  the  number  of  lives  taken  overall.  We  express  no  view 

about cases in which that condition does not hold—for example, the possibility of capital 

punishment for serious offenses other than killing, with rape being the principal historical 

example,  and  with  rape  of  children  being  a  currently  contested  problem.  Such  cases 

involve  distinctively  difficult  moral  problems  that  we  mean  to  bracket  here.  A  brief 

conclusion follows. 

I. 

 
Evidence 
 
For many years, the deterrent effect of capital punishment was sharply disputed.15 

But  a  great  deal  of  recent  evidence  strengthens  the  claim  that  capital  punishment  has 
large  deterrent  effects.16  The  reason  for  the  shift  is  that  a  wave  of  sophisticated 

econometric studies have exploited a newly-available form of data, so-called “panel data” 

that uses all information from a set of units (states or counties) and follows that data over 

an extended period of time. A leading study used county-level panel data from 3,054 U.S. 
counties between 1977 and 1996.17 The authors find that the murder rate is significantly 

reduced  by  both  death  sentences  and  executions.  The  most  striking  finding  is  that  on 
average, each execution results in 18 fewer murders.18  

Other econometric studies also find a substantial deterrent effect. In two papers, 

Paul Zimmerman uses state-level panel data from 1978 onwards to measure the deterrent 

effect of execution rates and execution methods. He estimates that each execution deters 

                                                 

15  Compare,  e.g.,  Isaac  Ehrlich,  The  Deterrent  Effect  of  Capital  Punishment:  A  Question  of  Life  and 
Death, 65 AM. ECON. REV. 397, 398 (1975) (estimating each execution deters eight murders); with William 
J.  Bowers  &  Glenn  L.  Pierce,  The  Illusion  of  Deterrence  in  Isaac  Ehrlich’s  Research  on  Capital 
Punishment, 85 YALE L.J. 187, 187 (1975) (finding Ehrlich’s data and methods unreliable). 

16  Even  as  this  evidence  was  being  developed,  one  of  us  rashly  and  wrongly  predicted  that  the  debate 
would  remain  inconclusive  for  the  foreseeable  future.  See  Adrian  Vermeule,  Interpretive  Choice,  75 
N.Y.U. L. REV. 74, 100–101(2000).  

17 See Dezhbakhsh et al., supra note 8, at 359. 
18 Id. at 373. 

8 

an average of fourteen murders.19 Using state-level data from 1977 to 1997, Mocan and 
Gittings  find  that  each  execution  deters  five  murders  on  average.20  They  also  find  that 

increases in the murder rate come from removing people from death row and also from 

commutations in death sentences. Yet another study, based on state-level data from 1997-

1999,  finds  that  a  death  sentence  deters  4.5  murders  and  an  execution  deters  three 
murders.21 The same study investigates the question whether executions deter crimes of 

passion  and  murders  by  intimates.  The  answer  is  clear:  these  categories  of  murder  are 
deterred by capital punishment.22 The deterrent effect of the death penalty is also found to 

be a function of the length of waits on death row, with a murder deterred for every 2.75 
years of reduction in the period before execution.23  

In the period between 1972 and 1976, the Supreme Court produced an effective 

moratorium on capital punishment, and an extensive study exploits that fact to estimate 

the deterrent effect. Using state-level data from 1960–2000, the authors make before-and-

after  comparisons,  focusing  on  the  murder  rate  in  each  state  before  and  after  the  death 
penalty  was  suspended  and  reinstated.24  The  authors  find  a  substantial  deterrent  effect. 

After suspending the death penalty, 91% of states faced an increase in homicides—and in 
67% of states, the rate was decreased after reinstatement of capital punishment.25 

                                                 

19 Paul R. Zimmerman, Estimates of the Deterrent Effect of Alternative Execution Methods in the United 
States,  Am.  J.  Econ.  &  Soc.  (forthcoming);  Paul  R.  Zimmerman,  State  Executions,  Deterrence,  and  the 
Incidence of Murder, 7 J. APPLIED ECON. 163, 163 (2004). 

20  H.  Naci  Mocan  &  R.  Kaj Gittings, Getting Off  Death  Row:  Commuted  Sentences and  the  Deterrent 
Effect of Capital Punishment, 46 J. L. & Econ. 453, 453 (2003). Notably, no clear evidence of a deterrent 
effect from capital punishment emerges from Lawrence Katz et al., Prison Conditions, Capital Punishment, 
and  Deterrence,  5  Am  L  and  Ec  Rev  318,  330  (2003),  which  finds  that  the  estimate  of  deterrence  is 
extremely sensitive to the choice of specification, with the largest estimate paralleling that in Ehrlich, supra 
note. Note, however, that the principal finding in id. is that prison deaths do have a strong deterrent effect, 
and a stunningly large one – with each prison death producing a reduction of “30-100 violent crimes and a 
similar number of property crimes.” Id. at 340. 

21  Joanna  M.  Shepherd,  Murders  of  Passion,  Execution  Delays,  and  the  Deterrence  of  Capital 

Punishment, 33 J. Legal Stud. 283, 308 (2004). 

22 Id. at 305 (“Many researchers have argued that some types of murders cannot be deterred: they assert 
that  murders  committed  during  arguments  or  other  crime-of-passion  moments  are  not  premeditated  and 
therefore  undeterrable.  My  results  indicate  that  this  assertion  is  wrong:  the  rates  of  crime-of-passion  and 
murders by intimates – crimes previously believed to be undeterrable – all decrease in execution months.”).  

23 Id. at 283. 
24 Id. 
25 Id. at tables 5 & 6. 

9 

 

A recent study offers more refined findings.26 Disaggregating the data on a state 

by  state  basis,  Joanna  Shepherd  finds  that  the  nation-wide  deterrent  effect  of  capital 

punishment  is  entirely  driven  by  only  six  states—and  that  no  deterrent  effect  can  be 
found  in  the  twenty-one  other  states  that  have  restored  capital  punishment.27  What 

distinguishes the six from the twenty-one? The answer lies in the fact that states showing 

a deterrent effect are executing more people than states that do not. In fact the data show 

a  “threshold  effect”:  deterrence  is  found  in  states  that  had  at  least  nine  executions 
between  1977  and  1996.  In  states  below  that  threshold,  no  deterrence  can  be  found.28 

This  finding  is  intuitively  plausible.  Unless  executions  reach  a  certain  level,  murderers 
may act as if the death is so improbable as not to be worthy of concern.29 Her main lesson 

is that once the level of executions reaches a certain level, the deterrent effect of capital 

punishment is substantial. 

All in all, the recent evidence of a deterrent effect from capital punishment seems 

impressive. But in studies of this kind, it is hard to control for confounding variables, and 

a  degree  of  doubt  inevitably  remains.  It  remains  possible  that  these  findings  will  be 

exposed  as  statistical  artifacts  or  will  be  found  to  rest  on  flawed  econometric  methods. 

More  broadly,  skeptics  are  likely  to  question  the  mechanisms  by  which  capital 

punishment  has  a  deterrent  effect.  On  the  skeptical  view,  many  murderers  lack  a  clear 

sense of the likelihood and perhaps even the existence of executions in their state; further 

problems  for  the  deterrence  claim  are  introduced  by  the  fact  that  capital  punishment  is 
imposed infrequently and after long delays.30 In any case many murders are committed in 

a passionate state that does not lend itself to an all-things-considered analysis on the part 

of perpetrators. 

As mentioned above, and as we discuss in Part IV, these suppositions are in some 

tension with existing evidence. But let us suppose that these doubts are reasonable. If so, 

                                                 

26  JOANNA  M.  SHEPHERD,  DETERRENCE  VERSUS  BRUTALIZATION:  CAPITAL  PUNISHMENT’S  DIFFERING 

IMPACTS AMONG STATES (Emory Legal Scholarship Working Paper No. 1, 2004). 

27 Id. at 38. 
28 Id. at 36 – 38. 
29 Less intuitively, Shepherd finds that in thirteen of the states that had capital punishment, but executed 
few  people,  capital  punishment  actually  increased  the  murder  rate.  She  attributes  this  puzzling  result  to 
what  she  calls  the  “brutalization  effect,”  by  which  capital  punishment  devalues  human  life  and  teaches 
people about the legitimacy of vengeance. Id. at 37 – 38. 

30 See Steven Levitt, Understanding Why Crime Fell in the 1990s, 18 J Econ Persp 163 (2004). 

10 

should current findings be deemed irrelevant for purposes of policy and law? That would 

be an odd conclusion. In regulation as a whole, it is common to embrace some version of 
the Precautionary Principle31—the idea that steps should be taken to prevent significant 

harm  even  if  cause-and-effect  relationships  remain  unclear  and  even  if  the  risk  is  not 

likely  to  come  to  fruition.  Even  if  we  reject  strong  versions  of  the  Precautionary 
Principle,32  it  hardly  seems  sensible  that  governments  should  ignore  evidence 

demonstrating  a  significant  possibility  that  a  certain  step  will  save  large  numbers  of 

innocent lives. 

For  capital  punishment,  critics  often  seem  to  assume  that  evidence  on  deterrent 

effects should be ignored if reasonable questions can be raised about it. But as a general 

rule, this is implausible. In most contexts, the existence of reasonable questions is hardly 

an  adequate  reason  to  ignore  evidence  of  severe  harm.  If  it  were,  many  environmental 
controls  would  be  in  serious  jeopardy.33  We  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  government 

should  commit  what  many  people  consider  to  be,  prima  facie,  a  serious  moral  wrong 

simply  on  the  basis  of  speculation  that  this  step  will  do  some  good.  But  a  degree  of 

reasonable  doubt  does  not  seem  sufficient  to  doom  capital  punishment,  if  the  evidence 

suggests that significant deterrence occurs.  

In  any  event,  we  will  proceed  by  stipulating  to  the  validity  of  this  evidence,  in 

order to isolate the question of its moral significance. Our primary concern here is not to 

reach a final judgment about the evidence, but how to evaluate capital punishment given 

the assumption of a substantial deterrent effect. Those who doubt the evidence might ask 

themselves how they would assess the moral questions if they were ultimately convinced 

that  life-life  tradeoffs  were  actually  involved—as,  for  example,  in  hostage  situations  in 

which officials are authorized to use deadly force to protect the lives of innocent people. 

                                                 

31  See  generally  ARIE  TROUWBORST,  EVOLUTION  AND  STATUS  OF  THE  PRECAUTIONARY  PRINCIPLE  IN 
INTERNATIONAL  LAW  (2002);  INTERPRETING  THE  PRECAUTIONARY  PRINCIPLE  (Tim  O'Riordan  &  James 
Cameron eds., 2002). 

32  See,  e.g.,  Julian  Morris,  Defining  the  Precautionary  Principle,  in  RETHINKING  RISK  AND  THE 

PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE (2002). 

33  Indeed,  those  skeptical  of  capital  punishment  invoked  evidence  to  the  effect  that  capital  punishment 
did  not  deter,  and  argued,  plausibly,  that  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  wait  for  definitive  evidence  before 
ceasing  with  a  punishment  that  could  not  be  shown  to  be  reducing  homicide.  See  Richard  O.  Lempert, 
Desert and Deterrence: An Assessment of the Moral Bases of the Case for Capital Punishment, 79 Mich. L. 
Rev. 1177, 1222-24 (1981). Here is a kind of precautionary principle, arguing against the most aggressive 
forms of punishment if the evidence suggested that they did not deter. We are arguing for a mirror-image 
precautionary principle when the evidence goes the other way. 

11 

 

If  capital  punishment  does  have  a  strong  deterrent  effect,  there  is  a  crucial 

implication: it must be the case that capital punishment is not a wholly capricious system 

of punishment, pervaded by false positives. At the very least, some or many prospective 

murderers must believe that the system has a high degree of accuracy. The simple reason 

is that if capital punishment were thoroughly error-prone and seen as such, the deterrent 

signal  of  the  punishment  would  be  so  diluted  that  it  would  be  extremely  unlikely  to 

produce  such  strong  and  consistent  empirical  traces  as  those  described  above.  At  the 

limit,  if  capital  punishment  were  entirely  random,  falling  with  utter  arbitrariness  upon 

innocent and guilty alike, there would be no reason for any prospective criminal to factor 

it into calculations about the costs and benefits of crime. In this sense, it turns out, Justice 

Potter Stewart’s comparison of capital punishment to being struck by lightning does not 
hold for current systems (a point on which we will expand below).34 We do not mean to 

overstate this point. Of course it remains undeniable that capital punishment is sometimes 

imposed  erroneously,  and  undeniable  too  that  it  is  sometimes  imposed  arbitrarily  or  on 

invidious  grounds  within  the  set  of  guilty  defendants.  Nothing  we  say  here  is  meant  to 

suggest that states should be content with erroneous or arbitrary death sentences. But the 

evidence suggests that there is at least a high degree of accuracy, in the sense of avoiding 

false positives, in the infliction of capital punishment. 

II. 

 
Capital Punishment: Moral Foundations and Four Objections 
 
Assume, then, that capital punishment does save significant numbers of innocent 

lives.  On  what  assumptions  should  that  form  of  punishment  be  deemed  morally 

unacceptable, rather than morally obligatory? Why should the deaths of those convicted 

of  capital  murder,  a  large  fraction  of  whom  are  guilty  in  fact,  be  considered  a  more 

serious  moral  wrong  than  the  deaths  of  a  more  numerous  group  who  are  certainly 

innocents? 

We consider, and ultimately reject, several responses. Our first general contention 

is that opposition to capital punishment trades on a form of the distinction between acts 

and  omissions.  Whatever  the  general  force  of  that  distinction,  its  application  to 

government systematically fails, because government is a distinctive kind of moral agent. 

                                                 

34 Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 309 – 310 (1972) (Stewart, J., concurring). 

12 

Our  second  general  contention  is  that,  apart  from  direct  state  involvement,  the  features 

that make capital punishment morally objectionable to its critics are also features of the 

murders  that  capital  punishment  deters.  The  principal  difference,  on  the  empirical 

assumptions we are making, is that in a legal regime without capital punishment, far more 

people  die,  and  those  people  are  innocent  of  any  wrongdoing.  No  one  denies  that 

arbitrariness  in  the  system  of  capital  punishment  is  a  serious  problem.  But  even  if  the 

existing system is viewed in its worst light, it involves far less arbitrariness than does the 

world of homicide. Let us begin, however, with foundational issues. 

 

A. Morality and Death 

 
On  a  standard  view,  it  is  impossible  to  come  to  terms  with  the  moral  questions 

about  capital  punishment  without  saying  something  about  the  foundations  of  moral 

judgments.  We  will  suggest,  however,  that  sectarian  commitments  at  the  foundational 

level are for the most part irrelevant to the issues here. If it is stipulated that the evidence 

discussed  in  Part  I  is  correct,  both  consequentialist  and  deontological  accounts  of 

morality  will  or  should  converge  upon  the  view  that  capital  punishment  is  morally 

obligatory.  Consequentialists  will  do  so  because  capital  punishment  minimizes  killings 

overall.  Deontologists  will  do  so  because  an  opposition  to  killing  is,  by  itself, 

indeterminate  in  the  face  of  life-life  tradeoffs;  because  a  legal  regime  with  capital 

punishment  has  a  strong  claim  to  be  more  respectful  of  life’s  value  than  does  a  legal 

regime lacking capital punishment; and because modern deontologists typically subscribe 

to  a  consequentialist  override  or  escape-hatch,  one  that  makes  otherwise  impermissible 

actions obligatory if necessary to prevent many deaths—precisely what we are assuming 

is true of capital punishment. Only those few deontologists who both insist upon a strong 

distinction  between  state  actions  and  state  omissions,  and  who  reject  a  consequentialist 

override, will believe the deterrent effect of capital punishment irrelevant in principle. 

Suppose  that  we  accept  consequentialism  and  believe  that  government  actions 

should be evaluated in terms of their effects on aggregate welfare. If so, the evidence of 

deterrence strongly supports a moral argument in favor of the death penalty—which, by 

hypothesis,  seems  to  produce  a  net  gain  in  overall  welfare.  Of  course  there  are  many 

complications here; for example, the welfare of many people might increase as a result of 

13 

knowing  that  capital  punishment  exists,  and  the  welfare  of  many  other  people  might 

decrease  for  the  same  reason.  A  full  consequentialist  calculus  would  require  a  more 

elaborate  assessment  than  we  aim  to  provide  here.  The  only  point  is  that  if  capital 

punishment  produces  significantly  fewer  deaths  on  balance,  there  should  be  a  strong 

consequentialist  presumption  on  its  behalf.  To  be  sure,  it  is  also  possible  to  imagine 

forms of consequentialism that reject welfarism as implausibly reductionist and that see 

violations of rights as part of the set of consequences that must be taken into account in 
deciding  what  to  do.35  For  some  such  consequentialists,  killings  are,  under  ordinary 

circumstances,  a  violation  of  rights,  and  this  point  is  highly  relevant  to  any  judgment 

about killings. But even if the point is accepted, capital punishment may be required, not 

prohibited,  on  consequentialist  grounds,  simply  because  and  to  the  extent  that  it 

minimizes rights violations. 

But imagine that we are deontologists, believing that actions by government and 

others should not be evaluated in consequentialist terms; how can capital punishment be 

morally  permissible,  let  alone  obligatory?  Suppose,  for  example,  that  under  ordinary 

circumstances, killing a human being is a wrong, and its wrongness does not depend on 

an inquiry into whether it produces a net increase in welfare. For many critics of capital 

punishment,  a  deontological  intuition  is  central;  evidence  of  deterrence  is  irrelevant 

because  moral  wrongdoing  by  the  state  is  not  justified  even  if  it  can  be  defended  on 

utilitarian grounds. Compare a situation in which a state seeks to kill an innocent person, 

knowing  that  the  execution  will  prevent  a  number  of  private  killings;  deontologists 

believe that the unjustified execution cannot be supported even if the state is secure in its 

knowledge  of  its  beneficial  effects.  Of  course  it  is  contentious  to  claim  that  capital 

punishment  is  a  moral  wrong.  But  if  it  is,  then  significant  deterrence  might  be  entirely 

beside the point. 

Despite all this, our claims here do not depend on accepting consequentialism or 

on  rejecting 

the  deontological  objection 

to  evaluating  unjustified  killings 

in 

consequentialist  terms.  The  argument  is  instead  that  by  itself  and  in  the  abstract,  this 

objection  is  indeterminate  on  the  moral  status  of  capital  punishment.  To  the  extent 

possible,  we  intend  to  bracket  the  most  fundamental  questions  and  to  suggest  that 

                                                 

35 Amartya Sen, Rights and Agency, 11 PHIL. & PUB. AFF. 3, 15 – 19 (1982). 

14 

whatever one’s view of the foundations of morality, the objection to the death penalty is 

difficult to sustain under the empirical assumptions that we have traced. Taken in its most 

sympathetic  light,  a  deontological  objection  to  capital  punishment  is  unconvincing  if 

states  that  refuse  to  impose  the  death  penalty  produce,  by  that  very  refusal,  significant 

numbers of additional deaths. For deontologists who emphasize life’s value and object to 

the death  penalty,  the  problem is acute if the  refusal  to  impose  that penalty predictably 

leads  to  significant  additional  murders.  In  a  hostage  situation,  police  officers  are 

permitted  to  kill  (execute)  those  who  have  taken  hostages  if  this  step  is  reasonably 

deemed  necessary  to  save  those  who  have  been  taken.  If  the  evidence  of  deterrence  is 

convincing, why is capital punishment so different in principle? 

Of  course  we  could  envision  a  form  of  deontology  that  refuses  any  exercise  in 

aggregation—one that would refuse to authorize, or compel, a violation of rights even if 

the violation is necessary to prevent a significantly larger number of rights violations. But 

most  modern  deontologists  reject  this  position,  instead  admitting  a  consequentialist 
override  to  baseline  deontological  prohibitions.36  Although  the  threshold  at  which  the 

consequentialist  override  is  triggered  varies  with  different  accounts,  we  will  suggest 

below  that  if  each  execution  deters  some  eighteen  murders,  the  override  is  plausibly 

triggered. 

To  distill  these  points:  the  only  moral  accounts  that  are  inconsistent  with  our 

argument  are  those  that  both  (1)  embrace  a  distinction  between  state  actions  and  state 

omissions  and  (2)  reject  a  consequentialist  override.  To  those  who  subscribe  to  this 

complex  of  views,  and  who  consider  capital  punishment  a  violation  of  rights,  our 

argument  will  not  be  convincing.  In  the  end,  however,  we  believe  that  it  is  difficult  to 

sustain  the  set  of  moral  assumptions  that  would  bar  capital  punishment  if  it  is  the  best 

means  of  preventing  significant  numbers  of  innocent  deaths.  Indeed,  we  believe  that 

those who think that they hold those assumptions are motivated by other considerations—

especially a failure to give full weight to statistical lives—on which we focus in Part III. 

 

                                                 

900 (2000). 

36 For an overview, see Larry Alexander, Deontology at the Threshold, 37 SAN DIEGO L. REV. 893, 898-

15 

B. Acts and Omissions  

 
A  natural  response  to  our  basic  concern  would  invoke  the  widespread  intuition 

that  capital  punishment  involves  intentional  state  “action,”  while  the  failure  to  deter 

private  murders  is  merely  an  “omission”  by  the  state.  In  our  view,  this  appealing  and 

intuitive line of argument goes rather badly wrong. The critics of capital punishment have 

been  led  astray  by  uncritically  applying  the  act-omission  distinction  to  a  regulatory 

setting.  Their  position  condemns  the  “active”  infliction  of  death  by  governments,  but 

does  not  condemn  the  “inactive”  production  of  death  that  comes  from  the  refusal  to 

maintain a system of capital punishment. The basic problem is that even if this selective 

condemnation can be justified at the level of individual behavior, it is difficult to defend 
for  governments.37  A  great  deal  of  work  has  to  be  done  to  explain  why  “inactive,”  but 

causal, government decisions should not be part of the moral calculus. Suppose that we 

endorse  the  deontological  position  that  it  is  wrong  to  take  human  lives,  even  if  overall 

welfare is promoted by taking them. Why does the system of capital punishment violate 

that position, if the failure to impose capital punishment also takes lives? 

Perhaps  our  argument  about  unjustified  selectivity  is  blind  to  morally  relevant 

factors that condemn capital punishment and that buttress the act-omission distinction in 

this  context.  There  are  two  possible  points  here,  one  involving  intention  and  the  other 

involving  causation.  First,  a  government  (acting  through  agents)  that  engages  in  capital 

punishment intends to take lives; it seeks to kill. A government that does not engage in 

capital  punishment,  and  therefore  provides  less  deterrence,  does  not  intend  to  kill.  The 

deaths that result are the unintended and unsought by-product of an effort to respect life. 

Surely—it  might  be  said—this  is  a  morally  relevant  difference.  Second,  a  government 

that inflicts capital punishment ensures a simple and direct causal chain between its own 

behavior and the taking of human lives. When a government rejects capital punishment, 

the  causal  chain  is  much  more  complex;  the  taking  of  human  lives  is  an  indirect 

consequence  of  the  government’s  decision,  one  that  is  mediated  by  the  actions  of  a 

murderer. The government authorizes its agents to inflict capital punishment, but does not 

                                                 

37 Compare debates over going to war: Some pacifists insist, correctly, that acts of war will result in the 
loss of life, including civilian life. But a refusal to go to war will often result in the loss of life, including 
civilian life. 

16 

authorize  private  parties  to  murder;  indeed  it  forbids  murder.  Surely  that  is  a  morally 

relevant difference too. 

In our view, both the argument from  causation  and the argument  from intention 

go  wrong  by  overlooking  the  distinctive  features  of  government  as  a  moral  agent. 

Whatever  the  general  status  of  the  act-omission  distinction  as  a  matter  of  moral 
philosophy,38 the distinction is least impressive when applied to government.39 The most 

fundamental point is that unlike individuals, governments always and necessarily face a 

choice  between  or  among  possible  policies  for  regulating  third  parties.  The  distinction 

between acts and omissions may not be intelligible in this context, and even if it is, the 

distinction does not make a morally relevant difference. Most generally, government is in 

the  business  of  creating  permissions  and  prohibitions.  When  it  explicitly  or  implicitly 
authorizes private action, it is not omitting to do anything, or refusing to act.40 Moreover, 

the distinction between authorized and unauthorized private action—for example, private 

killing—becomes  obscure  when  the  government  formally  forbids  private  action,  but 

chooses a set of policy instruments that do not adequately or fully discourage it.  

A  system  of  punishments  that  only  weakly  deters  homicide,  relative  to  other 

feasible  punishments,  does  not  quite  authorize  homicide;  but  it  is  not  properly 

characterized  as  an  omission,  and  little  turns  on  whether  it  can  be  so  characterized. 

Suppose, for example, that government fails to characterize certain actions—say, sexual 

harassment—as  tortuous or as violative of civil rights  law, and  that it  therefore  permits 

employers to harass employees as they choose, or to discharge employees for failing to 

submit to sexual harassment. It would be unhelpful to characterize the result as a product 

of governmental “inaction.” If employers are permitted to discharge employees for failing 

to submit to sexual harassment, it is because the law is allocating certain entitlements to 

employers  rather  than  employees.  Or  consider  the  context  of  ordinary  torts.  When 

                                                 

38 See generally RONALD DWORKIN, LIFE’S DOMINION: AN ARGUMENT ABOUT ABORTION, EUTHANASIA, 
AND  INDIVIDUAL  FREEDOM  (1993);  Frances  M.  Kamm,  Abortion  and  the  Value  of  Life:  A  Discussion  of 
LIFE’S  DOMINION,  95  COLUM.  L.  REV.  160  (1995)  (reviewing  DWORKIN,  supra);  Tom  Stacy,  Acts, 
Omissions, and the Necessity of Killing Innocents, 29 Am. J. Crim. L. 481 (2002). 

39 Here we proceed in the spirit of Robert E. Goodin, UTILITARIANISM AS A PUBLIC PHILOSOPHY (1995), 
by  treating  government  as  a  distinctive  sort  of  moral  agent  with  respect  to  whom  many  quotidian  moral 
distinctions have little purchase. Goodin, we should note, does not address the act/omission distinction at 
any length, although he seems to reject it. See id. at 89. 

40 See Stephen Holmes and Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost of Rights (1999). 

17 

homeowner B sues factory A, complaining of air pollution, a decision not to rule for B is 

not a form of inaction; it is the allocation to factory A of property right to pollute.  

Let  us  apply  these  points,  beginning  with  the  causal  version  of  the  argument  in 

favor of an act-omission distinction. For concreteness, suppose that government officials 

face a choice between two (and only two) packages of policies for reducing the murder 

rate.  Suppose  that  Package  A  contains  a  range  of  legal  instruments,  such  as  ordinary 

imprisonment,  imprisonment  without  parole  (perhaps  for  life),  post-incarceration 

programs to prevent recidivism, and so on. Package B contains all the same instruments 

plus capital punishment. 

Stipulating to the validity of the evidence discussed in Part I, the crux of the issue 

is  this:  whatever  the  nature  of  the  causal  chain,  Package  A  will  inevitably  ensure  a 

significant increase in the number of deaths. Why should the length of the causal chain 

matter?  In  this  setting,  it  is  hard  to  make  sense  of  the  claim  that  capital  punishment 

involves causal government “action” in some morally distinctive way. For government to 

opt for Package A—even in the sense of simply leaving in place previously-enacted laws 

that  adopted  Package  A—is  no  less  an  “action”  than  it  is  to  opt  for  Package  B.  Some 

criminal-justice policy or other will necessarily be in place. The only interesting or even 

meaningful question government ever faces is not whether to act, but what action should 

be taken—what mix of criminal-justice policies government ought to pursue. The policy 

mix that does not include capital punishment is not an “omission” or a “failure to act” in 

any meaningful sense. If a government chooses that mix, it is allocating a certain set of 

rights to both murderers and their victims; the latter are certainly given a right to be free 

from murder, but the right is limited by the terms of the anticipated punishment. In the 

extreme case, suppose that a state failed to punish certain classes of murders (say, those 

of  African-Americans),  or  that  it  punished  such  murders  only  infrequently,  or  that  it 

punished such murders with a slap on the wrist. If so, the distinction between authorizing 

murder, and failing to prevent it, would become thin.  

The  allied  idea  that  capital  punishment  involves  “intentional”  action,  whereas 

merely  allowing  (undeterred)  private  murders  to  proceed  does  not,  misfires  for  parallel 

reasons.  Consider  a  situation  in  which  regulators  refuse  to  adopt  motor  vehicle  or  drug 

safety  regulations  that  would  prevent  significant  numbers  of  statistical  deaths;  is  the 

18 

refusal acceptable because it leads to deaths that are not strictly speaking intended? The 

very  concept  of  “intentional”  action,  and  the  moral  relevance  of  intention,  are  both 

obscure when government is the pertinent moral agent. The executioner who administers 

the injection acts intentionally, but so does the private murderer. Proponents of this view 

presumably do not mean to focus narrowly on the actual individual who carries out the 

final action on the state’s behalf. (Does it matter so much that the executioner is on the 

government’s payroll? What if the executioner is a volunteer?) The real point is that in a 

regime  of  capital  punishment  the  executioner  acts  pursuant  to  an  explicit  government 

policy,  whereas  (the  idea  runs)  there  is  never  a  government  policy  to  murder  the 

particular citizens whose deaths would be deterred by capital punishment. 

It  is  true  that  there  is  no  such  policy,  but  the  moral  relevance  of  its  absence  is 

obscure.  If  the  point  appears  intuitively  important,  it  is  only  because  of  the  abstract  or 

statistical character of the eighteen persons whose murders are deterred by each execution 

(a  theme  to  which  we  return  in  Part  III).  The  legal  regime  whose  package  of  crime-

control  instruments  happens  not  to  include  capital  punishment  does  indeed  embody  an 

explicit  government  policy:  a  policy  that  inevitably  and  predictably  opts  for  more 

murders over fewer. That the victims of those murders cannot be personally identified in 

advance  does  not  seem  a  morally  impressive  basis  for  favoring  the  regime  that  makes 

their  murders  inevitable.  Putting  aside  the  intentional  actions  of  low-level  officials,  the 

relevant  policies  in  either  regime  will  be  set  by  a  complex  process  of  democratic  and 

regulatory interaction among voters, legislators, administrators, and judges. In this large-

scale  process  of  collective  decisionmaking,  the  concept  of  intention  becomes  too 
attenuated  to  bear  the  moral  weight  often  put  upon  it;41  and  the  regime  with  capital 

punishment  does  not  seem  importantly  different,  on  the  score  of  intentions,  than  the 

regime without it. 

In  this  light,  the  idea  that  the  government  “authorizes”  capital  punishment  but 

“forbids” private murder is too simple. Two points are important. First, of course it is true 
                                                 

41 There is a large philosophical literature that considers whether the concept of culpability for intentional 
wrongdoing applies meaningfully to governments. See, e.g., CHRISTOPHER KUTZ, COMPLICITY: ETHICS AND 
LAW  FOR  A COLLECTIVE  AGE  (2000).  There  are  also  large  literatures  in  jurisprudence  and  literary  theory 
that consider whether the concept of intention can meaningfully be transposed from individual to collective 
decisionmakers. See, e.g., JEREMY WALDRON, LAW  AND DISAGREEMENT (1999); Steven Knapp & Walter 
Benn Michaels, Against Theory, 8 CRITICAL INQUIRY 723 (1982);Max Radin, Statutory Interpretation, 43 
HARV. L. REV. 863 (1930). 

19 

that the government does not authorize private killings in a retail sense, barring cases of 

self-defense or defense of others. At the wholesale level, however, to adopt a package of 

criminal-justice policies that does not include capital punishment is to ensure the murders 

of a large number of (as yet unidentified) victims. The government’s inability to identify 

the victims before the fact must be morally irrelevant. Second, there is a sense in which 

the  regime  without  capital  punishment  comes  perilously  close  to  licensing  private 

killings, because in that regime policymakers know or should know that the prohibition 

on murder is supported by a weaker deterrent signal. The cash value of a prohibition lies 

in the scheme of punishments that enforce it; where the enforcement scheme is feeble, the 

prohibition is  as well.  On the empirical assumptions we are making, a government that 

eschews  capital  punishment  rejects  an  effective  mechanism  for  enforcing  the  baseline 

prohibition  of  murder.  In  the  extreme  case,  ineffective  enforcement  mechanisms  make 

the prohibition of murder begin to look like something of a sham. 

So  far  we  have  argued  that  the  act-omission  distinction  is  conceptually  obscure 

when  applied  to  government,  whatever  its  merits  when  applied  to  individuals.  Even  if 

that  argument  fails,  however,  capital  punishment  may  still  be  morally  obligatory  for 

governments.  The  relevant  acts  may  be  morally  required,  or  the  relevant  omissions 

morally blameworthy. We begin with the idea that declining to adopt capital punishment 

is  a  culpable  omission,  and  then  turn  to  the  idea  that  adopting  capital  punishment  is  a 

morally obligatory act. 

Suppose  that  there  is  some  clear  sense  in  which  a  system  of  capital  punishment 

counts as relevantly “action” and that this is not the case for a refusal to impose capital 

punishment, which therefore counts as  a  kind  of omission or failure to act. What is the 

moral  importance  of  this  distinction?  Individuals,  let  us  suppose,  are  prima  facie 

obligated not to harm others, but have no obligation to assist them. Of course this view 

raises many puzzles, not least in the definition of the relevant categories, but let us accept 

it for present purposes, and ask how it applies where government is the moral agent. The 

government  cannot  easily  claim  that  it  is  under  no  duty  to  assist  people,  at  least  when 

they are at risk of criminal violence. In administrative law, it is greatly contested whether 

agency inaction is subject to some special immunity from judicial review, and any such 

immunity turns largely on pragmatic considerations involving the limits of oversight by 

20 

federal  judges.42  Likewise,  governmental  failure  to  protect  people  against  private 
violence  generally  does  not  give  rise  to  constitutional  liability,43  but  this  too  is  largely 

because judges have a limited capacity to enforce liability in such cases. Apart from law, 

there is no reason to think that omissions of this kind are properly insulated from moral 

criticism if significant numbers of deaths are a predictable consequence. 

Alternatively, and equivalently, we can put the point within the usual language of 

the act-omission distinction. It is standard that an omission can count as an action where 

there is a “duty” to act, especially where the party subject to the duty has himself created 

the  conditions  that  threaten  harm.  Where  government  is  concerned,  these  requirements 

will often be fulfilled, far more often than for typical private parties. Where citizens are 

murdering each other, government is not a bystander, innocent or otherwise, because the 

decision  whether  to  murder  is  made,  at  least  in  part,  in  light  of  the  government’s 

criminal-justice policies. The background rules against which citizens act to threaten the 

lives  of  others  or  to  protect  their  own,  including  rules  about  and  limitations  on  self-

defense, are themselves products of government action, including the action of the special 

bureaucracies that lawyers call criminal courts. 

The previous points suggest that even if inflicting capital punishment is an “act” 

while  declining  to  inflict  it  is  an  “omission,”  the  omission  may  nonetheless  be  morally 

culpable.  Conversely,  the  act  may  be  morally  obligatory,  if  large  numbers  are  saved. 

Even strict deontological accounts of the impermissibility of killing typically build in a 
threshold  exception:  when  the  threshold  is  crossed,  the  moral  agent  is  obliged44  to 
commit otherwise impermissible acts in order to save third-party lives.45 Moral theorists 

are  typically  vague  as  to  where  the  threshold  lies,  but  if  each  execution  saves  eighteen 

                                                 

42 See Heckler v. Chaney, 470 U.S. 821 (1985). 
43 See DeShaney v. Winnebago County Dept. of Social Services, 489 U.S. 189 (1989). 
44  A  more  precise  formulation  would  be  “permitted  or  obliged,”  because  it  is  unclear  which  moral 
modality holds, according to threshold deontology, once the baseline deontological prohibition is waived. 
Without  digressing  too  far  into  moral  theory,  we  suggest  that,  conditional  on  accepting  threshold 
deontology, the agent is obliged (not merely permitted) to promote the best overall consequences once the 
threshold has been crossed. In our view it would be distinctly odd to say that a moral agent is permitted to 
infringe deontological constraints to save a large number of lives, but is not obliged to do so. For the related 
question whether general consequentialism entails an obligation to promote best consequences overall, or 
instead  can  recognize  a  class  of  supererogatory  acts,  see  Shelly  Kagan,  NORMATIVE  ETHICS  153-170 
(1998). 

45 For an overview, see Larry Alexander, Deontology at the Threshold, 37 SAN DIEGO L. REV. 893, 898-

900 (2000). 

21 

lives,  then  we  are  right  in  the  neighborhood  at  which  most  theorists  blanch  at  the 
collateral  costs  of  deontological  prohibitions.46  We  offer  more  general  remarks  on 

deontology and its relation to the act-omission distinction below. The point here is that 

capital punishment may be morally obligatory even if capital punishment counts as an act 

while failing to impose capital punishment counts as an omission. 

We  have  questioned  both  the  coherence  and  the  moral  relevance  of  the  act-

omission distinction as applied to capital punishment. We want to be clear, however, that 

in  this  setting,  as  elsewhere,  rejecting  the  act-omission  distinction  only  begins  the 

analysis.  For  government  to  opt  for  a  large  highway-building  project,  for  example, 

inevitably and predictably results in the deaths of a statistical set of workers who are no 

less real for being unidentifiable in advance. The reason the highway project is acceptable 

(if it is) might be either that more deaths would occur on net absent the project, or more 

broadly  that  the  social  benefits  are  higher  than  the  costs.  Likewise,  capital  punishment 

might  or  might  not  be  shown  to  save  lives,  on  net;  might  or  might  not  turn  out  to  be 

welfare-enhancing,  all  things  considered;  and  might  or  might  not  turn  out  to  be  just, 

depending on whether we hold a welfarist conception of justice. Our point here is limited: 

the  crucial  questions  that  determine  whether  capital  punishment  is  life-saving,  welfare-

enhancing, or otherwise just are not questions about the difference between actions and 

omissions. 

Consider,  in  this  regard,  the  “reasonable  doubt”  standard  of  criminal  law,  under 

which  it  is  better  that  some  number  of  guilty  defendants  go  free  than  that  an  innocent 

person be convicted. It is possible to imagine a defense of the reasonable doubt standard 

on  act-omission  grounds:  perhaps  the  government  “acts”  when  it  convicts  and  “fails  to 

act” when it does not convict; perhaps government errors through action are much worse 

than  government  errors  through  inaction.  Yet  this  seems  an  unlikely  description.    To 

acquit, or to decline to convict, is government “action” whether performed by a judge or 
by a jury acting as the state’s agents,47 under rules and procedures set by the state. Yet the 

reasonable  doubt  standard  can  still  be  straightforwardly  defended  on  a  claim  that  the 

overall social  consequences of false convictions are much  worse than the overall social 

                                                 

46 See Kagan, supra note 44, at 81 (stating that a “low threshold might permit killing one to save ten.”).  
47  See  Gary  J.  Simson  &  Stephen  P.  Garvey,  Knockin'  On  Heaven's  Door:  Rethinking  the  Role  of 

Religion in Death Penalty Cases, 86 CORNELL L. REV. 1090, 1108 (2001). 

22 

consequences  of  false  acquittals.  If  so  defended,  the  standard  is  perfectly  sensible,  and 

need not be justified by reference to an obscure distinction between acts and omissions. 

So  too  in  our  setting:  apart  from  the  distinction  between  acts  and  omissions,  there  is  a 

reasonable  question  about  whether  capital  punishment  really  does  provide  net  social 

benefits.  The  relevant  material  for  answering  that  question,  however,  is  the  empirical 

evidence discussed in Part I, rather than conceptual arguments that struggle to adapt the 

act-omission distinction to the state. 

C. Error, Arbitrariness, and Discrimination 

 
Of  course  there  are  important  objections  to  capital  punishment  that  do  not  trade 

on  (some  version  of)  the  distinction  between  acts  and  omissions.  Some  of  the  most 

powerful  of  these  objections  invoke  values  associated  with  the  rule  of  law.  There  are 

three concerns here.  

  

 

1.  Some  innocent  people  are  executed,  and  their  deaths  are  irreversible.48  No  legal 

system can ensure complete accuracy in criminal convictions. Even under the “no 

reasonable doubt” standard, errors are made. But errors are sometimes said to be 

intolerable  when  the  state  is  depriving  people  of  their  lives,  precisely  because 

mistaken deprivations cannot be reversed.  

2.  The  death  penalty  inevitably  contains  a  degree  of  arbitrariness.  Justice  Stewart 

famously made the point when he wrote that receiving the death penalty is “cruel 

and  unusual  in  the  same  way  that  being  struck  by  lightning  is  cruel  and 
unusual.”49  As  we  have  seen,  Justice  Stewart’s  point  is  overstated  for  current 

capital  punishment  systems.  But  if  any  such  system  operates  as  a  kind  of  death 

lottery,  in  which  similarly  situated  people are  not  treated  similarly,  perhaps  it  is 

unacceptable for that reason alone.  

3.  Even within the set of guilty defendants, the death penalty may be administered in 

a way that reflects objectionable or invidious discrimination. In 2003, 42% of the 
death row population was African-American and 56% was white.50 In some times 

                                                 

48 See Liebman, supra note. 
49 Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 309 (1972) (Stewart, J., concurring). 
50 Bureau of Justice Statistics, Capital Punishment, 2003, available at  

23 

and places, African-American defendants have been more likely to receive capital 

punishment than whites. More recently, those who kill white people appear to be 

more  likely  to  receive  capital  punishment  than  those  who  kill  African-
Americans.51  The  system  of  capital  punishment  might  reflect  a  form  of 

institutional  racism;  even  if  not,  the  system  might  simply  operate  against  the 

background  of  racial  injustice,  which  ensures  intolerable  inequalities  in  the 

imposition of death. In any event, capital defendants who are poor, or otherwise 

unlikely to have good lawyers, are far more likely to face the death penalty as a 

result.  

Some people believe that even if capital punishment could be morally acceptable 

if  it  were  fairly  administered,  the  inevitability  of  unfair  administration  means  that  we 

must  eliminate  it.  These  arguments  point  to  strong  reasons  for  reforming  the  existing 

system to increase accuracy and decrease arbitrariness. But the arguments do not succeed 

as  objections  to  capital  punishment  as  such.  Once  the  act-omission  distinction  is  no 

longer central, it becomes clear that the standard moral objections to capital punishment 

apply  even  more  powerfully  to  the  murders  that  capital  punishment  prevents.  Those 

murders  also  cause  irreversible  deaths:  the  deaths  of  the  victims  of  murder.  Private 

murders are also often highly arbitrary, involving  selectivity  on  any  number  of  morally 

irrelevant or objectionable grounds. African-Americans, for example, are far more likely 

than  other  groups  to  be  the  victims  of  murder.  In  2003,  48%  of  murder  victims  were 

white  and  48%  were  African-American—meaning  that  the  racial  disparity  in  the 

probability  of  becoming  a  murder  victim  is  even  greater  than  the  racial  disparity  in  the 

                                                                                                                                                 
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/cp03.pdf. 

51 For a well-known discussion, see Randall Kennedy, McCleskey v. Kemp: Race, Capital Punishment, 
and  the  Supreme  Court,  101  Harv  L  Rev  1388  (1988).  For  recent  evidence,  see  John  Blume,  Theodore 
Eisenberg, & Martin T. Wells, Explaining Death Row’s Population and Racial Composition, 1 J. Emp. L. 
Stud. 165 (2004). On the basis of their data, it is possible to estimate the rate at which death sentences are 
issued (per 1000 murders): 

Black on black 
Black on white 
White on white 
White on black 
  
  

6.7 
62.2 
28.4 
18.6 

24 

probability  of  ending  up  on  death  row.52  An  important  corollary  is  that  the  benefits  of 

capital  punishment,  to  the  extent  that  it  operates  as  a  powerful  deterrent  of  murder,  are 
likely to flow disproportionately to African-Americans.53  

To  be  sure,  this  effect  will  be  attenuated  if  death  sentences  are  imposed  less 

frequently on those who murder African-Americans. In the most pessimistic projection, 

capital punishment is likely to be disproportionately inflicted on African-Americans, and 

because that punishment is most likely to be imposed when whites have been killed, the 

resulting savings are likely to go largely to whites. On this view, the “life-life tradeoffs” 

may turn out, all too often, to be “African-American life-white life tradeoffs.” Perhaps it 

is unclear how to make that tradeoff, even if it involves larger numbers, and innocence, 

on one side of the ledger. But even on the current numbers, this projection is unrealistic. 
interracial.54  Because  African-Americans  are 

intraracial,  not 

Most  murder 

is 

disproportionately 

the  victims  of  homicide,  and  because 

their  murderers  are 

disproportionately  African-American,  they  have  a  great  deal  to  gain  from  capital 
punishment—very plausibly more, on balance, than white people do.55 In any event, the 

                                                 

52  See  FEDERAL  BUREAU  OF  INVESTIGATION,  CRIME  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  2003,  at  Table  2.3  (2003), 

available at http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/03cius.htm. 

53 See Randall Kennedy, McCleskey v. Kemp: Race, Capital Punishment, and the Supreme Court, supra 

note. 

54 See id. (tabulating murders as follows: 
White murdering white: 3,017 
African-American murdering African-American: 2,864 
White murdering African-American: 226 
African-American murdering white: 501 
55This judgment is supported by Blume et al., giving relevant figures for the demographics of murder:  

Because cases of white victims and African-American offenders are such a small percentage of the total 

number of murders, the pessimistic scenario discussed in text is not a plausible reading of the numbers. 

 

25 

more  natural  response  to  existing  racial  disparities  is  to  lower  them,  rather  than  to 

eliminate the penalty altogether. 

For  the  rule  of  law  questions,  as  for  all  others,  the  core  problem  of  capital 

punishment is that it presents a risk-risk tradeoff, or a life-life tradeoff. To say the least, it 

is extremely desirable to prevent arbitrary or irreversible deaths, but this consideration is 

on both sides of the ledger. The relevant analogy is not, say, to a policy that uses racial 

classifications to increase security or national wealth. The closer analogy would be one 

that  uses  racial  classifications  in  order  to  minimize  the  overall  use  of  racial 
classifications, or to hasten the day when racial classifications are no longer useful.56 A 

still closer analogy would be a policy that increases certain risks but that in the process 

decreases other risks of greater magnitude. Whatever the merits of such tradeoffs across 

different settings, a one-sided complaint about a harm or loss that is on both sides of the 

ledger is not a sufficient objection to a policy of this sort. 

On  this  view,  the  crucial  point  is  that  a  legal  regime  with  capital  punishment 

predictably  produces  far  fewer  arbitrary  and  irreversible  deaths  than  a  regime  without 

capital punishment. In a sensible regime of capital punishment, legal rules, enforced by 

administrative, judicial and citizen oversight, attempt to reduce arbitrariness and error up 
to the point where further reductions would inflict unacceptable harms.57 Where killing is 

carried  out  by  private  parties,  however,  there  are  no  such  institutions  for  keeping 

arbitrariness in check. Most striking is the sheer size of the opportunity cost of foregone 

capital  punishment.  Stipulate  that  for  every  foregone  execution  (conducted  under 

procedural  safeguards),  the  cost  is  on  average,  some  eighteen  arbitrary  and  irreversible 

murders—as  some  of  the  evidence  in  Part  I  suggests.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  five 
hundred  additional  death  row  inmates  were  executed  in  the  next  year.58  Unless  the 

                                                 

56 See, e.g., Regents of University of Calf. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 407 (1978) (Blackmun, J., concurring 
in  the  judgment  in  part  and  dissenting)  (“In  order  to  get  beyond  racism,  we  must  first  take  account  of 
race.”); Grutter v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306, 341 – 43 (2003) (“We expect that 25 years from now, the use of 
racial preferences will no longer be necessary to further the interest approved today.”); United Steelworkers 
of  Am.,  AFL-CIO  v.  Weber,  444  U.S.  193,  208  (1979)  (upholding  voluntary  private  affirmative  action 
plans “designed to break down old patterns of racial segregation and hierarchy). 

57  This  formulation  is  meant  as  a  placeholder  for  the  appropriate  degree  of  reduction.  We  bracket  the 
relevant questions here, beyond noting that the courts typically use a calculus of decision costs and error 
costs to assess the marginal value of additional procedures. See Matthews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319 (1976).  
58  The  death  row  population  is  now  over  3000.  See  BUREAU  OF  JUSTICE  STATISTICS,  CAPITAL 

PUNISHMENT, 2003, at 1 (2004), available at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/cp03.pdf. 

26 

marginal deterrent benefit of each additional execution diminishes very rapidly, the result 

would be to save thousands of innocent people—in all probability, far more people than 

were  killed  in  the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  2001.  The  people  whose  lives  are 

lost, and whose deaths could be averted, are killed arbitrarily and without fair process. In 

short,  rule-of-law  criticisms  of  capital  punishment  either  smuggle  in  the  distinction 

between acts and omissions, or else overlook the fact that the same objections apply even 

more powerfully to the utterly arbitrary killings that capital punishment prevents. 

 

D. Preferable Alternatives and the Principle of Strict Scrutiny 

 
Some  critics  of  the  death  penalty  believe  that  there  are  other,  better  ways  of 
deterring  murder,  and  states  ought  to  use  those  ways  instead.59  Deterrence  might  occur 

through  superior  law  enforcement  efforts.  Or  it  might  occur  through  taking  steps  to 

reduce people’s incentives to engage in violent crime; education, job training, and other 

steps  toward  poverty  reduction  are  preferred  remedies  here.  On  this  view,  capital 

punishment  reduces  the  pressure  to  take  better  and  less  barbaric  steps  to  control 

homicide. 

Here  there  is  an  analogy,  though  an  imperfect  one,  to  the  principle  of  “strict 

scrutiny”  found  in  many  areas  of  constitutional  law.  Although  constitutional  law  often 

permits  government  to  act  in  ways  that  burden  important  rights,  government  must 

typically show that no alternative policy would promote the same goals with less burden 
on  the  affected  right.60  The  analogy  is  imperfect  because  strict  scrutiny  in  the  courts  is 
often  “strict  in  theory  but  fatal  in  fact,”61  with  courts  often  barring  government  from 

satisfying  strict  scrutiny  by  reference  to  arguments  that  are  routinely  acceptable  in  the 

process  of  policy  evaluation.  Here  we  use  “strict  scrutiny”  as  a  shorthand  for  the 

argument  that  capital  punishment  is  justified  only  if,  and  when,  a  rational  policy 

evaluation  would  show  that  no  alternative  policies  could  do  as  much  to  reduce  murder 

                                                 

59 See Hugo Bedau, An Abolitionist’s Survey of the Death Penalty in America Today, in DEBATING THE 

DEATH PENALTY 15 (Hugo Bedau & Paul Cassell eds., 2004). 

60 See, e.g., Grutter v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306, 326 – 327 (2003). 
61  Gerald  Gunther,  The  Supreme  Court,  1971  Term--Foreword:  In  Search  of  Evolving  Doctrine  on  a 

Changing Court: A Model for a Newer Equal Protection, 86 HARV. L. REV. 1, 8 (1972). 

27 

rates. The Supreme Court has not accepted this idea as a matter of constitutional law.62 

But perhaps it should be accepted as a normative matter. 

Here is the simplest response. On the basis of the evidence that we are assuming 

to  be  true,  a  plausible  inference  is  that  whatever  steps  states  take  to  reduce  homicide, 

capital  punishment  will  provide  further  deterrence.  Whatever  states  do,  some  level  of 

homicide  is  inevitable;  so  long  as  liberty  is  respected,  a  significant  number  of  murders 

will continue to occur in every state. If states undertook the steps that are recommended 

as  less  restrictive  alternatives—and  they  surely  should  undertake  some  of  them—then 

capital punishment would still reduce that level from what it would otherwise be. In other 

words,  a  key  assumption  of  the  strict-scrutiny  view  is  that  the  alternative  policies  are 

substitutes  for  capital  punishment.  Yet  they  would  likely  turn  out  to  be  complements 

instead. Many steps can be simultaneously taken to reduce violent crime, and the criminal 

justice system is only one of those steps. 

Moreover,  the  strict-scrutiny  position  rests  upon  an  excessively  simple  view  of 

legal  policymaking.  The  first  question  is,  always,  what  policies  lie  in  the  feasible  set. 

Political  constraints  will  rule  out  some  policies  that  might  be  even  better,  from  the 

standpoint of deterring murders, than is capital punishment. Switching to a Swedish-style 

welfare  state  might  (or  might  not)  reduce  crime  dramatically,  but  we  will  never  know 

because  we  will  never  try  it.  So  too,  increasing  job-training  funds  by  several  orders  of 

magnitude might result in many fewer murders, but such policies are simply not on the 

cards. Capital punishment, by contrast, is very much a live policy option, even in many 
states that do not currently use it.63 Perhaps the apparent political constraints are partially 

endogenous;  perhaps  capital  punishment  reduces  the  political  incentive  to  adopt  other 

strategies,  and  if  this  were  so,  the  argument  for  capital  punishment  would  surely  be 

weakened. But there is little reason to believe that if capital punishment were abolished, 

there would be significantly larger efforts to reduce violent crime through education and 

training  programs.  We  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  abolition  would  result  in  a 

                                                 

62 See, e.g., Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 175 (1976). 
63 See, e.g., Rick Klein, Science Key in Building Case for Death Law, BOSTON GLOBE, Sept. 30, 2003, at 
B1  (reporting  that  a  majority  of  Massachusetts  residents  support  the  death  penalty  and  that  the  state’s 
Governor is developing a capital punishment proposal). 

28 

better mix of measures, all things considered. But if the death penalty has the deterrent 

effect suggested by the recent literature, then this would be a surprising conclusion. 

In  general,  there  is  no  reason  to  say  that  capital  punishment  must  be  prohibited 

unless and until all available alternatives have been tried and proven inferior. No sensible 

principle  of  policymaking  bars  regulators  from  adopting  a  clearly  desirable  practice, 

unless  and  until  they  show  that  all  other  potential  projects  are  inferior.  Such  a  view 

overlooks the opportunity cost of searching through the policy space and exhausting the 

available alternatives. In the setting of capital punishment, the alternatives might be tried 

and  fail;  even  if  they  succeed,  approaches  based  on  education  and  social-welfare 

provision will often have a longer lag time before they bear fruit. In either case, while the 

policy experiments are ongoing, a large number of murders will go undeterred. The hard 

question  is  what  the  interim  policies  should  be  while  regulators  search  for  optimal 

arrangements,  and  it  begs  the  question  to  say  that  the  interim  policy  must  be  a  regime 

without  capital  punishment.  Why  should  that  be  so,  if  there  is  powerful  evidence  that 

instituting capital punishment today will save many lives starting tomorrow? 

As  the  last  point  shows,  the  strict-scrutiny  idea  goes  wrong  in  the  same  sort  of 

way that the earlier arguments go wrong: by overlooking that the regime without capital 

punishment  itself  inflicts  even  larger  net  harms—harms  to  the  very  same  values  that 

animate opposition to capital punishment. This is a version of the act-omission mistake. 

Given  that  capital  punishment  saves  many  more  innocent  lives  than  it  takes,  the  strict-

scrutiny argument has the default position backwards. Criminal-justice policy would do 

well to adopt capital punishment while the search for regulatory alternatives proceeds; it 

is the alternatives that should be strictly scrutinized, to be rejected unless and until they 

prove themselves superior. 

 

E. Slippery Slopes 

 
Our argument might seem to have serious slippery slope problems. Suppose, for 

example, that the best way to deter heinous crimes is to torture perpetrators. Suppose that 

if torture were undertaken, there would be a significant reduction in the number of such 

crimes. The logic of our hypothesis is that torture would be morally obligatory on certain 

factual assumptions. 

29 

We  accept  this  claim  about  what  our  hypothesis  entails.  To  make  the  case  as 

simple  as  possible,  suppose  that  some  criminals  torture  their  victims,  and  that  if  such 

criminals were themselves tortured, the incidence of torture would decrease substantially. 

Suppose, that is, a ban on (state) torture ensures that (private) torture will occur far more 

than  it  otherwise  would.  In  our  view,  the  ban  on  state  torture  reflects  a  use  of  the  act-

omission  distinction  in  a  context  in  which  the  distinction  is  not  easy  to  defend.  If,  for 

example,  state  torture  of  a  torturer  would  prevent  eighteen  acts  of  torture—of,  say, 

children—the argument for banning state torture would be greatly weakened.  

None of this means that a ban on state torture is indefensible.64 Here as always, 

rejecting the act-omission distinction says nothing, by itself, about what policies are best 

from any point of view. State practices of torture might actually increase torture, rather 

than  diminish  it,  perhaps  by  weakening  the  social  prohibition  on  torture.  This  is  an 

empirical issue, and no evidence, so far as we are aware, either undermines or confirms 

it. Hence state torture might be self-defeating, if its goal is to reduce private torture. In 

any case a ban on torture might, or might not, have a rule-consequentialist defense, if the 

benefits of state torture are low, if its costs, prominently including the risks of abuse, are 

high, and if front-line decisionmakers cannot be trusted to sort good instances from bad 

instances. Everything depends on what the facts turn out to be. 

The  last  point  is  crucial.  Because  arguments  about  policies  such  as  capital 

punishment  and  torture  are  hostage  to  what  the  facts  turn  out  to  show  in  particular 

domains, slippery-slope arguments are disabled; instead of a slope, there is just a series of 

discrete  policy  problems.  Support  for  capital  punishment  need  not,  by  analogical 

reasoning or otherwise, commit policymakers to support for public floggings or punitive 

mutilation  or  other  horrors.  Nor  is  there  any  obvious  mechanism  that  would  push 

policymakers  or  citizens  to  adopt  those  other  practices  once  they  have  adopted  capital 
punishment.65 Not only is there no slope, there is no a priori reason to believe the ground 

slippery. 

                                                 

Legal? (draft on file with the authors). 

64 For relevant considerations, see Eric A. Posner & Adrian Vermeule, Should Coercive Interrogation Be 

65  For  criticism  of  slippery-slope  arguments  that  lack  a  specific  mechanism,  see  Frederick  Schauer, 
Slippery Slopes, 99 HARV. L. REV. 361 (1985); Eugene Volokh, The Mechanisms of the Slippery Slope, 116 
HARV. L. REV. 1026 (2003). 

30 

Perhaps the torture example fails to get to the heart of what is most objectionable 

in our argument. Return to a problem raised above and focus on the following question: 

“Suppose that holding a show trial to frame and convict one innocent person of murder 

would  deter  eighteen  real  murders.  Wouldn’t  you  be  obliged  to  defend  that,  crazy  as  it 

is?” On one view, the question is fair. It is possible to imagine a finding that a show trial 

of  this  sort  would  deter  murders,  so  that  the  failure  to  hold  show  trials  is,  in  effect, 

condemning  large  numbers  of  people  to  unjustified  deaths.  On  utilitarian  grounds,  the 

show  trials  might  be  permissible  or  even  mandatory.  On  deontological  grounds,  the 

answer  is  at  first  clear:  The  state  cannot  take  the  lives  of  innocent  people.  But  if  our 

argument is correct, the deontological argument might not be so clear after all: Might not 

the failure to conduct show trials be a way of taking the lives of innocent people, too? 

The problem with slippery slope questions of this kind is that they often obscure 
more than they clarify.66 First, as Rawls pointed out long ago, the systemic effects of a 

government policy that allowed sham convictions of the innocent, including debilitating 

uncertainty  for  other  innocents,  would  themselves  have  to  be  folded  into  the  overall 
assessment.67 Only a conspiracy to keep the policy secret would prevent the unraveling. 

No such conspiracy is likely to succeed. Put differently, such a policy would violate the 

publicity constraint emphasized by Rawls and others. It could not be defended publicly 
and still accomplish its central goal.68 The publicity constraint is a principle of political 
morality  that  can  be  given  both  deontological  and  consequentialist  justifications,69  so 

moral theorists of many stripes could reject this sort of hypothetical. 

Second, it is not clear how policymakers could have reliable evidence about the 

deterrent  effects  of  show  trials,  torture  or  other  disturbing  practices  without  first 

experimenting  on  hapless  victims;  and  the  necessary  experimentation  might  well  be 

impermissible  on  moral  grounds  ex  ante,  even  if  the  policies  themselves  would  be 

                                                 

66 Note that a widely held view, which we do not mean to endorse, insists that there is a kind of moral 
floor  for  the  infliction  of  severe  punishment,  a  floor  that  rules  out  punishment  of  the  innocent,  or 
punishment that is grossly excessive in comparison to the crime, but that permits the death penalty, if the 
evidence supports it, after people have been convicted, under stringent standards, of committing especially 
egregious murders.. Of course any floor will be controversial, and the most adamant opponents of capital 
punishment might believe that it is below the floor by its very nature.  

67 See John Rawls, Two Concepts of Rules, 67 PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW 3-32 (1955). 
68 On the publicity condition, see John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971). 
69  For  an  overview  of  issues,  see  David  Luban,  The  Publicity  Principle,  in  THE  THEORY  OF 

INSTITUTIONAL DESIGN 154 (Robert Goodin ed. 1996). 

31 

permissible given certain experimental findings ex post. Capital punishment, however, is 

already  the  status  quo  in  most  states,  and  policymakers  already  have  many  decades’ 

worth of reliable data about its deterrent effects. 

Finally, and most fundamentally, we doubt that the intuitions that drive extreme 

hypotheticals of this sort have moral significance in any event. Of course it is prima facie 

objectionable, worse than outrageous, if the state proposes to kill people whom it knows 

to  be  innocent.  The  widely  held  moral  and  legal  norm  against  executions  of  innocent 

people  is  certainly  an  individual  and  social  good,  whatever  one’s  views  about  the 

foundations  of  morality.  But  suppose  that  a  situation  arises  in  which  execution  of  an 

innocent  person  really  is  the  only  way  to  save  eighteen,  or  eighty,  or  eighteen  hundred 

innocent people. There is no reason to think that intuitions about the extreme cases are 

reliable  trackers  of  moral  truth,  or  to  assume  that  such  intuitions  have  any  privileged 

connection  to  what  a  considered  moral  theory  would  permit  or  require;  consider  the 

obvious tension between any such intuitions and the accepted practice of killing hostage-

takers. We offer more remarks on the moral status of particular intuitions below, and in 

Part III. 

 

F. Deontology and Consequentialism Again 

 
What  is  the  relationship  between  the  foregoing  argument,  particularly  our 

rejection  of the act-omission  distinction as applied to government’s policy  choices, and 

standard  debates  about  deontological  and  consequentialist  approaches  in  moral  theory? 
We do not think this is a crucial analytic lens for the questions we address.70 As we have 

emphasized,  our  argument  does  not  challenge  deontological  claims  as  such,  except 

insofar  as  they  apply  the  act-omission  distinction  to  government  and  reject  any 

consequentialist override of deontological injunctions. The simple injunction “thou shalt 

not  kill”  is  too  general  to  cut  between  the  relevant  options  at  the  lower  level  of  policy 

choice. If capital punishment strongly deters killings, and if the government that eschews 

capital punishment can fairly be charged with those killings, then the government’s only 

                                                 

70 For a recent argument that most or all substantive moral positions can be formulated at will in either 
deontological  or  consequentialist  terms,  see  Campbell  Brown,  Consequentialise  This  (2004),  at 
http://socpol.anu.edu.au/~cbrown/papers/ConsThis.pdf. 

32 

choices  are  to  kill  more  or  to  kill  fewer;  the  deontological  injunction  might  then  be 

interpreted to require rather than to forbid capital punishment. 

To be sure, some opponents of capital punishment tend to build the act-omission 

distinction directly into the deontological injunction itself. “Thou shalt not kill” might be 

interpreted just to mean that the state and its agents shall not themselves kill. Moreover, 

opponents sometimes assume away the problem of consequentialist overrides. But as we 

have seen, both the act-omission distinction, and the idea that deontological injunctions 

are absolute, are highly contentious assumptions; they require independent arguments on 

their behalf. In many cases, no such argument is offered; all that is typically offered is an 

intuition that the state must not kill, period. 

We do not believe that, upon reflection, the intuition can be defended, nor do we 

think that case-specific intuitions should be morally dispositive. In part this is because of 

familiar  arguments  in  moral  theory  that  commitments  to  generalizable  moral  principles 
should  trump  intuitions  in  particular  cases.71  In  part  it  is  because  the  reliability  of  such 

intuitions is highly suspect. Recent research in cognitive psychology, which we discuss in 

Part  III,  suggests  that  the  intuitions  underpinning  the  act-omission  distinction  may 

represent  cognitive  errors,  without  any  moral  relevance  or  larger  importance.  The  only 

point we emphasize here is that, in  light of the  recent evidence that capital punishment 

powerfully deters killings, an opposition to killing is most naturally understood to support 

capital punishment rather than to undercut it. Opponents of capital punishment who build 

the act-omission distinction directly into an absolutist deontological injunction, by stating 

a  position  against  state  killing  with  no  consequentialist  override,  face  the  prospect  that 

their position will ultimately come to rest upon little more than an inarticulate intuition, a 

conclusion masquerading as an argument.  

Overall, the crucial question is what the facts show, a point to which we return in 

Part  IV.  Perhaps  capital  punishment  might  best  be  restricted  to  certain  classes  of 

offenders or  offenses,  or even to certain geographic regions; different polities might,  in 

their  different  factual  circumstances,  each  do  well  by  adopting  or  rejecting  capital 

punishment as appropriate. It might even turn out that the system of capital punishment is 

so  riddled  with  errors  and  arbitrariness  that  it  would  be  unwise  and  unjust  to  adopt  it, 

                                                 

71 See generally R.M. HARE, MORAL THINKING: ITS LEVELS, METHODS, AND POINT (1981). 

33 

simply  because  it  is  a  hopelessly  defective  tool  of  criminal  justice.  Although  we  doubt 

very much that this is so, for the reasons given in Part I, it could be so, and a belief that it 

is so would supply a very respectable reason for opposing capital punishment. What does 

not  supply  such  a  reason  is  an  indeterminate  and  unprocessed  intuition  that  the  state 

should not “kill.” 

None of this is to suggest that intuitionism is the only possible basis for opposing 

capital  punishment;  of  course  it  is  not.  Perhaps  the  death  penalty  is  opposed  (as  it  is 

sometimes  endorsed)  on  expressivist  grounds;  perhaps  the  social  meanings  of  capital 
punishment are what drive opponents as well as advocates.72 But if the evidence outlined 

here  is  correct,  expressivist  opposition  is  not  so  easy  to  sustain.  A  failure  to  protect 

workers against severe occupational risks is objectionable on expressive grounds because 
it reflects contempt for the safety of workers.73 A failure to take steps that would prevent 

significant numbers of murders is itself expressively objectionable, on parallel grounds. 

There  is  a  final  point,  involving  democracy  itself.  On  one  view,  government’s 

central obligation is to follow the public will, assuming that it has been properly focused 
and  channeled  through  processes  of  public  deliberation.74  If  the  public  opposes  capital 

punishment, and insist on an act-omission distinction, then officials should oppose it too, 

unless, perhaps, opposition can be shown to be ill-informed or to have failed the minimal 

requirements  of  political  deliberation.  And  on  this  view,  public  support  for  capital 

punishment  would  be  presumptively  binding  as  well.  We  do  not  mean  to  say  anything 

contentious about democratic legitimacy here. Both citizens and representatives must ask 

themselves  about  what  morality  requires.  If  a  life-life  tradeoff  is  involved,  the  moral 

question  is  inevitably  affected.  And  if  capital  punishment  saves  large  numbers  of 

innocent lives, then participants in democracies are obliged to take note of that fact.  

 

III. Cognition and Capital Punishment 

 
Those  who  object  to  capital  punishment,  and  who  are  not  much  moved  by 

evidence of deterrence, believe that they are operating in accordance with a freestanding 

moral  principle.  They  will  not  be  enthusiastic  about  the  suggestion  that  their  moral 

                                                 

72 See Dan M. Kahan, The Secret Ambition of Deterrence, 113 Harv L Rev 413 (1999). 
73 See Elizabeth Anderson, Value In Ethics and Economics (1993). 
74 See William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (1993). 

34 

judgments  are  instead  a  product  of  some  kind  of  cognitive  error.  But  in  the  regulatory 

domain as a whole, it has become standard to say that cognitive processes contribute to 
large mistakes, at least on questions of fact.75 For risk regulation, people do seem to focus 

on a subset of the harms at stake, in a way that produces both excessive and insufficient 
reactions  to  environmental  problems.76  More  generally,  a  form  of  “tradeoff  neglect” 
pervades regulatory policy77; and it is easy to imagine that the moral domain has its own 

kinds  of  tradeoff  neglect.  For  example,  it  is  common,  in  the  environmental  domain,  to 

focus on the risks associated with some kind of environmental degradation, but to neglect 

the risks associated with environmental regulation; and those who focus on the costs of 
regulation often neglect the risks of inaction.78  

In a related vein, a great deal of recent work has emphasized the possibility that 

heuristics  and  biases  can  be  found  in  the  moral  arena,  ensuring  that  deeply  felt  moral 
intuitions  are  a  result  of  errors  and  confusions.79  This  is  a  possibility  and  no  more. 

Certainly  we  cannot  demonstrate  that  opposition  to  capital  punishment  is  rooted  in 

selective attention or an identifiable heuristic. But return to the hostage situation to which 

we have referred: Police officers are permitted to kill those who have taken hostages, at 

least if the killing is reasonably believed to be necessary to save human lives. If capital 

punishment  is  deemed  differently,  it  might  be  because  the  lives  to  be  saved  are  merely 

statistical,  as  compared  with  the  lives  of  hostages,  which  are  entirely  vivid.  More 

generally,  consider  two  points,  the  first  involving  salience,  the  second  involving  the 

foundations of the act-omission distinction. 

 

                                                 

LEGAL STUD. 747, 777 (1990). 

75 Roger G. Noll & James E. Krier, Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation, 19 J. 

76  This  is  the  theme  of  HOWARD  MARGOLIS,  DEALING  WITH  RISK:  Why  the  Public  and  the  Experts 

Disagree on Environmental Issues (1996). 

77 Id. 
78 Id. 
79  See,  e.g.,  Jonathan  Baron,  Heuristics  and  Biases  in  Equity  Judgments:  A  Utilitarian  Approach,  in 
PSYCHOLOGICAL  PERSPECTIVES  ON  JUSTICE  (Barbara  A.  Mellers  &  Jonathat  Baron  eds.,  1993);  Jonathan 
Haidt, The Emotional Dog and Its Rational Tail: A Social Intuitionist Approach to Moral Judgment, 108 
PSYCHOL.  REV.  814  (2001);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Moral  Heuristics  (2d  John  M.  Olin  L.  &  Econ.  Working 
Paper No. 180, 2003). 

35 

A. Salience 

It  is  obvious  that  people’s  reactions  to  factual  and  moral  questions  are  much 
affected by vividness or salience.80 If an event, such as a terrorist attack, seems salient, 

people will think it is more likely to occur. And if an event is salient, people may not pay 

much attention to less salient possibilities, such as the risk that a response to a terrorist 

attack  will  cause  a  significant  number  of  deaths  of  its  own.  When  people  neglect 

tradeoffs, it is often because one aspect of the situation is highly visible, or “on screen,” 

while other aspects are less visible or perhaps invisible. 

Consider  in  this  regard  the  life-life  tradeoffs  involved  with  capital  punishment. 

Those subject to capital punishment are real human beings, with their own backgrounds 

and  narratives.  Some  of  them  have  been  subject  to  multiple  forms  of  unfairness,  in  the 

legal  process  and  elsewhere.  At  least  some  were  wrongly  convicted.  By  contrast,  those 

whose  lives  are  or  might  be  saved  by  virtue  of  capital  punishment  are  mere  “statistical 
people.”81  They  are  both  nameless  and  faceless,  and  their  deaths  are  far  less  likely  to 

count in moral deliberations. It is, for this reason, perhaps, that the advocates of capital 

punishment  often  focus  on  the  heinousness  of  the  (salient)  offender,  while  the 

abolitionists focus on his or her humanity. We suspect that the discussion would take a 
different  form  if  the  victims  of  a  regime  lacking  capital  punishment  were  salient  too82; 

and the example of police behavior in hostage situations supports the suspicion. None of 

this  establishes  the  claim  that  the  death  penalty  is  morally  required  if  it  saves  far  more 

lives than it ends. But it does raise the possibility that moral intuitions, for many people, 

are a product of the salience of one set of deaths and the invisibility or speculativeness of 

another. 

 

 

 

                                                 

80  See  SCOTT  PLOUS,  THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  JUDGMENT  AND  DECISION  MAKING  125-26,  178-80  (1993) 
(discussing the salience heuristic and the closely related heuristics of vividness and availability). Cf. Robert 
M.  Reyes,  William  C.  Thompson  &  Gordon  H.  Bower,  Judgmental  Biases  Resulting  from  Differing 
Availabilities  of  Arguments,  39  J.  PERSONALITY  &  SOC.  PSYCHOL.  2,  5-12  (1980)  (demonstrating  that 
vivid,  concrete  information  exerts  greater  influence  on  mock  jury  deliberations  than  abstract,  pallid 
information). 

81 See Lisa Heinzerling, The Rights of Statistical People, 24 HARV. ENV. L. REV. 189, 189 (2000). 
82 Cf. PHILIP K. DICK, THE MINORITY REPORT (2002). 

36 

B. Acts, Omissions, and Brains 
 

Outside  of  the  domain  of  government,  we  have  not  questioned  the  act-omission 

distinction here. But in some settings, it may be worth considering the possibility that the 

act-omission  distinction  operates  as  a  heuristic  for  a  more  complex  and  difficult 
assessment  of  the  moral  issues  at  stake.83  Consider  in  this  regard  the  dispute  over  two 
well-known  problems  in  moral  philosophy.84  These  problems  do  not  involve  the  act-

omission  distinction,  but  they  implicate  closely  related  concerns.  We  suggest  that 

people’s asymmetrical reactions to the two problems say a great deal about the operation 

of the act-omission distinction.  

The first, called the trolley problem, asks people to suppose that a runaway trolley 

is headed for five people, who will be killed if the trolley continues on its current course. 

The  question  is  whether  you  would  throw  a  switch  that  would  move  the  trolley  onto 

another  set  of  tracks,  killing  one  person  rather  than  five.  Most  people  would  throw  the 

switch. The second, called the footbridge problem, is the same as that just given, but with 

one difference: the only way to save the five is to throw a stranger, now on a footbridge 

that spans the tracks, into the path of the trolley, killing that stranger but preventing the 

trolley  from  reaching  the  others.  Most  people  will  not  kill  the  stranger.  What  is  the 

difference  between  the  two  cases,  if  any?  A  great  deal  of  philosophical  work  has  been 

done on this question, much of it trying to suggest that our firm intuitions can indeed be 
defended in principle.85  

Without engaging these arguments, consider a suggestive experiment designed to 
see how the human brain responds to the two problems.86 The authors do not attempt to 

answer the moral questions in principle, but they find “that there are systematic variations 
in the engagement of emotions in moral judgment,”87 and that brain areas associated with 

emotion  are  far  more  active  in  contemplating  the  footbridge  problem  than  in 

contemplating the trolley problem. An implication of the authors’ finding is that human 

                                                 

PUBLIC DECISION MAKING (1998). 

83  The  argument  is  ventured  in  JONATHAN  BARON,  JUDGMENT  MISGUIDED:  INTUITION  AND  ERROR  IN 

84  See  JUDITH  JARVIS  THOMSON,  RIGHTS,  RESTITUTION,  AND  RISK:  ESSAYS  IN  MORAL  THEORY  94-116 

(1986). 
85 Id. 
86 Joshua Green et al., An fMRI Investigation of Emotional Engagement in Moral Judgment, 293 SCIENCE 

2105 (2001). 

87 Id. at 2107. 

37 

brains  are  hard-wired  to  distinguish  between  bringing  about  a  death  “up  close  and 
personal” and doing so at a distance. 88  

Of  course  this  experiment  is  far  from  decisive;  emotions  and  cognition  are  not 
easily  separable,89  and  there  may  be  good  moral  reasons  why  certain  brain  areas  are 

activated  by  one  problem  and  not  by  the  other.  Perhaps  the  brain  is  closely  attuned  to 

morally relevant differences. But consider the case of fear, where an identifiable physical 
region of  the brain  makes  helpfully immediate but not entirely reliable judgments.90 So 
too, very plausibly, in the context of morality.91  

For capital punishment, the implication is straightforward. For many people, the 

prospect  of  lethal  executions  is  akin  to  the  prospect  of  throwing  the  stranger  in  the 

footbridge problem; we expect that the relevant part of the brain would light up for most 

people who sincerely imagine themselves in the position of executioner. But for almost 

everyone, no such lights would be found after learning that the consequence of abolishing 

capital  punishment  was  to  ensure  somewhere  between  eight  and  twenty-eight  statistical 

deaths  for  each  foregone  execution.  No  unambiguous  moral  lesson  follows  from  an 

understanding of the operation of the human brain. But it is perhaps illuminating if moral 

judgments  are  caused  by  rapid  intuitions  that  do  not  involve  a  great  deal  of  cognitive 

work,  and  that  have  no  obvious  connection  to  the  morally  relevant  features  of  the 

situation. 

 

C. A Famous Argument That Might Be Taken as a Counterargument 
 

Our  general  claims  might  be  thought  to  run  up  against  Bernard  Williams’  well-

known  critique  of  utilitarianism,  rooted  largely  in  a  story  about  an  unfortunate  tourist 
named  Jim.92  In  Williams’  tale.  Jim  is  a  tourist  in  a  small  town  in  South  America.  He 

notices that twenty Indians are about to be shot. The leader of the shooters gives Jim a 

chance  to  save  all  but  one  of  the  Indians,  for  a  price:  Jim  has  to  shoot  one  of  them. 

Williams believes that for utilitarians, the moral answer is clear: Jim should shoot. But in 
                                                 

88 Id. 
89 See MARTHA C. NUSSBAUM, UPHEAVALS OF THOUGHT: THE INTELLIGENCE OF EMOTIONS (2001). 
90  See  Joseph  E.  LeDoux  &  Jeff  Muller,  Emotional  Memory  and  Psychopathology,  352  Philosophical 

Transactions: Biological Sciences 1719, 1719 (1997). 

91  Joshua  Green  &  Jonathan  Haidt,  How  (And  Where)  Does  Moral  Judgment  Work?,  6  Trends  in 

Cognitive Sciences 517, 522 – 23 (2002). 

92 See J. J. C. SMART & BERNARD WILLIAMS, UTILITARIANISM: FOR AND AGAINST 98-99 (1973). 

38 

his  view,  it  is  not  clear  that  this  is  what  morality  requires.  In  Williams’  words, 

utilitarianism “cuts out a kind of consideration which for some others makes a difference 

to what they feel about such cases: a consideration involving the idea, as we might first 

and very simply put it, that each of us is especially responsible for what he does, rather 
than for what other people do.”93 Williams asks: “how can a man, as a utilitarian agent, 

come  to  regard  as  one  satisfaction  among  others,  and  a  dispensable  one,  a  project  or 

attitude  round  which  he  has  built  his  life,  just  because  someone  else’s  projects  have  so 
structured the causal scene that that is how the utilitarian sum come out?”94 

 

We  believe  that  an  intuition  akin  to  Williams’  helps  to  explain  opposition  to 

capital  punishment  even  in  the  face  of  evidence  of  the  sort  that  we  have  outlined.  But 

there  are  three  responses.  Most  modestly:  Capital  punishment,  on  the  evidence  given 

here,  more  closely  resembles  a  hostage  situation  than  Jim’s  case.  Recall  that  police 

officers are permitted, even expected, to use deadly force against those who have taken 

hostages if that is the only way to save innocent people. Those who are subject to capital 

punishment  are  (almost  always)  egregious  wrongdoers,  not  innocents.  Somewhat  less 

modestly:  An  understanding  of  the  attitudes  around  which  people  have  built  their  lives 

might constrain people, but such an understanding does not constrain states, at least not in 

the same way. If Jim is a police officer, asked to save twenty hostages, he might well be 

morally obliged to shoot one of them if that is the only way to save the other nineteen. If 

Jim  is  the  head  of  state,  asked  to  engage  in  military  intervention  to  prevent  a  mass 

slaughter (say, in Rwanda), it is not so clear that he should refuse even if he knows that 

military intervention will also result in innocent deaths at the hands of his own military. 

At  the  very  least,  the  moral  question  cannot  be  answered,  at  the  level  of  the  state,  by 

insisting “that each of us is especially responsible for what he does, rather than for what 

other  people  do.”  Less  modestly  still:  Williams  ‘  own  arguments  seem  to  us  to  rely  on 

question-begging claims about causation, and about what counts as intentional action. He 

is right to say that we are particularly responsible for what we do; but in Jim’s case, how 

does that precept cash out, exactly? Granted that Jim faces bad choices, through no fault 

                                                 

93 Id. at 99.  
94 Id at 116. 

39 

of  his  own;  but  can  Jim  disclaim  responsibility  for  the  unnecessary  death  of  nineteen 

people? 

IV. 

Implications and Future Problems 
 
Here  we  expand  upon  the  implications  of  our  approach  and  highlight  some 

remaining puzzles, not with a view to resolving all issues, but with a view to indicating 

the contours of existing puzzles and some possible directions for future research. We also 

emphasize that our argument is limited to the setting of life-life tradeoffs: cases in which 

capital punishment is used to deter killing, rather than other offenses. 

 
A.  Threshold Effects (?) and Regional Variation 
 

The statistic that each execution saves eighteen lives, on average, is an aggregated 

statistic  based  on  national-level  data—something  like  a  national  average.  Averages  can 

be  misleading,  of  course,  and  a  look  at  regional  variation  suggests  a  potentially 

complicated picture. The most recent work suggests that states fall into three sets: a set of 

states in which capital punishment deters very strongly, a set in which it has no deterrent 

effect  at  all,  and  even  a  set  in  which  capital  punishment  has  perverse  effects,  slightly 

raising murder rates. The pronounced deterrent effect at the level of the national average 

occurs  because,  where  capital  punishment  does  deter,  it  deters  powerfully.  As  we 

mentioned in Part I, Joanna Shepherd suggests there is a “threshold effect” at work here: 

in states that execute very few, capital punishment either has no effect or even backfires, 

perhaps because (Shepherd conjectures) a “brutalization effect” operates; while states that 

execute a larger number see large deterrent effects. Whatever the validity of the particular 

mechanisms  Shepherd  proposes,  it  seems  plausible  that  capital  punishment  deters 

strongly  in  one  set  of  states  and  has  little  effect  in  others.  If  this  is  correct,  does  it 

undermine our thesis? 

The simple answer is no, not at all, because we hold no brief to promote capital 

punishment everywhere, at all times and places. Where capital punishment is a powerful 

deterrent, we have suggested that states may well be morally obligated to adopt it. Where 

capital punishment does not powerfully deter, the empirical predicate for that obligation 

disappears.  Retributivists  might  continue  to  argue  for  capital  punishment  on  other 

grounds,  but  we  are  not  retributivists  and  see  no  inherent  moral  necessity  for  capital 

40 

punishment if it produces little in the way of benefits in the protection of human life. If 

future  work  were  to  overturn  the  recent  evidence  that  capital  punishment  deters,  that 

work would also in our view overturn the case for capital punishment altogether. 

 

B. 
 

International Variation 

What holds for variation across states within the United States holds a fortiori for 

variation  across  liberal  democratic  polities.  The  European  Union  and  its  member  states 

firmly reject capital punishment as violative of human dignity; more broadly, the United 

States is one of only a small number of nations that permit capital punishment. How does 

this  bear  upon  our  thesis?  The  short  answer  is  that  we  have  nothing  to  say  about  such 

polities,  because  the  relevant  facts  are  not  yet  known.  It  might  turn  out  that,  due  to 

variation in some relevant factor, capital punishment is appropriate for our circumstances 

but not for the circumstances of (some set of) other polities; nothing in our view excludes 

this. If capital punishment turns out to deter strongly in some populations, or given some 

background legal and economic systems, but not otherwise, then the scope of the moral 

obligation  to  adopt  capital  punishment  would  vary  accordingly.  Israel  does  not  execute 

terrorists,  in  part  because  of  a  belief  that  executions  of  terrorists  would  breed  more 

terrorism;  if  the  belief  is  correct,  as  seems  plausible,  then  the  failure  to  use  capital 

punishment  is  correct  too.  (Those  who  favor  capital  punishment  on  retributive  grounds 

might ask whether they reject Israel’s policy.) 

  

C.  Offenders and Offenses 
 

Other dimensions of variation include differences in classes of offenses (murders 

for  profit  versus  murders  animated  by  passion)  and  in  classes  of  offenders  (juvenile 

murders, mentally disabled murders, and so on). As we noted in discussing the argument 

from slippery slopes, no a priori argument either precludes or mandates extending capital 

punishment to all such cases, because a priori argument is not helpful here. 

Let  us  consider  the  example  of  juvenile  offenders.  In  a  recent  decision,  the 

Supreme  Court  held  that  capital  punishment  may  not  be  inflicted  upon  offenders  who 
were  under  18  years  old  at  the  time  of  the  offense.95  Acknowledging  the  paucity  of 

                                                 

95 Roper v. Simmons, 125 S. Ct. 1183, 1198 (2005). 

41 

evidence  either  way,  the  Court  speculated  that  such  offenders  are  less  deterrable  than 
adults.96 Below, we will review findings suggesting, by analogy to crimes of passion, that 

the  speculation  is  mistaken.  What  if  the  facts  turn  out  to  be  otherwise  than  the  Court 

guessed? Suppose that there turns out to be a significant class of 15-year-old murderers, 

perhaps  predominantly  murdering  other  15-year-olds;  and  suppose  that  relevant  data 

suggested  that  allowing  capital  punishment  for  15-year-olds  would  significantly  deter 

those murders. 

In our view, there is a strong argument that states would then be morally obligated 

to extend capital punishment to such cases (bracketing whether such a course would be 

legally permitted). If the obligation would attach, it is precisely because killing 15-year-

olds is morally unacceptable, and because capital punishment would be the best system 

for  reducing  overall  the  number  of  such  killings;  only  an  implausible  version  of  the 

act/omission  distinction  would  suggest  otherwise.  On  the  other  hand,  suppose  that  the 

Court’s  speculation  is  correct,  and  that  murders  by  juveniles  turn  out  to  be  genuinely 

undeterrable, perhaps because juveniles are not yet capable of reasoning clearly about the 

expected  costs  and  benefits  of  crime,  or  frequently  act  out  of  uncontrollable  passion. 

Then the factual predicate for our view would simply fail to apply. 

The  same  holds  true  for  classes  of  offenses.  The  recent  work  has  suggested, 

contrary  to  the  intuitions  of  many,  that  capital  punishment  may  well  deter  types  of 
murders  previously  thought  undeterrable.97  In  particular,  the  frequent  conjecture  that 

murders  animated  by  passion  are  undeterrable  turns  out  to  be  erroneous.  Should  future 

work  identify  such  a  category  of  undeterrable  murders,  however,  our  view  would 

straightforwardly entail that capital punishment ought not extend to such cases. 

 

D.   Life-Life Tradeoffs and Beyond 
 

Every  case  we  have  discussed  so  far  involves  what  we  have  called  life-life 

tradeoffs: cases in which state execution deters many private executions. A very different 

set  of  moral  and  institutional  problems  arises  when  the  issue  is  whether  capital 

punishment  should  be  used  to  deter  serious  offenses  other  than  killing.  Consider  the 

                                                 

96 Id. at 1196. 
97 Shepherd, supra note 21, at 305. 

42 

sentence of capital punishment for particularly serious forms of rape, which the Supreme 
Court  invalidated  as  cruel  and  unusual  punishment.98  Apart  from  constitutional 

constraints, would states be morally obligated to employ capital punishment if it could be 

shown, empirically, that each such execution would deter many future rapes? 

We  have  given  simple  answers  to  the  foregoing  questions  about  variation  in 

regional and international circumstances, and in classes of offenders and offenses, but no 

simple answers are possible here. The reason is that, unlike the other cases, the harms on 

the two sides of the ledger are not the same. Where capital punishment of murderers is at 

issue, the taking of life is the only morally relevant action in the picture, and the state’s 

taking of life is entirely commensurable with the crimes it deters. (This assumes that one 

rejects, as we did in Part II, the attempt to build the act-omission distinction right into the 

definition of the relevant action. We have rejected, in other words, the idea that the state’s 

taking of life is itself a morally different act from the “private” taking of life that is made 

possible  by  the  state’s  choice  of  a  criminal-justice  policy  that  does  not  include  capital 

punishment).  When  other  offenses  are  at  issue,  additional  moral  questions  of 

commensurability and of aggregation arise. May the state inflict a permanent deprivation 

of  all  personhood  (death)  upon  a  few  to  deter  serious,  but  temporary,  deprivations  of 

autonomy  (rape)  that  would  otherwise  be  inflicted  upon  many?  What  if  the  many  are 

children? The moral analysis here will necessarily be more complicated. If a utilitarian or 

consequentialist framework is used, the effects must be “translated” in some way so as to 

permit tradeoffs to occur. Suppose that an execution of a rapist would deter thirty rapes; 

how should capital punishment be evaluated in that event? It is most unclear how to think 

about these and similar cases; here we mean to bracket such questions entirely. 

 
Conclusion 
 
 

We  conjecture  that  something  like  the  following  set  of  views  about  capital 

punishment  has  been  and  probably  still  is  widespread  in  the  legal  academy.  Capital 

punishment  does  not  deter,  or  at  least  the  evidence  that  it  does  so  is  essentially 

                                                 

98 See Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584, 598 (1977). 

43 

nonexistent99; some categories of murders, especially crimes of passion, are undeterrable 
(at least by capital punishment);100 even if capital punishment has a deterrent effect, the 

effect  is  marginal,  perhaps  because  of  the  relatively  small  number  of  capital  sentences 
and  the  long  time  lags  between  sentencing  and  execution;101  the  system  of  capital 
punishment is rife with error and arbitrariness.102 

The  recent  evidence  raises  doubts  about  all  of  these  views.  Capital  punishment 

may well have strong deterrent effects; there is evidence that few categories of murders 

are  inherently  undeterrable,  even  so-called  crimes  of  passion;  some  studies  find 

extremely  large  deterrent  effects;  error  and  arbitrariness  undoubtedly  occur,  but  the 

evidence of deterrence suggests that prospective murderers are receiving a clear signal. 

The moral and legal commentary on capital punishment ought to be sensitive to 

 

 

any significant revision in what we know. Life-life tradeoffs are inescapably involved. In 

light  of  recent  evidence,  a  government  that  settles  upon  a  package  of  crime-control 

policies that does not include capital punishment might well seem, at least prima facie, to 

be both violating the rights and reducing the welfare of its citizens—just as would a state 

that failed to enact simple environmental measures promising to save a great many lives.  

The  most  common  basis  for  resisting  this  conclusion,  and  our  principal  target 

here, is some version of the distinction between acts and omissions. Opponents of capital 

punishment  frequently  appeal  to  an  intuition  that  intentional  killing  by  the  government 

and its agents is morally objectionable in a way that simply allowing private killings is 

not.  Whatever  the  general  merits  of  the  distinction  between  acts  and  omissions  in  the 

moral  theory  of  individual  conduct,  we  think  it  gets  little  purchase  on  questions  of 

governmental policy. Government cannot help but act in ways that affect the actions of 

citizens; where citizens decide whether or not to kill each other in light of government’s 

policies, it is not clear even as a conceptual matter what it would mean for government 

not to act. For government to adopt a mix of criminal-justice policies that happens not to 

include capital punishment is not an “omission” or a “failure to act” in any meaningful 

sense. Likewise, deontological injunctions against unjustified killing, which we have not 

                                                 

99 See Richard O. Lempert, Desert and Deterrence: An Assessment of the Moral Bases of the Case for 

Capital Punishment, 79 Mich. L. Rev. 1177, 1222 (1981). 

100 See id. at 1193 – 94. 
101 See id. at 1192 – 93. 
102 See id. at 1224. 

44 

questioned  here,  are  of  little  help  in  these  settings.  Unjustified  killing  is  exactly  what 

capital punishment prevents.  

If this argument is correct, it has broad implications, some of which may not be 

welcomed  by  advocates  of  capital  punishment.  Government  engages  in  countless 

omissions,  many  of  which  threaten  people’s  health  and  safety;  consider  the  failure  to 

reduce  highway  fatalities,  to  regulate  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  to  prevent  domestic 

violence, to impose further controls on private uses of guns, even to redistribute wealth to 

those  who  most  need  it.  Suppose  that  it  is  not  sensible,  in  these  and  other  contexts,  to 

characterize government omissions as such, or suppose that even if the characterization is 

sensible,  it  lacks  moral  relevance.  If  so,  then  government  might  well  be  compelled,  on 

one  or  another  ground,  to  take  steps  to  protect  people  against  statistical  risks,  even  if 
those steps impose costs and harms; much will depend on what the facts show.103 

Any  objection  to  capital  punishment,  we  believe,  must  rely  on  something  other 

than abstract injunctions against the taking of life. If the recent evidence of deterrence is 

shown to be correct, then opponents of capital punishment will face an uphill struggle on 

moral grounds. If each execution is saving many lives, the harms of capital punishment 

would  have  to  be  very  great  to  justify  its  abolition,  far  greater  than  most  critics  have 

heretofore alleged. There is always residual uncertainty in social science and legal policy, 

and  we  have  attempted  to  describe,  rather  than  to  defend,  recent  findings  here.  But  if 

those findings are ultimately shown to be right, capital punishment has a strong claim to 

being,  not  merely  morally  permissible,  but  morally  obligatory,  above  all  from  the 

standpoint of those who wish to protect life.  

 

Readers with comments may address them to: 
 
Professor Cass Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL 60637 
 

csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 

 

45 

                                                 

103 For a general attack on the act-omission distinction from a utilitarian perspective, see Jonathan Baron, 
Judgment Misguided (1998). If our argument is correct, some of Baron’s arguments should be appealing to 
deontologists as well, and his controversial commitment to utilitarianism is not a necessary foundation for 
his conclusions. 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An 
Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of 
Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study 
(August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An 
Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial 
Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) 
(April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and 
Firm‐Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main 
Bank System (August 1993) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication 
(September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 
William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of 
Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption 
(January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) 
Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty 
Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 
1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 

46 

37. 

38. 

39. 
40. 

41. 

42. 
43. 

44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 

66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 

70. 

53.  

J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: 
Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good 
Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost‐Benefit State (May 1996) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership 
of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right‐to‐Carry Concealed 
Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health‐Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially 
Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 
William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from 
California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of 
Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of 
Laissez‐Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes 
on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  
William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation 
Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The 
Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law 
(March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better 
Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and 
Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police 
Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Second‐Order Decisions (June 1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm 
Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self‐Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of 
Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” 
(January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular 
Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 

47 

71. 

72. 
73. 

74. 

75. 
76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 
81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 
95. 

96. 

97. 
98. 
99. 

100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 

Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal 
Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 
Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right‐to‐
Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A 
Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) 
William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? 
(June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long‐Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of 
Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? 
Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 

Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law 

and Economics (September 1999) 

Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 

Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost‐Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 

Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case 

of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 

87. 

Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics 

(November 1999) 

88. 

Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost‐Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are 

Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 
1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative 
Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts 
(January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift 
(February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to 
Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti‐Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised May 
2002)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  

48 

105. 

106. 
107. 

108. 

109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 

113. 

114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 
118. 
119. 

120. 
121. 

122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 

126. 
127. 
128.   
129. 

130. 

131.   

132. 
133. 

134. 

135. 
136. 

137. 

138. 
139. 

140. 

Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November 
2000) 
Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System 
(November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations:  A 
Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 
William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) 
Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious Liability, Class 
Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An Economic Approach 
(December 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 
Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer Finance (February 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) (March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost‐Benefit Analysis:  A Positive Political Theory 
Perspective (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital Age (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the Conceptual 
Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) 
Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal 
Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)  
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 
2001) 
Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for Centralized 
Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent 
Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry:  Creating Cooperation through 
Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Allocation  of  the  Commons:  Parking  and  Stopping  on  the  Commons 
(August 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption 
Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts 
Perspective (September 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) 
Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections 
and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha “Solution” (February 
2002) 

 

 

49 

141. 
142. 

143. 

144. 

145. 
146. 

147. 

148. 

149. 
150. 

151. 
152. 

153. 

154. 
155. 

156. 
157. 
158. 

159. 

160. 
161 

162. 

163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 

170. 

171. 
172. 
173. 
174. 

175. 

Edna Ullmann‐Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) 
Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. 
Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) 
Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute 
Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal Studies 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, 
forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success or Failure (March 
2002) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The 
Antitrust Bulletin) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture 
February 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) 
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation?  
Deeper and Wider Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002; revised 
March 2003) 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference 
Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) 
Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as 
Insurer? (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on 
Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) 
Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the 
Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract 
Law (September 2002) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the 
File‐Swapping Networks (September 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Does the X‐Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) 
Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) 
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) 
Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis 
(November 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for the Regulation of 
Public Health (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxation and Risk‐Taking with Multiple Tax Rates (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act of 
1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 

50 

176. 

177. 

178. 

179. 

180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 

187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191.  
192. 
193. 
194. 

195. 

196. 

197. 

198. 

199. 

200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 
204. 

205. 
206. 
207. 

208. 

209. 

210. 
211. 
212. 

David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short‐Term Assets 
(January 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 
Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities 
and Verizon (January 2003) 
William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An 
Economic Perspective (February 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) 
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life‐Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) 
Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) 
David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September 
2003) 
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the 
Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 
and 2000? (September 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage 
(September 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September 
2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts 
of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)  
Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure 
Time (October 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003) 
David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) 
David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright Law (April 
2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of 
Statistical Lives (February 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A Critique of the 
Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceutical Patents: 
Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004) 
Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004) 

51 

213. 

214. 

215. 

216. 
217. 
218. 

219. 

220.  

221. 
222. 
223. 
224. 

225. 
226. 
227. 
228. 
229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 
233. 
234. 
235. 

236. 

237. 
238. 

239. 

Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Labor 
within and between Law Firms (April 2004) 
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of 
Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry (April 2004) 
James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the Market for 
Underwriting Business (July 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004) 
Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, Company Stock, 
Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets 
(August 2004, revised October 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross‐Cultural Risk 
Perceptions (August 2004) 
M. Todd Henderson and James C. Spindler, Corporate Herroin: A Defense of Perks (August 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Cyber Security: Of Heterogenity and Autarky (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Unbundling Scope‐of‐Permission Goods: When Should We Invest in Reducing 
Entry Barriers? (September 2004) 
Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing through Law (September 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of the Use of Citations in the Law (2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and the Environment (October 2004) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Cordell Hull, the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act, and the WTO (October 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Contract Interpretation (November 2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, A Social Networks Theory of Privacy (December 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Minimalism at War (December 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman, How the Law Responds to Self‐Help (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, The Decline of the International Court of Justice (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, Is the International Court of Justice Biased? (December 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, Public vs. Private Enforcement of International Economic Law: Of Standing and 
Remedy (February 2005) 
Dougals G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Serial Entrepreneurs and Small Business Bankruptcies 
(March 2005) 
Eric A. Posner, There Are No Penalty Default Rules in Contract Law (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright and the DMCA: Market Locks and Technological Contracts (March 
2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? The Relevance of 
Life‐Life Tradeoffs (March 2005) 

 

  

52 

