University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2005

Chevron Step Zero
Cass R. Sunstein

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Chevron Step Zero" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 249, 2005).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 249 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
Chevron Step Zero 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
May 2005 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=739129  

 

 

Preliminary draft 5/20/05 
All rights reserved 
Forthcoming Virginia Law Review 
 

 
 

Chevron Step Zero 
 
Cass R. Sunstein* 

Abstract 

 
The  most  famous  case  in  administrative  law,  Chevron  U.S.A.  v.  Natural  Resources 
 
Defense  Council,  Inc.,  has  come  to  be  seen  as  a  counter-Marbury,  or  even  a  McCulloch  v. 
Maryland, for the administrative state. But in the last period, new debates have broken out over 
Chevron Step Zero—the initial inquiry into whether Chevron applies at all. These debates are the 
contemporary location of a longstanding dispute between Justice Scalia and Justice Breyer over 
whether Chevron is a revolutionary decision, establishing an across-the-board rule, or instead a 
mere synthesis of preexisting law, inviting a case-by-case inquiry into congressional instructions 
on  the  deference  question.  In  the  last  decade,  Justice  Breyer’s  case-by-case  view  has  enjoyed 
significant  victories.  Two  trilogies  of  cases—one  explicitly  directed  to  the  Step  Zero  question, 
another implicitly so directed—suggest that the Chevron framework may not apply (a) to agency 
decisions not preceded by formal procedures and (b) to agency decisions that involve large-scale 
questions  about  agency  authority.  Both  of  these  trilogies  threaten  to  unsettle  the  Chevron 
framework, and to do so in a way that produces unnecessary complexity for judicial review and 
damaging  results  for  regulatory  law.  These  problems  can  be  reduced  through  two  steps.  First, 
courts  should  adopt  a  broader  understanding  of  Chevron’s  scope.  Second,  courts  should 
acknowledge  that  the  argument  for  Chevron  deference  is  strengthened,  not  weakened,  when 
major questions of statutory structure are involved.  
 
 

Over twenty years after its birth, the Supreme Court’s decision in Chevron U.S.A. 

v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.1 shows no sign of losing its influence. On the 

contrary,  the  decision  has  become  foundational,  even  a  quasi-constitutional  text—the 

undisputed  starting  point  for  any  assessment  of  the  allocation  of  authority  between 

federal  courts  and  administrative  agencies.  Ironically,  Justice  Stevens,  the  author  of 

Chevron, had no broad ambitions for the decision; the Court did not mean to do anything 

dramatic.2  But  shortly  after  it  appeared,  Chevron  was  quickly  taken  to  establish  a  new 

                                                 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am 
grateful to Douglas Lichtman, Richard Posner, Adrian Vermeule, and participants in the work-in-progress lunch at the University of 
Chicago Law School for valuable comments on a previous draft. Blake Roberts provided valuable research assistance. 
1 467 U.S. 837 (1984). As a sign of Chevron’s influence, consider the fact that the decision was cited 2,414 times in its first decade 
(between 1984 and January 1, 1994), 2,584 times in its next six years (between January 1, 1994 and January 1, 2000), and 2,235 times 
in its next five years (between January 1, 2000 and January 28, 2005). LEXIS search, March, 2005. 
2  See  Robert  Percival,  Environmental  Law  in  the  Supreme  Court:  Highlights  from  the  Marshall  Papers,  23  ENVTL.  L.  REP.  10606, 
10613 (1993). In fact it is possible, and fascinating, to trace a series of opinions in which Justice Stevens expressed reservations about 
the broad reading of Chevron, and attempted to domesticate the decision. See, e.g., Young v. Community Nutrition Institute, 476 U.S. 
974,  985  (1986)  (Stevens,  J.,  dissenting);  INS  v.  Cardoza-Fonseca,  480  U.S.  421  (1987);  Babbitt  v.  Sweet  Home  Chapter  of 

approach to judicial review of agency interpretations of law,3 going so far as to establish 

a  kind  of  counter-Marbury  for  the  administrative  state.  It  seemed  to  declare  that  in  the 

face  of  ambiguity,  it  is  emphatically  the  province  and  duty  of  the  administrative 

department to say what the law is.4  

Chevron also appeared to have imperialistic aspirations, cutting across countless 

areas  of  substantive  law  and  the  full  range  of  procedures  by  which  agencies  might 

interpret statutory law. Some of those ambitions have been realized, for Chevron has had 

a  fundamental  impact  on  areas  as  disparate  as  taxation,5  labor  law,6  environmental 

protection,7 immigration,8 foods and drugs,9 and highway safety.10 In all of these areas, 

and many more, Chevron has signaled a substantial increase in agency discretion to make 

policy through statutory interpretation. For this reason, Chevron might well be seen not 

only  as  a  kind  of  counter-Marbury,  but  even  more  fundamentally  as  the  administrative 

state’s very own McCulloch v. Maryland,11 permitting agencies to do as they wish so long 

as  there  is  a  reasonable  connection  between  agency  choices  and  congressional 

instructions. This grant of permission seemed to depend on a distinctive account of legal 

interpretation, one that sees resolution of statutory ambiguity as involving judgments of 

principle and policy, and insists that the executive, not the courts, should be making those 

judgments.12 

                                                                                                                                                 
Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687 (1995). See also Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576, 595 n.2 (2000) (Stevens, 
J., dissenting) (endorsing “fully” Justice Breyer’s narrow reading of Chevron). 
3  See,  e.g.,  Kenneth  Starr,  Judicial  Review  in  the  Post-Chevron  Era,  3 YALE  J.  REG.  283  (1986);  Richard  Pierce,  Chevron  and  its 
Aftermath:  Judicial  Review  of  Agency  Interpretations  of  Statutory  Provisions,  41  VAND.  L.  REV.  301  (1988).  On  the  real-world 
consequences  of  Chevron,  see  Peter  Schuck  and  E.  Donald  Elliott,  To  the  Chevron  Station:  An  Empirical  Study  of  Federal 
Administrative Law, 42 DUKE L.J. 984 (1989). Schuck and Elliott find a significant effect from Chevron, an increase in affirmance 
rates from 71% in the pre-Chevron year of 1984 to 81% in the post-Chevron year of 1985. Over more extended periods, studies are 
hard to conduct, because prospective litigants will adjust their mix of cases to the rules governing judicial review of agency action; 
when challenges are hard to sustain under doctrines of deference, fewer challenges will be brought. On the other hand, agencies and 
their lawyers may adjust their own practices to deference doctrines as well, and hence take legal risks that they would not assume if 
courts  were  less  likely  to  defer.  Relevant  findings,  exploring  the  importance  of  whether  a  panel  is  composed  of  Republican  or 
Democratic  appointees  to  the  application  of  Chevron,  can  be  found  in  Frank  Cross  and  Emerson  Tiller,  Judicial  Partisanship  and 
Obedience  to  Legal  Doctrine:  Whistleblowing  on  the  Federal  Courts  of  Appeals,  107  YALE  L.J.  2155  (1998)  (finding  that  all-
Republican  panels  are  particularly  willing  to  strike  down  agency  action  at  the  behest  of  an  industry  challenge,  notwithstanding 
Chevron). 
4 See Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. 137, 177 (1803) (“It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what 
the laws is.”). 
5 Atlantic Mutual Ins. Co. v. Commissioner, 523 U.S. 382 (1998); Tate & Lyle v. Commissioner, 87 F.3d 99 (3d Cir. 1996). 
6 See NLRB v. United Food Workers Union, 484 U.S. 112 (1987); Cavert Acquisition Co. v. NLRB, 83 F.3d 598 (3d Cir 1996). 
7 See Chemical Manufacturers Association v. NRDC, 470 U.S. 116 (1985). 
8 See INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987). 
9 Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518 U.S. 470 (1996). 
10 Geier v. American Honda Motor Co., 529 U.S. 861 (2000). 
11 17 U.S. 316 (1819). 
12 See infra notes 40-44. 

2 

 

In  the  last  fifteen  years,  however,  the  simplest  interpretations  of  Chevron  have 

unraveled. Like a novel or even a poem, the decision has inspired fresh and occasionally 

even shocking readings. In some cases, the Court appears to have moved strongly in the 

direction  of  pre-Chevron  law,  in  an  evident  attempt  to  reassert  the  primacy  of  the 

judiciary in statutory interpretation. At times, the effort to re-establish judicial supremacy 

has  been  quite  explicit.13  But  the  result  has  not  been  a  restoration  of  pre-Chevron 

principles;  it  has  instead  been  the  addition  of  several  epicycles  to  the  Chevron 

framework,  producing  not  only  a  decrease  in  agency  authority,  but  also  a  significant 

increase in uncertainty about the appropriate approach. More than at any time in recent 

years, a threshold question—the scope of judicial review—has become one of the most 

vexing in regulatory cases.14 

Chevron  famously  creates  a  two-step  inquiry  for  courts  to  follow  in  reviewing 

agency interpretations of law.15 The first step asks whether Congress has “directly spoken 

to  the  precise  question  at  issue,”  an  inquiry  that  requires  an  assessment  of  whether 

Congress’s  intent  “is  clear”  and  “unambiguously  expressed.”16  The  second  step  asks 

whether the agency’s interpretation is “permissible,” which is to say reasonable in light of 

the  underlying  law.17  It  is  an  understatement  to  say  that  a  great  deal  of  judicial  and 

academic attention has been paid to the foundations and meaning of Chevron’s two-step 

inquiry.18  But  in  the  last  period,  the  most  important  and  confusing  questions  have 

involved  neither  step.  Instead  they  involve  Chevron  Step  Zero—the  initial  inquiry  into 

whether  the  Chevron framework applies at all.19 The Supreme Court has issued several 

important  Step  Zero  decisions,20  which  clarify  a  number  of  questions  but  also  offer 

complex and conflicting guidance. As we shall see, the area is pervaded by legal fictions 

about  congressional  understandings,  and  the  proliferation  of  fictions  has  vindicated  the 
                                                 
13 See INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987); Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 
687 (1995); FDA v. Brown & Williamson, 529 U.S. 120 (2000). 
14 A detailed discussion can be found in Lisa Schultz Bressman, How Mead Has Muddled Judicial Review of Agency Action, VALD. L. 
REV. (forthcoming 2005). 
15 467 U.S. at 842-44. 
16 Id. at 842-43. 
17 Id. at 843. 
18 See, e.g., Thomas Merrill, Judicial Deference to Executive Precedent, 101 YALE L.J. 969 (1992); Clark Byse, Judicial Review of 
Administrative Interpretation of Statutes: An Analysis of Chevron’s Step Two, 2 ADMIN. L.J. 255 (1988); Thomas Merrill, Textualism 
and the Future of the Chevron Doctrine, 72 WASH U. L.Q. 351 (1994); Richard Pierce, Chevron and its Aftermath: Judicial Review of 
Agency Interpretations of Statutory Provisions, 41 VAND. L. REV. 301 (1988); Note, “How Clear is Clear” in Chevron’s Step One?, 
118 HARV. L. REV. 1687 (2005); Kenneth Starr, Judicial Review in the Post-Chevron Era, 3 YALE J. REG. 283 (1986). 
19 I borrow the term from Thomas W. Merrill and Kristin E. Hickman, Chevron’s Domain, 89 GEO. L.J. 833, 836 (2001). 
20 Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576 (2000); United States v. Mead, 533 U.S. 218 (2001); Barnhart v. Walton, 535 U.S. 212 
(2002). 

3 

 

fears of those who have insisted on the importance of a simple answer to the Step Zero 

question.21 

My principal purpose here is to provide an understanding of the foundations and 

nature of the Step Zero dilemma, and to suggest how that dilemma should be resolved. 

Step Zero has become  the central  location of an intense and  longstanding disagreement 

between  the  Court’s  two  administrative  law  specialists,  Justice  Breyer  and  Justice 

Scalia.22 In fact it is impossible to understand the current debates without reference to this 

disagreement. In the 1980s, the two converged, apparently independently, on a distinctive 

understanding  of  Chevron,  one  that  roots  the  decision  in  a  theory  of  implicit 

congressional  delegation  of  law-interpreting  power  to  administrative  agencies.23  Both 

justices explicitly recognized that any understanding of legislative instructions is a “legal 

fiction”24; both approved of resort to that fiction. But the two sharply disagreed about its 

meaning  and  content.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  Justice  Scalia  seeks  clear  and  simple  rules, 

intended to reduce the burdens of decision-making for lower courts and litigants.25 And 

here,  as  elsewhere,  Justice  Breyer  prefers  a  case-by-case  approach,  one  that  eschews 

simplicity  in  the  interest  of  (what  he  sees  as)  accuracy.26  This  kind  of  disagreement, 

involving  a  classic  rules-standards  debate,27  echoes  throughout  the  law,  but  as  we  shall 

see, it has distinctive resonance in the context of judicial review of agency interpretations 

of law. 

On an important matter, Justice Scalia’s approach has largely triumphed, at least 

thus  far:  When  agency  decisions  have  the  force  of  law,  or  follow  a  formal  procedure, 

Chevron  supplies  a  simple  rule,  notwithstanding  early  efforts  to  cabin  its  reach.28  In 

recent  years,  however,  Justice  Breyer’s  approach  has  enjoyed  a  partial  but  significant 

victory, on the theory that Chevron should not be taken to cede law-interpreting power to 

                                                 
21 See Mead, 533 U.S. at  239, 245-47 (Scalia, J., dissenting); Adrian Vermeule, Mead in the Trenches, 71 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 847 
(2003). 
22 Justice Breyer taught administrative law for many years at Harvard Law School; Justice Scalia did the same at the University of 
Virginia Law School and the University of Chicago Law School. 
23  Stephen  Breyer,  Judicial  Review  of  Questions  of  Law  and  Policy,  38  ADMIN.  L.  REV.  363  (1986);  Antonin  Scalia,  Judicial 
Deference to Agency Interpretations of Law, 1989 DUKE L.J. 511. 
24 This  point  is  emphasized  and  explored  in  David  J.  Barron  and  Elena  Kagan,  Chevron’s  Nondelegation  Doctrine,  2001  SUP.  CT. 
REV. 201. 
25 See Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law As a Law of Rules, 56 U. CHI. L. REV. 1175 (1989). 
26 See Stephen Breyer, On the Uses of Legislative History in Interpreting Statutes, 65 S. CAL. L. REV. 845 (1992). 
27 See Louis Kaplow, Rules v.s Standards: An Economic Analysis, 42 Duke LJ 557 (1992); Kathleen Sullivan, Foreword: The Justices 
of Rules and the Justices of Standards, 106 Harv L Rev 22 (1992). 
28 INS v. Cardoza Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987). As we shall see, this claim must be qualified by reference to recent developments 
involving major questions. See infra 198-231.  

4 

 

agencies in circumstances in which it is implausible to infer a congressional delegation. A 

trilogy of cases, unambiguously directed to Step Zero, has suggested that when agencies 

have  not  exercised  delegated  power  to  act  with  the  force  of  law,  Chevron  may  not 

provide  the  governing  framework.29  In  a  separate  trilogy  of  cases,30  the  Court  has  also 

raised Step Zero questions simply because it has suggested the possibility that deference 

will be reduced, or even nonexistent, if a “major question” is involved, one that goes to 

the heart of the regulatory scheme at issue. The apparent theory is that Congress should 

not be taken to have asked agencies to resolve those questions.  

I suggest  that  both  trilogies  point in unfortunate directions. As for the first: The 

“force  of  law”  test  is  a  crude  way  of  determining  whether  Chevron  deference  is 

appropriate,  and  it  introduces  far  too  much  complexity  into  the  deference  issue.  The 

Court  is  apparently  seeking  to  allow  Chevron  deference  only  or  mostly  when  agency 

decisions  have  followed  procedures  that  guarantee  a  kind  of  deliberation  and 

reflectiveness.  But  that  goal,  however  appealing,  cannot  justify  the  high  level  of 

complexity  that  the  first  trilogy  has  introduced.  As  for  the  second:  Major  questions  are 

not  easily  distinguished  from  less  major  ones,  and  the  considerations  that  underlie 

Chevron apply with more, not less, force when major questions are involved. To be sure, 

it  is  possible  to  defend  a  background  principle  that  limits  agency  discretion  when 

constitutionally  sensitive  interests  are  at  stake.31  But  that  principle  should  not  be 

converted  into  a  general  presumption  in  favor  of  limiting  agency  authority—a 

presumption  that  would  encode  a  kind  of  status  quo  bias,  or  possibly  even  a  strong 

antiregulatory “tilt,” into the Chevron framework. 

My argument, in short, is that where fairly possible, the Step Zero question should 

be resolved in favor of applying the standard Chevron framework—a framework that has 

the dual virtues of simplifying the operation of regulatory law and giving policymaking 

authority to institutions that are likely to have the virtues of specialized competence and 

political  accountability.  The  Court’s  emerging  steps  in  favor  of  a  more  complex 

framework,  calling  for  independent  judicial  judgment  in  certain  circumstances,  are  a 

                                                 
29 Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576 (2000); United States v. Mead, 533 U.S. 218 (2001); Barnhart v. Walton, 535 U.S. 212 
(2002). 
30  Babbitt  v.  Sweet  Home  Chapter  of  Communities  for  a  Great  Oregon,  515  U.S.  687  (1995);  MCI  Telecommunications  Corp.  v. 
AT&T, 512 U.S. 218 (1994); FDA v. Brown & Williamson, 529 U.S. 120 (2000). 
31 See Cass R. Sunstein, Administrative Law Goes to War, 118 HARV. L. REV. 2663 (2005). 

5 

 

product  of  an  evident  desire  to  constrain  agency  discretion  when  such  discretion  seems 

particularly unlikely to be fairly exercised.32 But the Court’s goals can be accomplished 

in  much  simpler  and  better  ways,  above  all  by  insisting  on  the  rule  of  law  constraints 

embodied in Steps One and Two, and on continued judicial review for arbitrariness. 

This Article comes in five parts. Part II explores the early debates over Chevron, 

with  particular  emphasis  on  the  striking  contrast  between  then-Judge  Breyer’s  effort  to 

domesticate  the  decision  by  reading  it  to  permit  case-by-case  inquiries  and  Justice 

Scalia’s insistence that Chevron is a dramatic development that establishes an across-the-

board presumption. Part III investigates Step Zero trilogy in which the Court has held that 

Chevron  applies  to  agency  decisions  having  the  force  of  law  or  backed  by  relatively 

formal procedures, while requiring a case-by-case inquiry into whether Chevron applies 

to less formal agency action. Part IV explores cases in which the Court has also failed to 

apply  Chevron  in  the  ordinary  way,  apparently  on  the  theory  that  major  questions, 

involving the basic reach of regulatory statutes, are for courts rather than agencies. Part V 

briefly concludes. 

 

 

II. Chevron in the 1980s: Foundations and Reach 

A. Chevron’s Framing: Two Steps in Search of a Rationale 

In  Chevron,  the  Court  announced  its  two-step  approach  without  giving  a  clear 

sense  of  the  theory  that  justified  it.  The  case  itself  involved  the  decision  of  the 

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to define “stationary source”33 under the Clean 

Air Act as an entire factory, rather than each pollution-emitting unit within the plant. The 

Supreme  Court  insisted  that  because  the  statute  was  ambiguous,  the  EPA  could  supply 

whatever (reasonable) definition it chose. But why, exactly, should agencies be permitted 

to  interpret  statutory  ambiguities  as  they  see  fit,  subject  only  to  the  limitations  of 

reasonableness?  The  Court  emphasized  that  Congress  sometimes  explicitly  delegates 

law-interpreting power to agencies34; if the Clean Air Act had said “stationary source (as 

defined  by  the  Administrator),”  judges  would  have  to  accept  administrative  judgments. 

                                                 
32 See Bressman, supra note 14. 
33 42 U.S.C. § 7502 (c). 
34 467 U.S. at 844. 

6 

 

Of course the Clean Air Act contained no explicit delegation. But the Court added that 

“sometimes  the  legislative  delegation  to  an  agency  on  a  particular  question  is  implicit 

rather than explicit.”35 If so, the court must accept any reasonable interpretation.  

But  why  should  a  court  find  an  implicit  delegation  in  the  Administrative 

Procedure Act (APA) or the Clean Air Act, the governing statutory provisions in Chevron 

itself? The APA does not appear to delegate law-interpreting power to agencies; on the 

contrary, it specifies that the “reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of law, 

[and] interpret statutory provisions.”36 This phrase seems to suggest that ambiguities must 

be  resolved  by  courts  and  hence  that  the  Chevron  framework  is  wrong.  But  by 

empowering the EPA to issue regulations, perhaps the Clean Air Act is best taken to say 

that the agency is implicitly entrusted with the interpretation of statutory terms. If so, the 

reviewing  court  must  continue  to  follow  the  APA  and  decide  “all  relevant  questions  of 

law”;  but  the  answer  to  the  relevant  questions  will  depend  on  what  the  EPA  has  said, 

because  under  the  Clean  Air  Act,  the  law  is  what  the  EPA  says  it  is.37  In Chevron, the 

Court referred to this possibility, noting that Congress might have wanted the agency to 

strike  the  relevant  balance  with  the  belief  “that  those  with  great  expertise  and  charged 

with  responsibility  for  administering  the  provision  would  be  in  a  better  position  [than 

courts or Congress itself] to do so.”38 But the Court did not insist that Congress in fact so 

thought. On the contrary, it said that Congress’s particular intention “matters not.”39  

Instead the Court briefly emphasized judges’ lack of expertise and, in more detail, 

their lack of electoral legitimacy. In interpreting law, the agency may “properly rely upon 

the  incumbent  administration’s  views  of  wise  policy  to  inform  its  judgments.  While 

agencies  are  not  directly  accountable  to  the  people,  the  Chief  Executive  is.”40  Hence  it 

would  be  appropriate  for  agencies,  rather  than  judges,  to  resolve  “competing  interests 

which  Congress  itself  either  inadvertently  did  not  resolve,  or  intentionally  left  to  be 

resolved in light of everyday realities.”41 

                                                 
35 Id. 
36 5 U.S.C. § 706. 
37 See Henry Monaghan, Marbury and the Administrative State, 83 COLUM. L. REV. 1 (1983). 
38 467 U.S. at 865. 
39 Id. 
40 Id.  
41 Id. 

7 

 

 The  Chevron  Court’s  approach  was  much  clearer  than  the  rationale  that 

accounted  for  it.  The  Court’s  reference  to  expertise  suggested  one  possible  rationale: 

Perhaps the Court was saying that the resolution of statutory ambiguities sometimes calls 

for  technical  expertise,  and  that  in  such  cases  deference  would  be  appropriate.  On  this 

view, having roots in the New Deal’s enthusiasm for technical competence,42 specialized 

administrators,  rather  than  judges,  should  make  the  judgments  of  policy  that  are 

realistically  at  stake  in  disputes  over  ambiguous  terms.  But  the  Court’s  emphasis  on 

accountability suggested a second possibility: Perhaps the two-step inquiry is based on a 

healthy  recognition  that  in  the  face  of  ambiguity,  agency  decisions  must  rest  on 

judgments  of  value,  and  those  judgments  should  be  made  politically  rather  than 

judicially.  On  this  view,  having  roots  in  legal  realism,43  value  choices  are  a  significant 

part  of  statutory  construction,  and  those  choices  should  be  made  by  democratically 

accountable  officials.  This  reading  suggests  a  third  and  more  ambitious  possibility: 

Perhaps Chevron is rooted in separation of powers, requiring courts to accept executive 

interpretations of statutory ambiguities in order to guard against judicial displacement of 

political judgments.44 

In  the  1980s,  then-Judge  Breyer45  and  Justice  Scalia,  both  administrative  law 

specialists, rejected these readings of Chevron. They agreed that Chevron must rest on a 

simple  idea: Courts defer  to agency  interpretations  of law  when and because Congress 

has  told  them  to  do  so.  As  we  shall  see,  this  reading  of  Chevron  has  prevailed.  If 

Congress  wanted  to  do  so,  it  could  entrench  Chevron,  by  providing  that  statutory 

ambiguities must be resolved by agencies; and if Congress sought to overrule Chevron, 

by calling for independent judicial judgments about legal questions, it could do precisely 

that. Judge Breyer and Justice Scalia agreed that the national legislature retains control of 

the deference question, and in this sense Chevron must rest on an understanding of what 

Congress has instructed courts to do. But their shared emphasis on implicit delegation led 

Judge Breyer and Justice Scalia to quite different understandings of Chevron’s scope and 

limitations. Where Judge Breyer sought to domesticate Chevron, treating it as a kind of 

                                                 
42 See JAMES LANDIS, THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS (1935). 
43 See Karl Llewellyn, Some Realism About Realism, 44 HARV. L. REV. 1222 (1931). 
44 See Douglas Kmiec, Judicial Deference to Executive Agencies, 2 ADMIN. L.J. 269, 277-28 (1988). 
45  For  ease  of  exposition,  I  shall  henceforth  refer  to  “Judge  Breyer”  when  speaking  of  his  1986  essay,  Stephen  Breyer,  Judicial 
Review of Questions of Law and Policy, 38 Admin. L. Rev. 363 (1986). 

8 

 

“problem” to be solved by reference to established principles, Justice Scalia saw Chevron 

as a genuinely revolutionary decision, one that would fundamentally alter the relationship 

between agencies and reviewing courts, and renovate what had long been the law.   

B. Against “Any Simple General Formula”: Breyer’s Plea for Complexity 

 

 

Chevron  was  decided  in  1984.  In  that  same  year,  Judge  Breyer,  writing  for  the 

United States  Court of Appeals  for the First Circuit,  tried  to  make  sense  of  the  Court’s 

decision.46  His  explanation  of  Chevron  pointed  to  a  delegation  of  law-interpreting 

authority to agencies. When Congress has not made an express delegation, Judge Breyer 

wrote,  “courts  may  still  infer  from  the  particular  statutory  circumstances  an  implicit 

congressional instruction about the degree of respect or deference they owe the agency on 

a question of law.”47 The inference would be intensely particularistic; it would rest on an 

inquiry  into  “what  a  sensible  legislator  would  have  expected  given  the  statutory 

circumstances.”48 The expectations of the sensible legislator would depend on an inquiry 

into institutional competence:  

“The  less  important  the  question  of  law,  the  more  interstitial  its  character,  the  more  closely 

related  to  the  everyday  administration  of  the  statute  and  to  the  agency's  (rather  than  the 

court's) administrative or substantive expertise, the less likely it is that Congress (would have) 

‘wished’ or ‘expected’ the courts to remain indifferent to the agency's views. Conversely, the 

larger the question, the more its answer is likely to clarify or stabilize a broad area of law, the 

more likely Congress intended the courts to decide the question themselves.”49 

 

 

Thus  Judge  Breyer’s  approach  squarely  endorsed  the  implicit  delegation  theory, 

but in a way that required a case-by-case inquiry into what “a sensible legislator would 

have  expected  given  the  statutory  circumstances.”  With  an  interstitial  question  closely 

connected  to  “the  everyday  administration  of  law,”  or  calling  for  agency  expertise, 

deference  would  be  warranted.  But  with  a  “larger”  question,  one  whose  answer  would 

“stabilize a broad area of law,” an independent judicial assessment would be required. 
                                                 
46 Mayburg v. HHS, 740 F.2d 100, 106 (1st Cir. 1984). 
47 Id.  
48 Id.  
49 Id. 

9 

 

 

In 1986, Judge Breyer explored these issues far more systematically, in an essay 

that  has  proved  to  be  extremely,  and  indeed  increasingly,  influential.50  Judge  Breyer’s 

basic  claim  was  straightforward.  In  the  immediate  aftermath  of  Chevron,  existing 

doctrine seemed to argue for deferential judicial review of agency interpretations of law 

but  stringent  judicial  review  of  agency  judgments  about  policy.51  In  this  sense,  the 

governing standards were “anomalous,” because a rational system would call for “stricter 

review  of  matters  of  law,  where  courts  are  more  expert,  but  more  lenient  review  of 

matters  of  policy,  where  agencies  are  more  expert.”52  In  Judge  Breyer’s  view,  judicial 

review should be specifically tailored to the “institutional capacities and strengths” of the 

judiciary.53  For  that  tailoring,  the  simple  approach  set  out  in  Chevron  was  hopelessly 

inadequate.  

Judge  Breyer  began  by  emphasizing  that  before  Chevron,  courts  had  been 

inconsistent  on  the  question  of  judicial  review  of  agency  interpretations  of  law,  with 

competing  strands  of  deference  and  independence.54  In  order  to  reconcile  the  conflict, 

Judge  Breyer  noted  that  courts  might  defer  to  agencies  either  because  agencies  have  a 

“better  understanding  of  congressional  will”55  or  because  Congress  explicitly  or 

implicitly delegated interpretive power to agencies.56 Judge Breyer added, crucially, that 

the  idea  of  a  “legislative  intent  to  delegate  the  law-interpreting  function”  is  “a  kind  of 

legal  fiction.”57  When  courts  find  such  an  intent,  they  are  really  imagining  “what  a 

hypothetically  ‘reasonable’ 

legislator  would  have  wanted  (given 

the  statute’s 

objectives),” and “looking to practical facts surrounding the administration of a statutory 

scheme.”58  

In Judge Breyer’s view, this imagining should lead to a case-by-case inquiry into 

Congress’s hypothesized intentions. If the question calls for special expertise, the agency 

is  more  likely  to  be  able  to  answer  it  correctly;  hence  an  ordinary  question  of  agency 

administration  would  call  for  deference.59  But  if  the  question  is  “an  important  one,”  an 

                                                 
50 See Stephen Breyer, Judicial Review of Questions of Law and Policy, 38 ADMIN. L. REV. 363 (1986). 
51 Id. at 364-65. 
52 Id. at 397. 
53 Id. at 398. 
54 Id. at 365-67. 
55 Id. at 368. 
56 Id. at 369. 
57 Id. at 370. 
58 Id.  
59 Id.  

10 

 

independent  judicial  approach  is  preferable.  “Congress  is  more  likely  to  have  focused 

upon,  and  answered,  major  questions,  while  leaving  interstitial  matters  to  answer 

themselves  in  the  course  of  the  statute’s  daily  administration.”60  (That  sentence  has 

proved to be especially important, as we shall soon see.) Judge Breyer added that a court 

should  “consider  the  extent  to  which  the  answer  to  the  legal  question  will  clarify, 

illuminate or stabilize a broad area of the law,” and whether “the agency can be trusted to 

give  a  properly  balanced  answer.”61  Judge  Breyer  insisted  that  the  reconciliation  of  the 

apparently conflicting lines of cases depends on inquiries of this sort. 

 

At  this  stage  Judge  Breyer  was  confronted  with  an  obvious  question  about  the 

relationship  between  his  views  and  the  Court’s  approach  in  Chevron.  To  answer  that 

question,  he  embarked  on  a  new  discussion  with  a  revealing  title:  “The  Problem  of  the 

Chevron  Case.”62  He  noted  that  Chevron  could  be  read  as  embodying  “the  complex 

approach”  that  he  endorsed;  but  it  could  also  be  seen  “as  embodying  a  considerably 

simpler  approach,”  one  that  accepts  any  reasonable  agency  interpretation  in  the  face  of 

ambiguity.63  Not  surprisingly,  Judge  Breyer  argued  strenuously  against  that  latter 

approach. Notwithstanding “its attractive simplicity,” he urged, the broad reading could 

not survive “in the long run.”64  

Judge  Breyer  offered  three  reasons  for  this  conclusion.  The  first  involves  the 

sheer  diversity  of  situations  in  which  courts  might  be  asked  to  defer  to  agency 

interpretations.  No  simple  formula  can  fit  so  “many  different  types  of  circumstances, 

including different statutes, different kinds of application, different substantive regulatory 

or  administrative  problems,  and  different  legal  postures.”65  Second,  and  ironically,  a 

simple  rule  will  increase  delay  and  complexity.  Under  Chevron,  courts  will  sometimes 

have  to  remand  a  case  to  an  agency  to  establish  a  reasonable  interpretation;  because 

judges are at least as likely to produce the correct interpretation, such Chevron remands 

will be “a waste of time.”66 Third, the simple view “asks judges to develop a cast of mind 

                                                 
60 Id.  
61 Id. at 371. 
62 Id. at 372. 
63 Id. at 373. 
64 Id. at 373. 
65 Id. 
66 Id. at 378. 

11 

 

that  often  is  psychologically  difficult  to  maintain.”67  The  reason  is  that  after  a  detailed 

examination  of  a  legal  question,  it  is  difficult  “to  believe  both  that  the  agency’s 

interpretation is legally wrong, and that its interpretation is reasonable.”68  

In  the  end,  Judge  Breyer  concluded,  these  “factors  will  tend  to  force  a  less 

univocal, less far-reaching interpretation of Chevron.” Inevitably, “we will find the courts 

actually  following  more  varied  approaches,”  without  adhering  to  any  “single  simple 

judicial  formula.”69  Judge  Breyer  urged,  in  short,  that  Chevron  should  be  read  in 

accordance with the most sensible understanding of what had preceded it, which entailed 

a  case-specific  inquiry  into  Congress’s  fictional  instructions  on  the  question  of 

deference.70 Far from being a revolution, or even a radical departure, Chevron should be 

taken to codify the best understanding of existing law. 

 

C. An “Across-the-Board Presumption”: Justice Scalia’s Plea 

 

 

Writing just three years later, Justice Scalia defended Chevron in exactly the same 

terms  as  Judge  Breyer  (though  without  referring  to  his  essay).71  He  began  by  insisting 

that the decision ultimately rested on a reading of congressional instructions—and hence 

that prominent justifications for the decision, pointing to agency expertise and separation 

of powers, were irrelevant.72 Quoting a lower court, Justice Scalia said that the deference 

judgment  must  be  “a  function  of  Congress’  intent  on  the  subject  as  revealed  in  the 

particular statutory scheme at issue.”73 For Justice Scalia, as for Judge Breyer, the central 

issue  is  what  Congress  has  told  courts  to  do,  for  the  national  legislature  maintains 

ultimate authority over the deference question. 

Justice Scalia also agreed  with Judge  Breyer’s reading  of pre-Chevron law. The 

lower courts had tried to decide the deference question on a case-by-case basis, producing 

a statute-by-statute evaluation that was a recipe for confusion. “Chevron, however, if it is 

                                                 
67 Id. at 379. 
68 Id. at 379. 
69 Id. at 381. 
70  Candor  compels  an  acknowledgement  that  an  extremely  young  man,  writing  in  the  same  period,  analyzed  the  Chevron  issue  in 
terms akin to those used by Judge Breyer. See Cass R. Sunstein, Constitutionalism After the New Deal, 101 HARV. L. REV. 421, 465-70 
(1987). A  somewhat  older  man  believes  that  the  conclusion  in id.,  favoring  case-by-case  inquiries  into  the  deference  question,  was 
mistaken. 
71 Antonin Scalia, Judicial Deference to Agency Interpretations of Law, 1989 Duke L.J. 511. 
72 Id. at 512-13. 
73 Id. at 516. 

12 

 

to be believed, replaced this statute-by-statute evaluation (which was assuredly a font of 

uncertainty  and  litigation)  with  an  across-the-board  presumption  that,  in  the  case  of 

ambiguity, agency discretion is what is meant.”74 Here again Justice Scalia is in complete 

accord  with  Judge  Breyer;  but  where  Judge  Breyer  challenges  the  presumption  as 

unacceptably simplistic, Justice Scalia defends it on exactly that ground—and hence as a 

dramatic departure from what preceded it.  

 

How  might  that  presumption  be  defended?  Returning  to  the  touchstone  of 

legislative  instructions,  Justice  Scalia  acknowledges  that  Chevron  is  “not  a  100% 

accurate estimation of modern congressional intent”75; deference does not always capture 

what  Congress  wants.  But  “the  prior  case-by-case  evaluation  was  not  so  either”76—a 

point that might be buttressed with the suggestion that such evaluations will increase the 

burdens of decision while also producing a degree of error from inevitably fallible judges. 

In the end, Justice Scalia agrees with Judge Breyer on yet another point: Any account of 

congressional  instructions  reflects  “merely  a  fictional,  presumed  intent.”77  A  judgment 

about that fictional and presumed intent, Justice Scalia seems to say, should also be based 

on  a  judgment  about  what  would  amount  to  a  sensible  instruction  by  a  sensible 

legislature.  

But  what  makes  sense  should  be  informed  by  a  central  point:  any  fictional  or 

presumed  intent  will  operate  “principally  as  a  background  rule  of  law  against  which 

Congress can legislate.”78 And by emphasizing this point, Justice Scalia marks his crucial 

departure  from  Judge  Breyer.  “If  we  are  speaking  of  fictional  intent, Chevron,  taken  to 

provide a simple background rule, is unquestionably better than what preceded it,” simply 

because  “Congress  now  knows  that  the  ambiguities  it  creates,  whether  intentionally  or 

unintentionally, will be resolved, within the bounds of permissible interpretation, not by 

the  courts  but  by  a  particular  agency,  whose  policy  biases  will  ordinarily  be  known.”79 

Thus Justice Scalia offers a dynamic rather than static understanding of Chevron. Where 

Judge  Breyer  asks  whether  a  univocal  deference  rule  accurately  reflects  (fictive) 

congressional understandings, Justice Scalia focuses on the effects of a deference rule on 

                                                 
74 Id.   
75 Id. at 517. 
76 Id.  
77 Id. 
78 Id.  
79 Id. 

13 

 

subsequent  congressional  activity  –  a  focus  that,  in  his  view,  argues  for  clarity  and 

simplicity. 

To  this  Justice  Scalia  added  two  points  about  the  scope  of  Chevron,  thus 

defended. First, the emphasis on “real or presumed legislative intent to confer discretion” 

should  obliterate  the  old  idea  that  longstanding  and  consistent  interpretations  would 

receive  more  deference  than  recent  and  inconsistent  ones.80  Second,  and  more 

fundamentally,  Justice  Scalia  suggested  the  distinct  possibility  that  under  Chevron,  it 

would be necessary to revise a “distinction of yesteryear,” which involves “the distinction 

among the various  manners  in  which  the agency makes its legal views known.”81 Even 

mere litigating positions might receive Chevron deference, for 

“if the matter at issue is one for which the agency has responsibility, if all requisite procedures 

have  been  complied  with,  and  if  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  position  urged  has  full  and 

considered  approval  of  the  agency  head,  it  is  far  from  self-evident  that  the  agency's  views 

should  be  denied  their  accustomed  force  simply  because  they  are  first  presented  in  the 
prosecution of a lawsuit.”82 

At  this  point  Justice  Scalia  offered  a  jurisprudential  suggestion,  one  that  has 

turned out to be quite prescient. In his view, “there is a fairly close correlation between” 

enthusiasm for Chevron and a commitment to textualist methods of interpretation.83 “One 

who finds more often (as I do) that the meaning of a statute is apparent from its text and 

from  its  relationship  with  other  laws,  thereby  finds  less  often  that  the  triggering 

requirement for Chevron deference exists.”84 Those who reject plain meaning, and are  

 

 

 

“willing  to  permit  the  apparent  meaning  of  a  statute  to  be  impeached  by  the  legislative 

history,  will  more  frequently  find  agency-liberating  ambiguity,  and  will  discern  a  much 

broader range of ‘reasonable’ interpretation that the agency may adopt and to which the courts 

must pay deference. The frequency with which Chevron will require that judge to accept an 
interpretation he thinks wrong is infinitely greater.”85 

                                                 
80 Id. at 519. 
81 Id.  
82 Id. 
83 Id. at 521. 
84 Id. 
85 Id. 

14 

 

 

 

Justice Scalia noticed that Chevron had not yet marked a revolution in the law.  

“The opinions we federal judges read, and the cases we cite, are full of references to the old 

criteria  of  ‘agency  expertise,’  ‘the  technical  and  complex  nature  of  the  question  presented,’ 

‘the consistent and long-standing agency position’—and it will take some time to understand 

that those concepts are no longer relevant, or no longer relevant in the same way.”86  

 

 

But he added his belief that  

“in  the  long  run  Chevron  will  endure  and  be  given  its  full  scope—not  so  much  because  it 

represents a rule that is easier to follow and thus easier to predict (though that is true enough), 

but  because  it  more  accurately  reflects  the reality  of government,  and  thus  more  adequately 

serves its needs.”87  

Where Judge Breyer predicted a disintegation of Chevron’s “univocal” approach, 

on  the  ground  that  it  was  ill-suited  to  reality,  Justice  Scalia  contended  that  Chevron 

would be given its full scope, and amount to a major and novel development, precisely 

because  of  its  univocal  quality.  As  we  shall  see,  Breyer’s  prediction  appears  to  have 

proved to be more accurate; but in important respects the jury is still out. 

It should be clear that the disagreement between Judge Breyer and Justice Scalia 

involves  the  pervasive  choice  between  standards  and  rules.  Judge  Breyer  urged  that  no 

rule  could  solve  the  deference  problem,  simply  because  it  would  produce  so  much 

inaccuracy.  Justice  Scalia  can  be  taken  to  have  responded  that  a  rule  is  likely  to  be  as 

accurate  as  any  standard  and  that  it  has  the  further  advantage  of  reducing  decisional 

burdens  on  courts.  Seeing  a  deference  rule  as  relevant  to  Congress’  subsequent 

performance, Justice Scalia emphasizes, as Judge Breyer does not, that a simple rule will 

provide  better  guidance  to  subsequent  legislators.  If  the  choice  between  rules  and 

standards  turns  in  part  on  the  costs  of  error  and  the  costs  of  decisions,88  then  Judge 

Breyer and Justice Scalia might be seen as disagreeing about exactly how to assess those 

costs. 

                                                 
86 Id.  
87 Id. 
88 See Kaplow, supra note. 

15 

 

D. Reading Deference Doctrines Jurisprudentially: Chevron As Erie 

 

 

If  Chevron  is  read  in  light  of  the  shared  concerns  of  Judge  Breyer  and  Justice 

Scalia,  it  can  be  understood  as  a  natural  outgrowth  of  the  twentieth-century  shift  from 

judicial to agency lawmaking.89 In numerous contexts, judge-made law has been replaced 

by  administrative  regulation,  often  pursuant  to  vague  or  open-ended  guidance.  The 

replacement  has  been  spurred  by  dual  commitments  to  specialized  competence  and 

democratic accountability—and also by an understanding of the need for frequent shifts 

in policy over time, with new understandings of fact and with new values as well.  For 

banking, telecommunications, and environmental protection – among many other areas – 

changing  circumstances  often  require  agencies  to  adept  old  provisions  to  unanticipated 

problems.  Despite  the  Court’s  lack  of  ambition  for  its  decision,  the  Chevron  opinion, 

approving a bold and novel initiative by the Reagan Administration, did speak explicitly 

of the role of expertise and accountability in statutory interpretation. And if interpretation 

of unclear terms cannot operate without some judgments of the interpreter’s own,90 then 

the argument for Chevron, as the appropriate legal fiction, seems overwhelming. Indeed, 

Chevron can be seen in this light as a close analogue to Erie Railroad v. Tompkins91—as 

a suggestion that law and interpretation often involve no “brooding omnipresence in the 

sky”  but  instead  discretionary  judgments  to  be  made  by  appropriate  institutions.  For 

resolution of statutory ambiguities, no less than for identification of common law, federal 

courts may not qualify as appropriate. 

I  am  suggesting,  then,  that  Justice  Scalia’s  argument  about  the  need  for  a  clear 

background  rule  can  be  strengthened  with  a  strong  emphasis  on  Judge  Breyer’s  claims 

about expertise, an appreciation of the pressing need for agency flexibility over time, and 

a  recognition  that  when  agencies  interpret  ambiguities,  a  judgment  of  value,  operating 

under the President, is often involved. As we shall see, many of the post-Chevron cases, 

                                                 
89 An illuminating study is Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor, A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins of Workers’ Compensation 
(1999).  See  also  Jerry  Mashaw,  Due  Process  in  the  Administrative  State  (1983),  for  a  valuable  discussion  in  the  context  of  social 
security disability determinations. 
90  There  is  a  connection  here  between  Chevron  and  Ronald  Dworkin’s  view  on  interpretation,  as  set  out  in  Law’s  Empire  (1985). 
Dworkin contends that interpretation requires a judicial judgment about “fit” with existing materials and also about “justification” of 
those materials; his conception of law as integrity asks judges to put existing materials in their “best constructive light.” In modern 
government, courts are often less capable of accomplishing this task than are agencies, precisely because of their comparatively lesser 
expertise and accountability. Hence acceptance of Dworkin’s account of interpretation, or any account in the same general family, is 
easily enlisted on behalf of Chevron.  
91 304 U.S. 64 (1938). 

16 

 

read in their context, testify to the importance of these points. But if Chevron is read both 

broadly and ambitiously, it runs immediately into Judge Breyer’s objection that it is too 

crude and univocal. 

 

 

III. Step Zero 

A. Possibilities 

The disagreements between Justices Scalia and Breyer could manifest themselves 

at  multiple  points.  Suppose  that  the  question  involves  Chevron  Step  One.  We  should 

expect a degree of simplicity from Justice Scalia, in the form of deference to the agency’s 

interpretation  unless  the  text  unambiguously  forbids  it;  and  the  expectation  is  met  in 

many cases.92 We might expect Justice Breyer to be less willing to find statutory language 

to be plain and hence to be willing to defer to agencies even when Justice Scalia is not; 

and there is evidence to this effect as well.93  

In  these  respects,  the  tempting  idea  that  Justice  Scalia’s  enthusiastically  pro-

Chevron  approach  will  be  more  deferential  to  agencies  is  only  partly  right.  If  Justice 

Scalia is correct to say that Chevron enthusiasts are also likely to insist on plain meaning, 

then those who favor the “simple” reading of  Chevron  will  be  more  likely  to  find  Step 

One violations. There is some evidence that this is true.94 And in an important case that 

actually  upholds  an  agency’s  interpretation,  the  Court  went  out  of  its  way  to  reject  the 

strong  and  simple  version  of  Chevron  in  favor  of  the  weaker  and  more  complex 

version—with explicit citation to the 1986 essay by then-Judge Breyer.95 

 

In  fact,  the  1980s  disagreement  might  have been expected to involve something 

far larger than Step Zero. While Justice Scalia would adopt a general rule of deference to 

agency  interpretations,  Justice  Breyer  would  call  for  a  case-by-case  inquiry  into 

(fictional,  hypothesized)  legislative expectations.  The major locus of the disagreement, 

however, has become much narrower. It involves the threshold question whether Chevron 

is  applicable  at  all—a  question  ignored  by  Judge  Breyer  in  1986  and  prominently 

                                                 
92 See Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687, 699 (1995) (Scalia, J., dissenting); Gen. 
Dynamics Land Sys. v. Cline, 540 U.S. 581 (2004); Smith v. City of Jackson, 125 S. Ct. 1536 (2005). 
93 See MCI Telecommunications Corp. v. AT&T, 512 U.S. 218 (1994). 
94 Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687 (1995); MCI Telecommunications Corp., 512 
U.S.. 
95 Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687 (1995). 

17 

 

presaged by Justice Scalia in 1989. In Chevron’s first decade, this question was largely 

invisible,  at  least  in  the  Court  itself;  and  a  number  of  decisions  applied  the  Chevron 

framework without serious consideration of any Step Zero.  

Consider,  for  example,  Young  v.  Community  Nutrition  Institute.96  That  case 

involved  a  provision  saying  that  “the  Secretary  [of  Health  and  Human  Services]  shall 

promulgate  regulations  limiting  the  quantity  [of  any  poisonous  or  deleterious  substance 

added  to  any  food]  to  such  extent  as  he  finds  necessary  for  the  protection  of  public 

health."97  The  interpretive  question,  one  of  considerable  practical  importance,  was 

whether  “to  such  extent  as  he  finds  necessary”  modified  “shall  promulgate,”  so  as  to 

allow the Secretary not to act at all, or instead modified “limiting the quantity,” so as to 

require  him  to  issue  regulations,  but  with  such  severity  as  he  chose.  The  agency  had 

settled  on  the  former  interpretation,  but  not  through  any  formal  procedure;  instead  the 

agency’s  informal  understanding  was  involved.  Without  even  pausing  to  consider  the 

applicability  of  the  Chevron  framework,  the  Court  gave  deference  to  the  agency  and 

upheld its interpretation.98 

Does Young suggest that all agency interpretations of law should receive Chevron 

deference? If the underlying theory involves implicit (and fictional) delegation, the real 

question  is  when  Congress  should  be  understood  to  have  delegated  law-interpreting 

power  to  a  regulatory  agency.  The  broadest  imaginable  answer  would  be  simple: 

Whenever  an  agency  makes  an  interpretation  of  law,  that  interpretation  falls  under  the 

Chevron  framework.  This  answer  would  eliminate  Step  Zero  altogether.  But  everyone 

should  be  willing  to  agree  that  the  answer  is  too  broad.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  an 

agency  is  interpreting  the  Administrative  Procedure  Act.  Is  the  FDA  permitted  to 

interpret the APA’s provisions governing reviewability, and hence to decide, within the 

bounds  of  reasonableness,  whether  its  own  decisions  are  reviewable?    Is  the  NLRB’s 

understanding  of  the  APA’s  substantial  evidence  test  controlling,  or  does  the  Court 

interpret  that  test  on  its  own?  The  clear  answer  to  such  questions  is  that  Chevron  is 

                                                 
96 476 U.S. 974 (1986). 
97 21 U.S.C. § 346. 
98 FDIC v. Philadelphia Gear Corp., 476 U.S. 426, 438-439 (1986); Mead Corp. v. Tilley, 490 U.S. 714 (1989); NationsBank of N.C., 
N.A. v. Variable Annuity Life Ins. Co., 513 U.S. 251, 255 (1995); Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation v. LTV Corp., 496 U.S. 633, 
642-643, 647-648 (1990). 

18 

 

inapplicable.99 The reason is that neither the FDA nor the NLRB “administers” the APA; 

it is more accurate to say that the agencies are governed, or administered, by the APA. 

Hence,  there  is  no  reason  to  defer.  By  itself,  this  conclusion  resolves  a  number  of 

questions  about  Chevron  Step  Zero.  Agencies  are  not  given  Chevron  deference  when 

they are interpreting the Freedom of Information Act, the National Environmental Policy 

Act, and other statutes that cut across a wide range of agencies.100  

If this analysis is right, then the broadest plausible reading of Chevron would be 

this:  Whenever  an  agency  makes  an  interpretation  of  a  statute  that  it  administers,  that 

interpretation  falls  under  the  Chevron  framework.  But  a  moment’s  reflection  should 

reveal that this interpretation remains implausibly broad. Suppose that a particular statute 

contains provisions governing the reviewability of agency action, as the Clean Air Act in 

fact  does.  Is  the  EPA  permitted  to  interpret  those  provisions,  because  the  EPA 

administers the Clean Air Act? It would make little sense to suppose that Congress has 

delegated to the EPA the power to say whether its own decisions are reviewable, even if 

the EPA is in charge of the Clean Air Act.101 To be sure, judgments about reviewability 

might well call for both expertise and accountability; if an agency resists judicial review, 

it may do so for good reasons. But when an agency’s self-interest is so conspicuously at 

stake,  Congress  should  not  be  taken  to  have  delegated  law-interpreting  power  to  the 

agency.102  

An unfortunate feature of this view is that it complicates the Chevron framework. 

But it is not all that complicated to offer an amended understanding of Chevron’s reach: 

Whenever  an  agency  makes  an  interpretation  of  a  statute  that  it  administers,  that 

interpretation falls under the Chevron framework, unless the agency’s self-interest is so 

conspicuously at stake that it is implausible to infer a congressional delegation of law-

interpreting power. The evident problem with this attractive reading is that it does not say 

what it means for an “agency” to be making an interpretation of a statute. Does a lower-

level official count as the “agency”? Does the General Counsel’s office? Such questions 

                                                 
99 See Merrill & Hickman, supra note 19. 
100 Id. 
101 See Friends of the Earth v. Laidlaw Env. Services, 528 U.S. 167 (2000) (resolving standing issue without deferring to agency’s 
view); International Brotherhood of Teamsters v. Pena, 17 F.3d 1478 (D.C. Cir. 1994) (same). But see Chemical Waste Manufacturers 
v. EPA, 873 F.2d 1477 (D.C. Cir. 1989) (deferring to EPA regulations defining “public hearing”); Penobscot Air Services Ltd. v. FAA, 
164 F.3d 713 (1st Cir. 1999) (deferring to FAA regulations involving procedures). 
102 Timothy K. Armstrong, Chevron Deference and Agency Self-Interest, 13 CORNELL J. L. & PUB POLICY 203 (2004). 

19 

 

lead  to  an  amended  reading  that  is  both  plausible  and  broad,  one  favored  by  Justice 

Scalia:  Whenever  an  agency  makes  an  authoritative  interpretation  of  a  statute  that  it 

administers, that interpretation falls under the Chevron framework, unless the agency’s 

self-interest  is  so  conspicuously  at  stake  that  it  is  implausible  to  infer  a  congressional 

delegation  of  law-interpreting  power.  On  this  approach,  it  is  necessary  only  to  know 

whether  the  purported  interpreters  truly  speak  for  the  agency  itself.  If  they  do,  the 

Chevron framework applies. 

This approach retains a separate Step Zero inquiry, but it has the virtue of relative 

simplicity. Is its breadth justified by the theory of implicit delegation? If so, it is because 

the very creation of administrative agencies, and the grant of authority to them, implicitly 

carries with it a degree of interpretive power. But on its face, that statement requires an 

immediate qualification. Some agencies enforce the law; more particularly, they enforce 

the criminal law. The Department of Justice is of course the most obvious example. Is it 

plausible to say that when criminal statutes are ambiguous, the Department of Justice is 

permitted to construe them as it sees fit? That would be a preposterous conclusion. Such 

deference would ensure the combination of prosecutorial power and adjudicatory power, 

in a way that would violate established traditions and threaten liberty itself.103 Congress 

should  not  be  understood  to  have  violated  these  traditions  merely  by  authorizing 

enforcement of the criminal law; the grant of prosecutorial power, under federal criminal 

law, should not be seen as including interpretive power as well. 

But  this  qualification,  important  as  it  is,  is  a  limited  one;  it  does  not  greatly 

undermine  the  reading  of  Chevron  offered  above.  Note,  however,  that  the  resulting 

reading  downplays  two  features  of  Chevron  itself:  That  case  involved  notice-and-

comment  rulemaking,  a  procedure  that  is  designed  to  ensure  a  degree  of  public 

transparency,  responsiveness,  and  reason-giving;  and  it  involved  agency  judgments  that 

had the force of law, in the sense that EPA rules are binding on private parties. Chevron 

did not say whether these features of the case were relevant to the question of deference. 

In  an  important  but  old  case,  Skidmore  v.  Swift  &  Co.,  104  involving  an  agency 

                                                 
103 Crandon v. United States, 494 U.S. 152, 177 (1990) (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment). Note as well that the rule of lenity 
ensures that ambiguities in criminal statutes are construed favorably to defendants; Chevron deference to criminal prosecutors would 
override that long-established principle. For a contrary view, supporting deference to Department of Justice interpretations of statutes, 
see Dan Kahan, Is Chevron Relevant to Federal Criminal Law?, 110 HARV. L. REV. 469 (1996).  
104 Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134 (1944). 

20 

 

interpretation  lacking  the  force  of  law,  the  Court  had  made  it  clear  that  such  an 

interpretation would have only persuasive authority, and hence that the statutory question 

would  be  resolved  judicially  rather  than  administratively.  Thus  the  Skidmore  decision 

suggested  that  courts  would  merely  consult  such  interpretations,  considering  whether 

they  were  longstanding,  consistent,  and  well-reasoned.105  The  status  of  the  Skidmore 

holding was put in doubt by Chevron.  

In three cases—a Step Zero trilogy—the Court has attempted to sort out the scope 

of Chevron. 

 

 

B. A Step Zero Trilogy 

1.  Christensen.  The  initial  decision  is  Christensen  v.  Harris  County.106  At  issue 

there  was  the  validity  of  an  opinion  letter  from  the  Acting  Administration  of  the  Wage 

and  Hour  Division  of  the  Department  of  Labor.  The  letter  involved  the  complex  rules 

governing “compensatory time,” that is, overtime work paid at a rate of 1 1/2 hours for 

each hour worked. In an opinion by Justice Thomas, the Court concluded that Chevron 

deference  was  inapplicable  to  the  Acting  Administrator’s  opinion  letter.  Speaking  in 

broad  terms,  it  said  that  interpretations  “such  as  those  in  opinion  letters—like 

interpretations  contained  in  policy  statements,  agency  manuals,  and  enforcement 

guidelines,  all  of  which  lack  the  force  of  law—do  not  warrant  Chevron-style 

deference.”107  The  Court  distinguished  opinion  letters  and  their  analogues  from 

interpretations  “arrived  at  after,  for  example,  a  formal  adjudication  or  notice-and-

comment  rulemaking.”108  Opinion  letters  would  be  treated  in  the  same  way  the 

Administrator’s  opinion  in  Skidmore—as  having  merely  persuasive  authority.  In  this 

way, the Court made it clear that Skidmore had survived Chevron. 

But the Court’s analysis left several ambiguities. By pointing first to the “force of 

law,” and second to the processes that give rise to agency interpretations, the Court did 

not  specify  which  of  these  two  factors  was  critical  to  its  ruling,  nor  did  it  explain  the 

relationship  between  them.  And  the  Court  did  not  say  whether  interpretations  that  lack 
                                                 
105 Id. 
106 Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576 (2000). 
107 Id. at 587. 
108 Id. 

21 

 

the force of law, or that do not emerge from relatively formal procedures, are always to 

be assessed under Skidmore, or to be so assessed only some of the time. Nonetheless, the 

Court made it clear that Step Zero involves an independent inquiry, one that will often be 

resolved  against  the  application  of  the  Chevron  framework.  Henceforth  there  would  be 

two sets of deference doctrines, one based on Chevron, the other on Skidmore. 

Justice Scalia wrote separately, building directly on his 1989 article to argue that 

Skidmore “is an anachronism.”109 All that mattered, in his view, was whether the position 

at  issue  “represents  the  authoritative  view  of  the  Department  of  Labor.”110  It  no  longer 

was  relevant  whether  the  agency’s  interpretation  stemmed  from  formal  procedures  or 

otherwise.  Indeed,  Justice  Scalia  contended  that  Chevron  deference  should  follow  from 

the mere fact that the Solicitor General filed a brief in the case, cosigned by the Solicitor 

of Labor, stating that the opinion letter reflected the position of the Secretary of Labor.111  

Evidently  aware  of  the  broader  implications,  Justice  Breyer  wrote 

separately  as  well,  building  directly  on  his  1986  article  to  emphasize  that  in 

crucial  respects,  “Chevron  made  no  relevant  change”  in  longstanding  law.112  For 

Justice  Breyer,  Chevron’s  only  contribution—in  his  view  a  modest  one—was  to 

identify  a  particular  reason  for  “deferring  to  certain  agency  determinations, 

namely,  that  Congress  had  delegated  to  the  agency  the  legal  authority  to  make 

those  determinations.”113  In  some  circumstances,  he  said,  “Chevron-type 

deference  is  inapplicable”  on  this  theory,  for  example  because  “one  has  doubt 

that  Congress  actually  intended  to  delegate  interpretive  authority  to  the 

agency.”114  In  such  circumstances,  the  appropriate  “lens,”  as  he  put  it,  comes 

from Skidmore, not Chevron. This suggestion is best taken as an effort to use his 

1986  analysis  to  domesticate  Chevron—to  treat  it  as  a  synthesis  rather  than  a 

revolution. 

                                                 
109 Id. at 589 (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment). 
110 Id. For a valuable suggestion that the applicability of Chevron should turn on whether a high-level agency official has endorsed 
the interpretation in question, see David J. Barron and Elena Kagan, Chevron’s Nondelegation Doctrine, 2001 Sup. Ct. Rev. 201. 
111 Id. 
112 Id at 596 (Breyer, J., dissenting). 
113 Id. at 596-97. 
114 Id. at 597. 

22 

 

2.  Mead.  The  second  case  in  the  trilogy,  and  the  most  elaborately  reasoned,  is 

United States v. Mead Corporation.115 At issue there was a tariff clarification ruling by 

the United States Customs Service. The Court concluded that the ruling was not entitled 

to Chevron deference and that Skidmore supplied the appropriate framework. The key to 

the  holding  is  the  suggestion  that  Chevron  applies  “when  it  appears  that  Congress  has 

delegated authority to the agency generally to make rules carrying the force of law, and 

that the agency interpretation claiming deference was promulgated in the exercise of that 

authority.”116  It  follows  that  the  “core”  cases  for  Chevron  involve  an  exercise  of 

delegated  rulemaking  authority.  In  the  Court’s  understanding,  a  delegation  “may  be 

shown in a variety of ways, as by an agency’s power to engage in adjudication or notice-

and-comment  rulemaking,  or  by  some  other  indication  of  comparable  congressional 

intent.”117 Hence the linchpin for deference is the power to act with the force of law; that 

power would be found with the authority to use formal procedures, but it could also be 

based on some other evidence of what Congress intended.  

Closely  following  Justice  Breyer’s  position  in  1986,  the  Court  described 

longstanding law in this way: the “fair measure of deference to an agency administering 

its  own  statute  has  been  understood  to  vary  with  circumstances,  and  courts  have  often 

looked  to  the  degree  of  the  agency’s  care,  its  consistency,  formality,  and  relative 

expertise,  and  to  the  persuasiveness  of  the  agency’s  position.”118  In  the  Court’s  view, 

Chevron  merely  offered  “an  additional  reason  for  judicial  deference,”119  one  that  stems 

from  an  implicit  delegation  of  authority.  When  there  has  been  such  a  delegation,  the 

Court  must  accept  any  reasonable  interpretation  of  ambiguous  terms.  An  implicit 

delegation would be apparent if Congress “would expect the agency to be able to speak 

with the force of law.”120  

But when is that? A “very good indicator of delegation,” in the Court’s view, is 

authorization  “to  engage  in  the  process  of  rulemaking  or  adjudication  that  produces 

regulations  or  rulings  for  which  deference  is  claimed.”121  The  reason  is  that  when 

                                                 
115 533 U.S. 218 (2001). 
116 Id. at 226-27. 
117 Id. 
118 Id. at 228. 
119 Id. at 229. 
120 Id.  
121 Id.  

23 

 

Congress  provides  “for  a  relatively  formal  administrative  procedure,”  one  that  fosters 

“fairness  and  deliberation,” 

it 

is  fair 

to  assume 

that  “Congress  contemplates 

administrative action with the force of law.”122 If agencies have been given power to use 

relatively formal procedures, and if they have exercised that power, they are entitled to 

Chevron  deference.  Nonetheless,  Chevron  deference  can  be  found,  and  has  sometimes 

been  found,  “even  when  no  such  administrative  formality  was  required  and  none  was 

afforded.”123  Thus  the  Court  squarely  rejected  a  possible  reading  of  Christensen,  to  the 

effect  that  agency  interpretations  lacking  the  force  of  law,  or  not  preceded  by  formal 

procedures, would always be evaluated under Skidmore. 

Why,  then,  was  the  tariff  ruling  in  Mead  not  entitled  to  deference?  A  relevant 

factor  was  that  formal  procedures  were  not  involved.  Another  was  that  nearly  fifty 

customs  offices  issue  tariff  classifications,  producing  10,000  to  15,000  annually.  “Any 

suggestion that rulings intended to have the force of law are being churned out at a rate of 

10,000 a year at an agency’s 46 scattered offices is simply self-refuting.”124 Hence such 

rulings  should  be  treated  like  the  policy  statements,  agency  manuals,  and  enforcement 

guidelines  mentioned  in  Christensen.  Skidmore,  not  Chevron,  provided  the  applicable 

principles. 

Justice  Scalia’s  dissenting  opinion  emphasized  a  position  that  should  now  be 

familiar:  “Chevron  sets  forth  an  across-the-board  presumption,  which  operates  as  a 

background  rule  of  law  against  which  Congress  legislates:  Ambiguity  means  Congress 

intended agency discretion. Any resolution of the ambiguity by the administering agency 

that  is  authoritative—that  represents  the  official  position  of  the  agency—must  be 

accepted by the courts if it is reasonable.”125 Responding to the Court’s emphasis on the 

absence of formal procedures, he contended that the appropriateness of deference should 

depend on authoritativeness rather than formality. In his view, the principal consequences 

of Mead would be to produce “protracted confusion” for litigants and courts and also to 

create  an  artificial  incentive  to  resort  to  formal  procedures.  In  this  way,  Mead  would 

significantly  decrease  agency  flexibility  over  time—and  thus  eliminate  a  primary 

advantage of Chevron itself.  
                                                 
122 Id. at 230. 
123 Id. at 231. 
124 Id. at 233. 
125 Mead, 533 U.S. at 241 (Scalia, J., dissenting). 

24 

 

The Court offered a rebuttal to Justice Scalia, one that sounded almost identical to 

Judge  Breyer’s  attack  on  Chevron  in  1986.126  The  Court’s  major  emphasis  was  on  the 

“great range” of administrative action and the variety of procedures under which agency 

action  occurs.127  In  these  circumstances,  simplicity  would  be  obtuse.  “If  the  primary 

objective is to simplify the judicial process of giving or withholding deference, then the 

diversity  of  statutes  authorizing  discretionary  administrative  action  must  be  declared 

irrelevant or minimized.”128 But if “it is simply implausible that Congress intended such a 

broad range of statutory authority to produce only two varieties of administrative action, 

demanding either Chevron deference or none at all, then the breadth of the spectrum of 

possible  agency  action  must  be  taken  into  account.  .  .  .  The  Court's  choice  has  been  to 

tailor deference to variety.”129 

3.  Barnhart:  Justice  Breyer’s  triumph.  Whereas  Christensen  suggested  a  clean 

line between Chevron cases and Skidmore cases, turning on the “force of law” test, Mead 

says  that  Congress  might,  under  unidentified  circumstances,  be  best  read  to  call  for 

deference  even when  (a)  an  agency is  not using formal procedures and (b) an agency’s 

actions lack the force of law. This qualification turned out to be central in the third case 

in the Step Zero trilogy, Barnhart v. Walton.130  

At issue there was a regulation of the Social Security Administration, specifying 

that  a  claimant  for  disability  benefits  did  not  have  an  “impairment”  unless  facing  a 

problem that would be expected to last for at least twelve months. The twelve-month rule 

had been adopted after notice and comment procedures, and the Court might have simply 

emphasized  that  fact.  Instead  the  Court  acknowledged  that  the  agency  had  previously 

reached  its  interpretation  through  less  formal  means—but  said  that  that  use  of  those 

means did not eliminate Chevron deference. On the contrary, the Court read Mead to say 

that Chevron deference would depend on “the interpretive method used and the nature of 

the question at issue.”131 In the key sentence, the Court added,  

 

                                                 
126 See Barron and Kagan, supra note 110, at 226, for the suggestion that “Mead naturally lends itself to interpretation as a classic ad 
hoc balancing decision, and so a partial reversion to the doctrine of judicial review that prevailed before Chevron.” 
127 Mead, 533 U.S. at 236. 
128 Id. at 237. 
129 Id. 
130 535 U.S. 212 (2002). 
131 Id. at 222. 

25 

 

“the  interstitial  nature  of  the  legal  question,  the  related  expertise  of  the  Agency,  the 

importance  of  the  question  to  the  administration  of  the  statute,  the  complexity  of  that 

administration, and the careful consideration the Agency has given the question over a long 

period of time all indicate that Chevron provides the appropriate legal lens through which to 

view the legality of the Agency interpretation here at issue.”132 

 

This  sentence  represents  an  extraordinary  personal  triumph  for  Justice  Breyer. 

Sixteen years before, he had argued against a strong reading of Chevron and contended 

that  a  case-by-case  inquiry  would  be  far  better  than  a  simple  deference  rule.  Barnhart 

embeds  such  a  case-by-case  inquiry.  Just  as  he  urged  in  1986,  whether  an  agency’s 

decision is “interstitial” has now become highly relevant. Even more important, Barnhart 

says  that  careful  consideration  over  a  long  period  of  time—a  factor  that  might  have 

become  an  anachronism  after  Chevron,  as  Justice  Scalia  urged  in  1989—also  bears  on 

whether Chevron provides  “the appropriate legal  lens.” And  indeed, a number  of lower 

courts have given Chevron deference to agency interpretations that are not a product of 

any kind of formal process.133 Under Christensen, Mead, and Barnhart, the real question 

is Congress’s (implied) instructions in the particular statutory scheme, and the grant of 

authority  to  act  with  the  force  of  law  is  a  sufficient  but  not  necessary  condition  for 

finding a grant of power to interpret ambiguous terms.   

Justice  Breyer’s  triumph  is  not  unqualified.134  Recall  that  in  1986,  he 

urged  that  Chevron  should  be  taken  not  to  establish  a  presumption  or  a  rule,  but 

instead  to  invite  a  case-by-case  inquiry  into  whether  the  relevant  legal  question 

should  be  resolved  administratively  or  judicially.  In  the  Step  Zero  trilogy,  the 

Court has not accepted this position. When an agency’s decision has the force of 

law,  or  results  from  some  kind  of  formal  process,  Chevron  applies  with  full 

force;  these  are  safe  harbors  for  application  of  Chevron.135  And  when  Chevron 

applies, the Step Zero trilogy does not argue in favor of any kind of case-by-case 

inquiry. Of course it would be possible to use the trilogy as the foundation for a 

far  more  frontal  assault  on  the  Chevron  framework—to  suggest  that  whether  an 
                                                 
132 Id. 
133 See, e.g., Mylan Laboratories v. Thompson, 389 F.2d 1272, 1279-80 (D.C. Cir. 2004); Davis v. EPA, 336 F.3d 965, 972 n.5 (9th 
Cir. 2003); Alfaro v. Commissioner, 349 F.3d 225 (5th Cir. 2003). 
134 See Barron & Kagan, supra note 110, at 227 (emphasizing the degree of structure imposed by the Mead opinion). 
135 See, e.g., Shotz v. City of Plantation, 344 F.3d 1161, 1179 (11th Cir. 2003); New York Public Interest Research Group v. Whitman, 
321 F.3d 316 (2d Cir. 2003). 

26 

 

issue  is  interstitial,  or  calls  for  agency  expertise,  always  bears  on  the  deference 

question, and not merely on the threshold inquiry whether Chevron is applicable 

at  all.  Indeed,  some  of  the  Court’s  decisions  can  be  taken  to  suggest  a  tacit 

judgment  to  exactly  that  effect.136  And  in  an  important  opinion,  Judge  Posner 

writes  that  Barnhart  “suggests  a  merger  between  Chevron  deference  and 

Skidmore's  .  .  .  approach  of  varying  the  deference  that  agency  decisions  receive 

in  accordance  with  the  circumstances.”137  If  there  has  indeed  been  a  “merger,” 

Justice  Breyer’s  triumph  is  complete.  But  notwithstanding  Judge  Posner’s 

suggestion,  the  formal  doctrine  does  not  qualify  the  Chevron  framework  in  this 

way138—with one exception to which I will turn in due course. 

4. The trilogy in the lower courts. A consequence of the three cases has been to 

produce  a  great  deal  of  confusion139—and,  perhaps  more  notably  still,  a  series  of 

decisions  according  Chevron  deference  to  agency  interpretations  that  did  not  follow 

formal procedures.  

As a leading example, consider Davis v. EPA.140 At issue was the EPA’s denial of 

a  request  by  California  for  a  waiver  of  the  oxygen  level  requirement  under  the  federal 

reformulated  gas  program.141  The  relevant  provision  allowed  a  waiver  “upon  a 

determination  by  the  Administrator  that  compliance”  with  the  oxygen  requirement 

“would prevent or interfere with the attainment by the area” of the air quality required by 

national  ambient  air  quality  standards.142  The  EPA  interpreted  this  provision  to  require 

that  a  state  “clearly  demonstrate”  the  impact  of  a  waiver  on  attainment  with  national 

standards.  The  D.C.  Circuit  panel  treated  this  as  a  Chevron  question.143  The  court 

acknowledged that the agency’s interpretation was not a product of any formal procedure, 

and it did not investigate the question whether that interpretation had the force of law.144 

Quoting  Barnhart,  it  said  that  “the  interpretive  method  used  and  the  nature  of  the 

                                                 
136  Babbitt  v.  Sweet  Home  Chapter  of Communities  for  a  Great  Oregon,  515  U.S.  687  (1995);  MCI Telecommunications  Corp.  v. 
AT&T, 512 U.S. 218 (1994); FDA v. Brown & Williamson, 529 U.S. 120 (2000).  
137  Krzalic  v.,  Republic  Title  Co.,  314  F.3d  875,  879  (7th  Cir.  2002).  Notably,  Judge  Easterbrook  wrote  separately  on  this  point, 
supporting the standard view that there was no such merger. Id. at 883-84 (Easterbrook, J., concurring in the judgment). 
138 See id. (Easterbrook, J., concurring in the judgment).  
139 See Bressman, supra note14, for a valuable treatment. 
140 348 F.3d 772 (D.C. Cir. 2003). 
141 42 U.S.C § 7545(k)(2)(B). 
142 Id. 
143 Id. at 779-80. 
144 Id. at 780 n.5. 

27 

 

question at issue” called for application of Chevron even though the denial of the waiver 

was merely “informal” action.145   

The  same  approach  was  followed  in  Mylan  Laboratories  v.  HHS.146  The  legal 

question involved the time that Mylan would be permitted to market a generic version of 

a chronic pain treatment for which other companies had been given a temporary period of 

exclusive  marketing.  In  a  letter  to  the  interested  parties,  the  FDA  interpreted  the 

governing statute to forbid Mylan from marketing its generic version at the stage Mylan 

preferred.147 Under Mead, it would certainly have been reasonable to say that interpretive 

letters of this kind must be analyzed under Skidmore rather than Chevron; and so Mylan 

urged.  But  a  D.C.  Circuit  panel  disagreed.  Emphasizing  Barnhart  and  Mead,  the  court 

stressed  that  this  was  a  complex  statutory  regime  and  that  the  FDA’s  expertise  was 

relevant to its interpretation.148 The court added that “the FDA’s decision made no great 

legal  leap  but  relied  in  large  part  on  its  previous  determination  of  the  same  or  similar 

issues  and  on  its  own  regulations.”149  Hence  Chevron,  not  Skidmore,  provided  the 

appropriate basis for analysis.  

Other  cases  are  in  the  same  vein.150  For  example,  the  majority  view  is  that 

Statements of Policy issued by the Department of Housing and Urban Development are 

entitled to Chevron deference, even though such statements do not come from any kind 

of formal procedure.151 But other decisions, reading Mead broadly, seem to adopt a kind 

of  presumption  to  the  effect  that  a  lack  of  formality  implies  a  lack  of  Chevron 

deference.152  In  the  important  context  of  Revenue  Rulings  for  the  IRS,  for  example, 

deference  is  denied  by  analogy  to  the  tariff  classification  rulings  involved  in  Mead.153 

Many lower courts seem to choose between Mead and Barnhart, and the result is a kind 

of Step Zero chaos.154 

                                                 
145 Id. 
146 389 F.3d 1272 (D.C. Cir. 2004). 
147 Id. at 1277. 
148 Id. at 1280. 
149 Id.  
150 See, e.g, Nation v. HHS, 285 F.3d 864 (9th  Cir. 2002); but see Glover v. Standard Federal Bank, 283 F.3d 953 (8th Cir. 2002). 
151 See Schuetz v. Banc One Mortgage Corp, 292 F.3d 1004 (9th Cir. 2002); Kruse v. Wells Fargo Home Mortgage, Inc., 383 F.3d 49 
(2d Cir. 2004). 
152 Krzalic v. Republic Title Co., 314 F.3d 875, 879 (7th Cir. 2002); Wilderness Society v. United States Fish and Wildlife Service, 
353 F.3d 1051 (9th Cir. 2003) (en banc). 
153 See Omohundro v U.S., 300 F.3d 1065, 1067-68 (9th Cir. 2002); Aeroquip-Vickers, Inc. v. CIR, 347 F.3d 173 (6th Cir. 2003). 
154 See Bressman, supra note 14. 

28 

 

 

C. Bad Fictions 

1. Problems. The initial innovation in the Step Zero trilogy is to emphasize that 

agency decisions receive Chevron deference if they are a product of delegated authority 

to act with the force of law. It is presumed that an agency has such authority if it has been 

granted the power to act through notice-and-comment rulemaking or formal adjudication. 

For four reasons, this analysis is quite confusing. 

a.  Defining  the  force  of  law.  The  Court  has  not  explained  what  it  means  by  the 

“force of law.” There seem to be two possible interpretations. An agency decision may 

have the “force of law” when and because it receives Chevron deference. On this view, 

the  “force  of  law”  test  is  no  test  at  all;  it  is  a  circle,  not  an  analytical  tool.  All  of  the 

relevant  work  is  being  done  by  an  inquiry  into  congressional  intentions,  which  are 

typically elicited by an examination of whether the agency has been given the authority to 

use certain procedures. Alternatively, an agency decision may be taken to have the “force 

of law” when it is binding on private parties in the sense that those who act in violation 

of the decision face immediate sanctions.155 On this view, Chevron deference is inferred 

from the grant of power to make decisions that people violate at their peril. Perhaps we 

could supplement this approach to say that a decision has the “force of law” if the agency 

is  legally  bound  by  it  as  well.156  This  interpretation  has  the  advantage  of  avoiding  any 

circularity,  and  it  is  therefore  the  most  plausible  reading  of  the  Court’s  approach  in 

Mead.157 

b. Force of law vs. formal procedures. Some rules having the force of law in the 

latter  sense  do  not,  and  need  not,  go  through  formal  procedures  at  all;  as  a  statutory 

matter, formal procedures are emphatically not a necessary condition for the force of law. 

The  APA  itself  makes  a  series  of  exemptions  from  notice-and-comment  requirements. 

For example, an agency may make rules that are binding, in the sense that they have the 

                                                 
155 See Thomas W. Merrill, The Mead Doctrine: Rules and Standards, Meta-Rules and Meta-Standards, 54 ADMIN. L. REV. 807, 809 
(2002)  (“The  traditional  understanding  is  that  agency  action  has”  the  force  of  law  “when  it  is  not  open  to  further  challenge  and 
subjects a person who disobeys to some sanction, disability, or other adverse legal consequence….”); Thomas W. Merrill and Kathryn 
Tongue Watts, Agency Rules with the Force of Law: The Original Convention, 116 HARV. L. REV. 467 (2002). An analogous debate 
can be found in the complex body of law raising the question whether certain rules must go through notice and comment procedures; 
in the relevant cases, some courts refer to a “legal effect” test. See American Mining Congress v. Dept. Of Labor, 995 F.2d 1106 (D.C. 
Cir. 1993); but see Appalachian Power Co. v. EPA, 208 F.3d 1015 (D.C. Cir. 2000) (requiring a rule to go through notice and comment 
procedures even though it appears to lack legal effect). 
156 FEC v. NRA, 254 F.3d 173 (2d Cir. 2001). 
157 See Merrill and Watts, supra note 155. 

29 

 

force  of  law,  without  notice  and  comment  when  the  rules  involve  agency  procedure  or 

when  there  is  “good  cause”  for  dispensing  with  notice-and-comment  processes.158  

Properly exempted rules have the force of law, but they need not go through any kind of 

procedure. The Court cannot have meant to say that such rules are not entitled to Chevron 

deference; but the emphasis on procedures seems to leave this possibility open.  

c.  Adjudications  without  the  force  of  law.  Many  adjudications  lack  the  force  of 

law.159  The  NLRB  and  the  Federal  Trade  Commission,  for  example,  issue  orders  that 

cannot be enforced without a judicial proceeding; in fact the FTC’s rules do not have the 

force  of  law.160  What  does  the  Step  Zero  trilogy  mean  to  suggest  for  agency  decisions 

that follow formal procedures  but  that do not  lead  to sanctions in the event  that  people 

violate them? It would be exceedingly strange to say that the decisions of the NLRB and 

the  FTC  lack  Chevron  deference,  and  the  Court  has  held  that  NLRB  decisions  do,161 

notwithstanding the fact that those decisions do not have the force of law. The most likely 

conclusion is that Chevron deference applies in such circumstances, but the Court did not 

appear to see the problem. 

d.  Fictions  and  heuristics.  Most  importantly,  the  relationship  among  “force  of 

law,” formal procedure, and Chevron deference is confusing. What does any one of these 

have  to  do  with  the  other  two?  Mead  seems  to  insist  on  close  links  among  these  three 

moving parts. The Court appears to be using the “force of law” idea as a heuristic for an 

implicit delegation—on the theory that when Congress has given an agency the authority 

to  act  with  legal  force,  it  has  also  given  the  agency  the  authority  to  interpret  statutory 

ambiguities.  But what is the basis for this heuristic? It is possible to imagine a delegation 

of interpretive authority to an agency that does not have, or is not exercising, the power to 

act  with  the  force  of  law.  It  is  also  possible  to  imagine  a  congressional  decision  to 

withhold  interpretive  authority  from  an  agency  that  has  that  power.  Congress  retains 

ultimate control of the deference issue, and hence Congress could uncouple, if it chose, 

the force of law question from the deference question. 

                                                 
158 5 U.S.C § 553. 
159 See Merrill and Watts, supra note 155. 
160 Id. 
161 See, e.g., NLRB v. United Food & Commercial Workers, 484 U.S. 112 (1987); Hoffman Plastics Compounds v. NLRB, 535 U.S. 
137 (2002). 

30 

 

Perhaps the Court’s reasoning is as follows. We do not know whether Congress 

wants  courts  to  defer  to  agency  interpretations  of  law;  any  answer  to  that  question 

remains a legal fiction. But if Congress has authorized agencies to act with the force of 

law,  the  best  inference  is  that  deference  is  the  national  legislature’s  instruction.  At  the 

very  least,  a  grant  of  authority  to  act  with  such  force  is  a  sufficient  condition  for 

deference—a  basis  for  a  presumption  of  the  sort  that  Justice  Scalia  originally 

championed.  Since  we  are  speaking  of  fictions,  this  particular  inference  is  not 

implausible, at least if the power to act with the force of law is taken as a sufficient even 

if not necessary condition for Chevron deference. 

But  what  is  the  relevance  of  relatively  formal  procedures?  There  are  two 

possibilities. Perhaps a heuristic is at work here as well: An agency will be assumed to 

have  the  power  to  act  with  the  force  of  law  if  it  is  authorized  to  engage  in  formal 

procedures. On this view, the Court does not ordinarily know whether an agency can act 

with the force of law, and an agency is presumed to be entitled to do so if Congress has 

granted  the  power  to  engage  in  rulemaking  or  adjudication.  This  idea  does  not  fit  with 

longstanding  understandings  of  when  an  agency  acts  with  the  force  of  law,  and  as  a 

matter  of  legislative  instructions  it  is  probably  wrong.162  But  it  is  not  the  worst 

reconstruction of judicial understandings in the last two decades.163  

Alternatively, the Court may not be using a heuristic for the force of law. It might 

mean something more straightforward and appealing, to wit: An agency will be assumed 

to be entitled to Chevron deference if it is exercising delegated power to make legislative 

rules or to issue orders after an adjudication. The general goal is to ensure that at one or 

another  stage,  the  legal  system  contains  adequate  safeguards  against  arbitrary,  ill-

considered,  or  biased  agency  decisions.  In  fact,  this  does  seem  to  be  a  crucial  part  of 

Mead, which might therefore be read in the following way. Any reading of congressional 

instructions  on  the  deference  question  is  inevitably  fictive;  it  is  not  a  matter  of  finding 

something. The best reconstruction of congressional will is that agencies receive Chevron 

deference if and only if they have availed themselves of procedures that promote what, in 

the  crucial  passage,  the  Mead  Court  called  “fairness  and  deliberation”164—by,  for 

                                                 
162 See Merrill and Hickman, supra note 19. 
163 Id. 
164 533 U.S. 218, 230 (2001). 

31 

 

example,  giving  people  an  opportunity  to  be  heard  and  offering  reasoned  responses  to 

what people have to say. Of course trial-type procedures, including both adjudication and 

formal  rulemaking,  satisfy  that  requirement.  The  same  is  true  of  notice-and-comment 

rulemaking, which create an opportunity to participate in agency processes165 and which 

operate,  in  practice,  to  require  agencies  to  produce  detailed  explanation  for  their 

decisions.166 If we emphasize the phrase “fairness and deliberation,” we can see Mead as 

attempting  to  carry  forward  a  central  theme  in  administrative  law,  which  is  to  develop 

surrogate safeguards for the protections in the Constitution itself.167 

By  contrast,  informal  processes—certainly  of  the  sort  that  result  in  10,000 

classifications per year—are unlikely to promote values of participation and deliberation. 

On this view, Mead puts agencies to a salutary choice; it essentially says, Pay me now or 

pay me later. Under Mead, agencies may proceed expeditiously and informally, in which 

case they can invoke Skidmore but not Chevron; or they may act more formally, in which 

case Chevron applies. In either case, the legal system, considered as a whole, will provide 

an ample check on agency discretion and the risk that it will be exercised arbitrarily—in 

one  case,  through  relatively  formal  procedures;  in  another,  through  a  relatively  careful 

judicial check on agency interpretations of law. 

In my view, these points are the best and most appealing reconstruction of Mead, 

and they help to account for much of what the Court has done in the Step Zero trilogy. 

But  it  is  not  at  all  clear  that  they  adequately  justify  the  trilogy.  The  initial  problem 

involves the burdens of judicial decisions reviewing agency action. Suppose, as is clear, 

that the values promoted by Mead come at the expense of a significantly more complex 

system of law.168 Under Mead, the system is complex along two dimensions. First, Step 

Zero is exceedingly hard for both litigants and courts to handle. Second, courts that use 

Skidmore deference are deprived of the simplicity and ease introduced by Chevron.169 If 

so, Mead may not be worth the candle. This point is buttressed by the very fact that the 

choice between Chevron and Skidmore will often be irrelevant to the resolution of cases. 

                                                 
165 5 U.S.C. § 553. 
166 See Motor Vehicle Manufacturers’ Assn. v. State Farm Mutual Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29 (1983). 
167  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Constitutionalism  After  the  New  Deal,  supra  note  70,  for  an  overview;  for  important  cases  implicitly 
reflecting this theme, see Motor Vehicle Manufacturers’ Assn. v. State  Farm  Mutual Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29 (1983); Allentown Mack 
Sales and Service v. NLRB, 522 U.S. 359 (1998); Zhen Li Iao v. Gonzales, 400 F.3d 530 (7th Cir. 2005). 
168 See Vermeule, supra note 21; Bressman, supra note 14. 
169 See Peter Strauss, One Hundred Fifty Cases Per Year: Some Implications of the Supreme Court’s Limited Resources for Judicial 
Review of Agency Action, 87 COLUM. L. REV. 1093 (1987). 

32 

 

If the difference between the two is often immaterial, does it really make sense for courts 

and litigants to spend a great deal of time deciding whether Skidmore governs or instead 

Chevron?  

If  courts  could  easily  apply  the  approach  suggested  by  Christensen,  Mead,  and 

Barnhart, that method would have something to be said in its favor. Above all, it would 

ensure that agency interpretations would receive Chevron deference only if they were a 

product  of  procedures  that  increase  the  likelihood  of  reasoned  decisionmaking.  At  the 

same time, the Court’s approach would increase the incentive to use such procedures—a 

desirable  step  if  those  procedures  are  in  fact  helpful.  But  serious  problems  remain. 

Suppose that the question is whether to select a judicial or administrative interpretation of 

an  ambiguous  statute  when  formal  procedures  have  not  been  used.  It  is  not  at  all  clear 

how to answer that question. If policymaking expertise and democratic accountability are 

relevant, then perhaps Congress should be understood to have delegated law-interpreting 

power whether or not formal procedures are involved.  

My attempted explanation of Mead places a great deal of weight on the value of 

formal procedures; but this might be questioned. Barnhart takes Mead to allow Chevron 

deference in many contexts in which such procedures are absent;  it  does  not say  when, 

exactly, such deference will be appropriate, but it clearly permits deference even in the 

absence of formality. And as Justice Scalia has emphasized, it is not clear that agencies 

should generally be encouraged to use more formal procedures, because such procedures 

tend to ossify the administrative process and hence to make it more difficult for agencies 

to  implement  the  law.170  It  is  also  necessary  to  know  how  much,  exactly,  is  gained  by 

resorting to more formal processes. If the notice and comment process produces far more 

sensible and well-reasoned rules, then an asymmetry, in terms of the intensity of judicial 

review,  might  well  be  defensible.  But  it  is  not  at  all  clear  that  notice  and  comment  so 

significantly increases the quality of rules as to justify this difference.171  

Mead is evidently motivated by a concern that Chevron deference would ensure 

an  insufficient  safeguard  against  agency  decisions  not  preceded  by  formal  procedures. 

                                                 
170 See STEPHEN BREYER ET AL.., ADMINISTRATIVE LAW AND REGULATORY POLICY (5th ed. 2002). 
171 See E. Donald Elliott, Reinventing Rulemaking, 41 DUKE L.J. 1490, 1492-93 (1992) (“No administrator in Washington turns to 
full-scale  notice-and-comment  rulemaking  when  she  is  genuinely  interested  in  obtaining  input  from  interested  parties.  Notice  and-
comment  rulemaking  is  to  public  participation  as  Japanese  Kabuki  theater  is  to  human  passions  —  a  highly  stylized  process  for 
displaying in a formal way the essence of something which in real life takes place in other venues.”) 

33 

 

But Chevron is no blank check to agencies. Step One ensures that agencies will lose if 

Congress  has  clearly  forbidden  them  from  acting  as  they  have  chosen.  Even  if  no 

congressional  ban  is  found,  Step  Two  operates  as  a  safeguard  against  insufficiently 

justified interpretations.172 In any case, judicial review always remains available for lack 

of substantial evidence or arbitrariness, and unreasonable agency decisions will be struck 

down even if there is no problem under either step of Chevron.173 

I hope that I have said enough to show that an identifiable and appealing rationale 

lies behind Mead; it is possible to identify the Court’s concerns. But it is also possible to 

doubt  whether  those  concerns  justify  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  that  now 

accompanies the Step Zero question. Perhaps the Court should follow the path originally 

suggested  by  Christensen  and  hold,  very  simply,  that  agency  interpretations  receive 

Chevron  deference  only  if  they  have  the  force  of  law  or  (alternatively)  follow  formal 

procedures. This approach would have the virtue of simplifying the line between Chevron 

cases and Skidmore cases; it would produce a rule, rather than a standard, for identifying 

that line.174 It might lead to an excessively large set of Skidmore cases, but perhaps that is 

a  price  worth  paying  in  return  for  greater  simplicity  on  the  threshold  question  whether 

Chevron  or  Skidmore  applies.  But  this  approach  seems  to  be  foreclosed  by  Mead  and 

Barnhart.  

 

 

D. Out of the Box 

In short, the Court seems to have placed itself and lower courts into a box from 

which extrication is extremely difficult. Indeed, it would be possible to conclude that the 

Court has opted for a complex standard over a simple rule in precisely the circumstances 

in which a complex standard makes least sense: numerous decisions in which little is to 

be  gained  by  particularized  judgments.  Those  are  the  settings  in  which  a  standard 

imposes high decisional burdens while also offering little or no gain in terms of increased 

accuracy.  Because  the  scope  of  judicial  review  of  agency  interpretations  comes  up  so 

often – indeed, because that issue is an opening question in a vast array of administrative 
                                                 
172 See Ohio v. Dept. of Interior, 880 F.2d 432 (D.C. Cir. 1989). 
173 See Motor Vehicle Manufacturers’ Assn. v. State Farm Mutual Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29 (1983); Allentown Mack Sales and Service v. 
NLRB, 522 U.S. 359 (1998); Zhen Li Iao v. Gonzales, 400 F.3d 530 (2005). 
174 See the argument in this direction in Merrill, supra note 155. 

34 

 

law cases – the Step Zero trilogy forces courts to undertake complex inquiries when it is 

far from clear anything at all is gained by the ultimate conclusion that Skidmore, rather 

than  Chevron,  provides  the  governing  standard.  What  might  be  done  to  improve  the 

situation? 

I suggest two possible solutions.  

1. It often won’t matter. The first and simplest solution stems from a recognition 

that Chevron and Skidmore are not radically different in practice; in the vast majority of 

cases,  either  approach  will  lead  to  the  same  result.  If  the  agency’s  interpretation  runs 

afoul  of  congressional  instructions  or  is  unreasonable,  the  agency  will  lose  even  under 

Chevron.  If  the  agency’s  interpretation  is  not  evidently  in  conflict  with  congressional 

instructions,  and  if  it  is  reasonable  ,  the  agency’s  interpretation  will  be  accepted  even 

under  Skidmore.  These  observations  suggest  the  easiest  path  for  questions  on  which 

Mead  and  Barnhart  give  inadequate  guidance:  Resolve  the  case  without  answering  the 

question  whether  it  is  governed  by  Chevron  or  Skidmore.  For  most  cases,  the  choice 

between Chevron and Skidmore is not material, and hence it is not worthwhile to worry 

over it. 

A  number  of  cases  take  this  pragmatic  approach.175  In  General  Dynamics  Land 

Systems v. Cline,176 the Supreme Court was confronted with the question whether the Age 

Discrimination  in  Employment  Act  (ADEA)  forbids  “reverse  discrimination,”  that  is, 

discrimination against younger workers for the benefit of older ones. The Court ruled that 

such discrimination was not forbidden by the ADEA. But to do so, it had to deal with an 

EEOC  regulation  concluding  otherwise;  the  parties  strenuously  disputed  the  (open) 

question  whether  an  EEOC  regulation  should  be  given  Chevron  deference  or  instead 

Skidmore deference. The Court found it unnecessary to resolve that dispute, announcing, 

“We  neither  defer  nor  settle  on  any  degree  of  deference  because  the  Commission  is  so 

clearly  wrong.”177  In  so  saying,  the  Court  followed  an  earlier  decision  in  which  it  had 

refused  to  resolve  the  deference  question,  finding  that  it  was  not  necessary  “to  choose 

                                                 
175 See, e.g., Krzalic v. Republic Title Co., 314 F.3d 875 (7th Cir 2002); Ranbaxy Labs. v. FDA, 96 Fed Appx 1, 1 (D.C. Cir. 2004); 
Community Health Center v. Wilson-Coker, 311 F.3d 132 (2d Cir. 2002). This strategy is helpfully described as “Chevron avoidance” 
in  Bressman,  supra  note  14.  Bressman  plausibly  objects  that  Chevron  avoidance  leaves  the  agency  uncertain  about  whether  it  may 
make changes in the future, but in my view, that uncertainty is unlikely to create serious problems; if an agency is uncertain about 
whether  it  may  make  changes,  it  is  nonetheless  likely  to  do  so  if  the  argument  for  those  changes  is  strong.  In  any  case  Skidmore 
permits agencies to make changes so long as they have good reasons for doing so.  
176 540 U.S. 581 (2004).  
177 Id. at 600. 

35 

 

between  Skidmore  and  Chevron,  or  even  to  defer,  because  the  EEOC  was  clearly 

right.”178 In Mylan itself, the court noted that “the result would likely be the same” under 

Skidmore or Chevron.179  

The  general  lesson  is  plain.  If  the  agency’s  decision  clearly  runs  afoul  of 

congressional  instructions,  the  Step  Zero  question  is  immaterial,  and  so  too  if  the 

agency’s decision is clearly consistent with the statute. 

2. Domesticating Mead. The second and more ambitious solution would attempt 

to domesticate Mead—and to suggest that read carefully, the Court’s analysis there is not 

as different from Justice Scalia’s approach as it appears.180 Let us turn more specifically 

to  the  question  why  the  Court  refused  to  give  Chevron  deference  to  the  tariff 

classification letter there at issue. The Court did not rest content with the observation that 

such  letters  were  not  a  product  of  formal  processes.  Instead  it  said  that  “to  claim  that 

classifications have legal force is to ignore the reality that 46 different Customs offices 

issue 10,000 to 15,000 of them each year.”181 Because of that reality, the suggestion that 

“rulings intended to have the force of law are being churned out at a rate of 10,000 a year 

at  an  agency’s  46  scattered  offices  is  simply  self-refuting.”182  If  these  sentences  are 

emphasized,  Mead  can  emerge  as  a  highly  pragmatic  case  about  the  problems  with 

deferring to the numerous lower-level functionaries who produce mere letter rulings.183  

Barnhart,  granting  Chevron  deference  to  an  agency  decision  not  preceded  by 

formal  procedures,  is  an  illuminating  comparison  on  this  count.  No  lower-level 

functionaries were involved in Barnhart, nor was there a question of thousands of rulings 

purporting to receive Chevron deference. Recall Justice Breyer’s discussion in Barnhart 

on  the  agency’s  “interstitial”  judgment  on  a  complex  issue,  calling  for  specialized 

expertise.  And  if  Mead  and  Barnhart  are  distinguished  in  this  way,  the  line  between 

Justice Scalia’s “authoritativeness” test and the Court’s apparently case-by-case inquiry is 

thinner than it appears. If an agency’s decision is authoritative, and if an interstitial matter 

is  involved,  Barnhart  suggests  that  the  agency  is  likely  to  receive  Chevron  deference 

                                                 
178 Id., citing Edelman v. Lynchburg College, 535 U.S. 106 (2002). 
179 389 F.3d at 1280 n.6. 
180 In the same vein, see Barron and Kagan, supra note110, at 257, emphasizing that “Both the majority and the dissent in Mead refer 
to the agency’s internal decision-making structure — and, specifically, to the level of the decision maker; these references count as the 
single point of commonality between the two warring opinions.” 
181 533 U.S. 218, 233 (2001). 
182 Id. at 219. 
183 See Barron & Kagan, supra note 110. 

36 

 

after  all.  It  emerges  that  the  real  difference  between  Justice  Scalia  and  the  Court  will 

matter  only  when  an  agency  makes  a  decision  on  a  large  question  without  resorting  to 

formal proceedings. 

But  this  point  raises  independent  issues.  It  recalls  the  1980s  debate  in  another 

form,  for  one  of  Judge  Breyer’s  principal  claims  in  1986  was  that  courts,  rather  than 

agencies, should resolve “major” questions of law. That debate has returned in a separate 

Step  Zero  trilogy—one  that  is  less  self-evidently  creating  a  new  understanding  of  the 

domain of Chevron, but that is, I suggest, best understood in just those terms. 

 

 

III. Winning by Losing: Chevron and Big Issues 

A. Old Debates 

1.  Interstitial  questions,  major  questions.  Recall  that  in  his  1986  article, 

then-Judge  Breyer  distinguished  between  interstitial  issues  and  larger  ones.  He 

suggested  that  for  larger  questions,  courts  ought  not  to  defer  to  agency 

interpretations of law, because Congress is not best read to have instructed courts 

to  do  so.  For  questions  that  do  not  involve  everyday  administration,  but  central 

aspects of the statutory scheme, a degree of independent review is desirable. We 

have  seen  Barnhart  endorses  this  claim;  it  suggests  that  “interstitial”  judgments 

will  be  reviewed  under  Chevron,  with  the  clear  implication  that  noninterstitial 

judgments will be reviewed more independently. 

The  most  plausible  source  of  this  idea  is  the  implicit  delegation  principle, 

accompanied  by  an  understanding  of  what  reasonable  legislators  would  prefer.  Judge 

Breyer appears to  think  that Congress  should be  understood to want agencies to decide 

interstitial questions, but to prefer courts to resolve the larger ones, which are necessary 

to clarify and stabilize the law. But why is this? At first glance, there is no reason to think 

that in large cases, the considerations that animate Chevron do not apply. Suppose that an 

agency is deciding whether to adopt an emissions trading system, rather than command-

and-control,  in  order  to  reduce  air  pollution;  suppose  too  that  this  qualifies  as  a  large 

question  rather  than  an  interstitial  one.  The  agency’s  expertise  is  certainly  relevant  to 

answering  that  question.  And  to  the  extent  that  issues  of  value  are  involved,  it  would 

37 

 

appear best to permit the resolution of ambiguities to come from a politically accountable 

actor.  

Nor  is  this  particular  example  hypothetical.  It  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  looming 

litigation over the validity of the EPA’s recent decision to regulate mercury, a hazardous 

pollutant,  under  a  trading  system.184  Indeed  the  example  is  a  version  of  Chevron  itself, 

which involved the EPA’s decision to adopt a modest kind of (intrafirm) trading system 

through its definition of “source.” Chevron hardly involved an interstitial question of the 

sort at issue in the everyday administration of the Clean Air Act; it involved a significant 

rethinking of the definition of the statutory term “source.”185 Of course we are speaking 

of  legal  fictions,  but  why  should  it  be  assumed  that  Congress  (fictionally)  intended  the 

courts, rather than agencies, to define that term? Isn’t that a bad and unhelpful fiction?  

Judge Breyer’s central response is that “Congress is more likely to have focused 

upon,  and  answered,  major  questions,  while  leaving  interstitial  matters  to  answer 

themselves  in  the  course  of  the  statute’s  daily  administration.”186  But  this  is 

unconvincing.  If  Congress  has  in  fact  focused  upon,  and  answered,  major  questions, 

agencies  must  accept  those  answers  under  Chevron  Step  One.  By  hypothesis,  we  are 

dealing not with such cases but with those in which statutes are ambiguous, and the only 

question  is  whether  to  accept  an  agency’s  resolution  or  instead  to  rely  on  the 

interpretation chosen by a federal court. For “major questions,” the agency’s specialized 

fact-finding competence and democratic accountability might well be more relevant, not 

less.  

A  better  justification  for  the  distinction  between  interstitial  and  major  questions 

would involve agency incentives. Perhaps there is less reason to trust agencies when they 

are making large-scale judgments about statutory meaning. Perhaps parochial pressures, 

such as those imposed by interest groups, will distort agency decisions in one or another 

direction; perhaps agency self-interest, such as the expansion of administrative authority, 

will  increase  the  likelihood  of  bias.  Judge  Breyer  might  believe  that  on  interstitial 

questions, involving everyday administration, agencies can be trusted, but that the same 

is not true when a major decision is involved. And if agencies were systematically less 

                                                 
184 See Lisa Heinzerling & Rene Stenzor, A Perfect Storm: Mercury and the Bush Administration, 34 ENV. L. REPT. 10297 (2004). 
185 See ROBERT PERCIVAL ET AL., ENVIRONMENTAL LAW AND POLICY (2003). 
186 Id.  

38 

 

reliable  on  major  questions,  the  argument  for  a  reduced  degree  of  deference  would  be 

quite plausible.  

Nonetheless,  that  argument  faces  large  problems.  As  I  have  noted,  the  line 

between interstial and major questions is thin. If the line can be drawn, it is hardly clear 

that  courts  are  in  a  substantially  better  position  to  resolve  the  “major”  questions  than 

agencies  are.  Perhaps  agencies  are  responding  to  parochial  pressures,  but  it  is  also 

possible  that  their  judgments  are  a  product  of  specialized  competence  and  democratic 

will; no sustained evidence justifies the suggestion that when agencies make decisions on 

major  questions,  bias  and  self-interest  are  the  motivating  factors.  In  any  case,  Chevron 

deference does not give agencies a blank check. It remains the case that agency decisions 

must  not  violate  clearly  expressed 

legislative  will,  must  represent  reasonable 

interpretations  of  statutes,  and  must  not  be  arbitrary  in  any  way.187  These  constraints 

produce significant checks on agency self-interest and bias if they should be present. 

As  we  have  seen,  Judge  Breyer’s  challenge  to  the  simple  reading  of  Chevron 

refers  more  generally  to  the  psychological  difficulty,  for  judges,  of  believing  that  an 

agency  interpretation  is  both  reasonable  and  wrong;  and  that  difficulty  is  likely  to  be 

heightened for major questions. Perhaps he is right. But it is hardly unfamiliar for judges 

to think “wrong but reasonable.” They might believe, for example, that a jury’s verdict is 

incorrect  but  not  clearly  erroneous,  or  that  some  statutes,  even  major  ones,  are  hard  to 

defend but not “irrational.”188 In any case, doctrines of deference ought not to be based 

on the psychological difficulties of judges. Perhaps Judge Breyer’s point should be taken 

as purely predictive—as a claim that judges are unlikely to follow the simplified version 

of Chevron generally or for major questions. If so, the path of the law is certainly a point 

in his favor; indeed, the decisions of the past twenty years suggest that he was uncannily 

prescient.  But  he  clearly  means  his  point  as  a  normative  one—as  a  challenge  to  the 

simplified reading of Chevron—and to this extent, the psychological point is neither here 

nor there.189 

                                                 
187 See note supra. 
188 See, e.g., Williamson v. Lee Optical, 348 U.S. 483 (1955). 
189 Perhaps Judge Breyer ought to be taken to be venturing a version of “ought implies can,” through the suggestion that the Supreme 
Court should not ask judges to maintain an attitude that is psychologically unrealistic. So stated, the argument is logical, but the use of 
lenient standards of review suggests that judges can indeed maintain that attitude. 

39 

 

2.  Jurisdiction.  In  an  early  debate,  the  Court  divided  on  the  question  whether 

Chevron  applies  to  jurisdictional  disputes,190  and  this  particular  Step  Zero  question 

remains  unsettled  in  the  lower  courts.191  It  is  easy  to  understand  the  opposing  views. 

Chevron  rests  on  a  theory  of  implied  delegation,  and  perhaps  Congress  should  not  be 

taken to have intended to delegate to agencies the power to decide on the scope of their 

own  authority.  That  question,  it  might  be  thought,  ought  to  be  answered  by  an 

independent  institution,  not  by  the  agency  itself.  Thus  Justice  Brennan  urged  that 

judgments  about  jurisdiction  “have  not  been  entrusted  to  the  agency”  and  might  well 

“conflict with the agency's institutional interests in expanding its own power.”192 In his 

view,  “agencies  can  claim  no  special  expertise  in  interpreting  a  statute  confining  its 

jurisdiction,”  and  Congress  cannot  be  presumed  to  ask  “an  agency  to  fill  ‘gaps’  in  a 

statute confining the agency's jurisdiction.”193 

On the other hand, any exemption of jurisdictional questions is vulnerable on two 

grounds. First, the line between jurisdictional and nonjurisdictional questions is far from 

clear, and hence any exemption threatens to introduce more complexity into the world of 

Chevron.  Thus  Justice  Scalia  argued  that  “there  is  no  discernible  line  between  an 

agency's exceeding its authority and an agency's exceeding authorized application of its 

authority.”194 Second, the theory that underlies Chevron might well support, rather than 

undermine, its application to jurisdictional questions. If an agency is asserting or denying 

jurisdiction over some area, it is either because democratic forces are leading it to do so 

or  because  its  own  specialized  competence  justifies  its  jurisdictional  decision.  Thus 

Justice  Scalia  urged  that  “Congress  would  naturally  expect  that  the  agency  would  be 

responsible,  within  broad  limits,  for  resolving  ambiguities  in  its  statutory  authority  or 

jurisdiction.”195 Of course the claim about what “Congress would naturally expect” is a 

fiction; but perhaps it is the most useful one. 

                                                 
190 Miss. Power & Light Co. v. Mississippi, 487 U.S. 357 (1988). 
191 See, e.g., Alaska v. Babbitt, 72 F.3d 698 (9th Cir. 1995) (deferring on jurisdictional issue involving definition of “public lands”); 
Cavert Acquisition Corp. v. NLRB, 83 F.3d 598 (3d Cir. 1996) (deferring on jurisdictional issue involving definition of “employee”);  
United Trans. Union v. Surface Transp. Bd., 183 F.3d 606 (7th Cir. 1999) (refusing to defer on jurisdictional issue). A recent discussion 
can be found in NRDC v. Abraham, 355 F.3d 179 (2d Cir. 2004), in which the court, after finding a Step One violation, adds that “it 
seems highly unlikely that a responsible Congress would implicitly delegate to an agency the power to define the scope of its own 
power” — and then suggested that Mead (!) provided the appropriate framework. See id. at 199-200. 
192 487 U.S. at 387 (Brennan, J., dissenting). 
193 Id.  
194 Id. at 345 (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment). 
195 Id. 

40 

 

Consider  a  prominent  example.  During  the  Clinton  Administration,  the  EPA 

contended  that  it  could  assert  jurisdiction  over  greenhouse  gases  under  ambiguous 

provisions of the Clean Air Act.196 During the Bush Administration, the EPA contended 

that it could not do so.197 The difference is undoubtedly attributable to some combination 

of  political  commitments  and  readings  of  relevant  evidence.  If  this  is  so,  there  is  every 

reason,  one  might  well  think,  to  give  deference  to  the  agency’s  jurisdictional  judgment 

under Chevron. 

 

 

 

 

B. Major Questions and Another Trilogy 

While  the  Court  has  not  recently  spoken  to  the  question  of  jurisdiction,  it  has 

issued  three  decisions  that  bear  on  the  Step  Zero  question  whether  Chevron  applies  to 

major questions.  The meaning of these decisions is far from clear, and it remains to be 

seen  whether  they  will  be  taken  to  carve  out  a  distinct  exception  to  Chevron.  But  the 

Court has given strong indications that this is what it means to do, in a way that has an 

unmistakable  link  with  Judge  Breyer’s  distinction  between  incremental  and  major 

questions.  Ironically,  Justice  Breyer  dissented  from  the  most  important  and  explicit  of 

these decisions—which borrowed, with citation, his central argument.  

(1)  An  “unlikely”  delegation:  MCI.  The  first  case  in  the  trilogy  is  MCI 

Telecommunications  Corp.  v.  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph.198  The  1934 

Communications  Act  permits  the  Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC)  to 

“modify”  the  statutory  requirement  that  carriers  file  tariffs  and  charge  customers  in 

accordance  with  the  tariffs  that  have  been  filed.199  As  part  of  a  program  of  partial 

deregulation,  the  FCC  issued  a  regulation  providing  that  only  AT&T,  as  the  dominant 

long-distance carrier, would have to file tariffs; other carriers need not do so.  

At first glance, this was a straightforward Step One question, and by a 6 to 3 vote, 

the Court held that the agency’s decision was unlawful under Step One. Much of Justice 

Scalia’s  opinion  for  the  Court  emphasized  the  dictionary  definition  of  “modify”—a 

                                                 
196 See Note, Trapped in the Greenhouse?, 54 DUKE L.J. 147 (2004); Note, Carbon Dioxide: A Pollutant in the Air, but Is the EPA 
Correct that It is Not an Air Pollutant?, 104 Colum. L. Rev. 1996 (2004). 
197 Id.; see Memorandum from Robert  E. Fabricant,  EPA  General Counsel, to Marianne  L.  Horinko, Acting EPA Administrator,  at 
http://www.epa.gov/airlinks/co2petitiongcmemo8-28.pdf. 
198 512 U.S. 218 (1994). 
199 49 U.S.C. § 203. 

41 

 

definition  that,  in  the  Court’s  view,  permitted  only  “moderate”  or  “modest”  rather  than 

fundamental  change.  But  as  Justice  Stevens’s  dissenting  opinion  pointed  out,  a  long-

established  meaning  of  “modify”—“to  limit  or  reduce  in  extent  or  degree”—was  fully 

compatible with the FCC’s decision. Perhaps, then, MCI could be taken as an odd case in 

which  the  Court  found  a  Step  One  violation  because  of  an  emphasis,  characteristic  in 

Justice  Scalia’s  opinions,  on  what  most  dictionaries  say.  And  perhaps  Justice  Scalia’s 

opinion should be taken as a vindication of his promise, in 1989, that as an advocate of 

“plain  meaning”  approaches  to  interpretation,  he  would  be  entirely  willing  to  invoke 

Chevron Step One to strike down agency action. 

But the Court offered a strong clue that something else was involved. It noted that 

rate filings are “the essential characteristic of a rate-regulated industry.”200 In this light, it 

“is highly unlikely that Congress would leave the determination of whether an industry 

will  be  entirely,  or  even  substantially,  rate-regulated  to  agency  discretion.”201  Thus  the 

Court’s analysis of whether the agency’s decision was a “modification” was undertaken 

with  reference  to  “the  enormous  importance  to  the  statutory  scheme  of  the  tariff-filing 

provision.”202 This discussion, and the suggestion about what “Congress would leave” to 

the agency, seems to suggest that a kind of Step Zero inquiry might be involved, one that 

raised  a  question  whether  Congress  intended  to  delegate  this  “enormous”  question  to  a 

regulatory  agency.  And  indeed,  the  Court’s  emphasis  on  the  important,  and  hardly 

interstitial, nature of the question at issue might easily be taken as a partial endorsement 

of Justice Breyer’s approach to the Chevron question. 

(2)  Where’s  Chevron?:  “some  degree  of  deference.”      The  Court  provided  a 

related clue in Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon.203 At 

issue was a provision of the Endangered Species Act that makes it unlawful to “take” a 

member of an endangered species.204 The word “take” is in turn defined to mean “harass, 

harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect, or to attempt to engage in 

any  such  conduct.”205  By  regulation,  the  Department  of  the  Interior  adopted  a  broad 

understanding  of  the  word  “take,”  interpreting  it  to  include  “significant  habitat 

                                                 
200 512 U.S. at 231. 
201 Id. 
202 Id. 
203 515 U.S. 687 (1995). 
204 16 U.S.C. § 1538(a)(1). 
205 16 U.S.C. § 1532(19). 

42 

 

modification  or  degradation  where  it  actually  kills  or  injures  wildlife  by  significantly 

impairing  essential  behavioral  patterns,  including  breeding,  feeding,  or  sheltering.”206 

Small landowners and logging companies challenged this definition as unlawfully broad. 

Two different opinions would have been unsurprising from the Court. The Court 

might have upheld the regulation by treating the case as a simple rerun of Chevron itself, 

involving  an  ambiguous  term  (“harm”)  and  a  reasonable  agency  interpretation  of  that 

term. Alternatively, the Court might have struck down the regulation under Chevron Step 

One  on  the  ground  that  the  term  “harm”  appears  in  the  context  of  verbs  suggesting 

intentionality  (“harass,  pursue,  hunt,  short,  wound,  kill,  trap,  capture,  or  collect”). 

Perhaps  the  context  forbids  an  interpretation  that  would  include  mere  habitat 

modification  and  unintended  injury  to  members  of  endangered  species.  And  indeed, 

Justice Scalia, true to his account in 1989 and continuing his emphasis on dictionaries in 

MCI,  was  willing  to  find  a  “plain  meaning”  of  the  statute  that  prohibited  the  agency’s 

understanding.207  But  the  Court  did  neither  of  these  things.  Instead  it  embarked  on  its 

own,  entirely  independent  construction  of  the  statute,  suggesting  the  correctness  of  the 

broad construction. For most of the Court’s opinion, it would be reasonable to ask: Where 

is  Chevron?  Why  does  the  Court  fail  to  point  to  statutory  ambiguity  and  the  agency’s 

interpretation?  

After  parsing  the  statute  independently,  the  Court  turned  to  Chevron  in  a  brief 

paragraph, noting (finally!) that Congress had “not unambiguously manifested its intent” 

to  forbid  the  regulation.208  And  then  the  Court  added  a  singularly  odd  sentence:  “The 

latitude the ESA gives the Secretary in enforcing the statute, together with the degree of 

regulatory expertise necessary to its enforcement, establishes that we owe some degree of 

deference  to  the  Secretary’s  reasonable  interpretation.”  At  that  point  the  Court  did  not 

cite  Chevron  or  indeed  any  of  its  other  decisions  on  the  general  question.  Instead  its 

citation reads, in full: “See Breyer, Judicial Review of Questions of Law and Policy, 38 

Admin. L. Rev. 363, 373 (1986).”209 As it happens, p. 373 of this essay contains the heart 

of  Judge  Breyer’s  attack  on  Chevron,  on  the  ground  that  the  proper  judicial  attitudes 

                                                 
206 50 C.F.R. 17.2 (1994). 
207  515  U.S.  at  714  (Scalia,  J.,  dissenting).  The  Court  might  have  invalidated  the  regulation  by  reference  to  some  canon  of 
construction, perhaps involving the protection of property rights; and indeed, Justice Scalia’s opinion contains an opening gesture in 
that direction. Id.  
208 Id. at 703. 
209 Id. at 703-04. 

43 

 

toward  review  of  questions  of  law  cannot  “be  reduced  to  any  single  simple  verbal 

formula.” 

The  key  paragraph  in  Sweet  Home  is  cryptic,  to  be  sure,  but  the  Court’s 

opinion  might  well  be  read  in  a  way  that  fits  with  the  general  approach  in  MCI. 

The  scope  of  the  words  “take”  and  “harm”  is  not  an  interstitial  question;  it  goes 

to  the  heart  of  the  Endangered  Species  Act.  Narrow  definitions  would  constrict 

the  range  of  the  statutory  ban;  broad  definitions  work,  in  a  sense,  to  expand  the 

agency’s  jurisdiction.  For  this  reason,  Sweet  Home  did  not  present  the  sort  of 

minor question, involved in everyday administration, which Judge Breyer treated 

as  the  core  case  for  judicial  deference  to  agency  interpretation.  On  the  other 

hand,  both  expertise  and  accountability  are  relevant  to  interpretation  of  this 

provision  of  the  Act,  and  a  judgment  about  the  breadth  of  the  term  “harm” 

certainly  requires  knowledge  of  the  underlying  facts.  Unlike  in  MCI,  the  agency 

was  not  fundamentally  altering  any  central  feature  of  the  statute.  Hence  “some 

degree  of  deference”  was  due.  But  the  Court’s  refusal  to  produce  a  simple 

Chevron  opinion,  and  its  only  citation,  appear  to  endorse  Breyer’s  position  on 

the proper approach. 

(3)  “Congress  could  not  have  intended  to  delegate”:  Brown  &  Williamson.  It 

might  have  been  an  overreaction  to  see  MCI  and  Sweet  Home  as  offering  a  serious 

qualification of Chevron, or as suggesting that major questions would be treated in any 

special way. But consider FDA v. Brown & Williamson.210 At issue there was whether the 

FDA had authority to regulate tobacco and tobacco products. The agency pointed to the 

statutory language, which defines drug to include “articles (other than food) intended to 

affect  the  structure  or  any  function  of  the  body.”211  It  would  certainly  be  plausible  to 

argue that under this language and with the assistance of Chevron, the FDA could assert 

authority  over  tobacco.  At  the  same  time,  it  could  have  been  concluded  that  this  was  a 

question  of  agency  jurisdiction,  for  which  Chevron  deference  was  inapposite.  But  the 

Court took a far more complicated route. Much of its opinion emphasized the wide range 

of tobacco-specific legislation enacted by Congress in the last decades—legislation that, 

in the Court’s view, should “preclude an interpretation of the FDCA that grants the FDA 
                                                 
210 529 U.S. 120 (2000). 
211 21 U.S.C. § 321(g)(1)(c). 

44 

 

authority to regulate tobacco products.”212 This argument had a degree of fragility, as the 

Court  appeared  to  appreciate;  repeals  by  implication  are  disfavored,213  and  the  Court’s 

failure to allow the agency to interpret ambiguous terms, merely because of subsequent 

legislation, was the equivalent of a finding of an implied repeal.  

Perhaps for this reason,  the Court  added a closing word.  It said that its inquiry 

into  the  Step  One  question  “is  shaped,  at  least  in  some  measure,  by  the  nature  of  the 

question  presented.”214  Chevron,  the  Court  noted,  is  based  on  “an  implicit  delegation,” 

but in “extraordinary cases,” courts should “hesitate before concluding that Congress has 

intended such an implicit delegation.”215 Just as in Sweet Home, the Court cited no case 

for  this  key  proposition,  but  instead  resorted  to  only  one  source:  Judge  Breyer’s  1986 

essay.  On  this  occasion,  however,  it  went  beyond  the  citation  to  offer  a  quotation, 

encapsulating one of Judge Breyer’s central arguments, that there is a difference between 

“major questions,” on which “Congress is more likely to have focused,” and “interstitial 

matters.” At that point the Court drew a direct connection with MCI: “As in MCI, we are 

confident that Congress could not have intended to delegate a decision of such economic 

and political significance to an agency in so cryptic a fashion.”216  

Ironically,  Justice  Breyer  dissented  from  the  Court’s  conclusion;  even  more 

ironically, he offered a powerful rebuttal to his own argument in 1986. He acknowledged 

the  possibility  that  courts  should  accept  a  “background  canon  of  construction”  to  the 

effect  that  decisions  with  enormous  social  consequences  “should  be  made  by 

democratically  elected  Members  of  Congress  rather  than  by  unelected  agency 

administrators.”217 In this way he suggested, even more clearly than the Court, that some 

decisions,  rejecting  agency  interpretations  of  statutes,  might  be  rooted  in  nondelegation 

principles that reflect a reluctance to take ambiguous provisions as grants of “enormous” 

discretion  to  agencies.  But  he  found  any  such  background  principle  inapplicable  to  the 

problem at issue. The reason was that the decision to regulate tobacco is one for which 

the incumbent administration “must (and will) take responsibility.”218  

                                                 
212 529 U.S. at 157. 
213 TVA v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153 (1978). 
214 529 U.S. at 159. 
215 Id. 
216 Id at 160. 
217 Id. at 190 (Breyer, J., dissenting). 
218 Id. 

45 

 

Because of its high visibility, that decision will inevitably be known to the public, 

and officials will be held accountable for it. “Presidents, just like Members of Congress, 

are  elected  by  the  public.  Indeed,  the  President  and  Vice  President  are  the  only  public 

officials  whom  the  entire  Nation  elects.”219  An  agency’s  “decision  of  this  magnitude—

one  that  is  important,  conspicuous,  and  controversial”  will  inevitably  face  “the  kind  of 

public  scrutiny  that  is  essential  in  any  democracy.  And  such  a  review  will  take  place 

whether it is the Congress or the Executive Branch that makes the relevant decision.”220  

There  is  a  close  link  between  Justice  Breyer’s  arguments  on  this  count  and  the 

Court’s emphasis on procedural safeguards in Mead. Those safeguards might be seen as a 

check  on  administrative  arbitrariness,  a  check  that  reduces  the  need  for  independent 

judicial  scrutiny  of  agency  interpretations  of  law.  So  too,  a  high  degree  of  public 

visibility, ensuring the operation of political safeguards, might be seen as a surrogate for 

independent judicial scrutiny. I believe that Justice Breyer is correct on this point and that 

his argument casts serious doubt on his own argument to the contrary in 1986. It is that 

issue to which I now turn. 

 

 

C. Major Issues, Expertise, and Political Safeguards 

Suppose that Brown & Williamson is taken to suggest that Chevron deference is 

not  due  for  agency  decisions  involving  questions  of  great  “economic  and  political 

significance.”  This  position  would  have  exceedingly  large  implications.  Return,  for 

example,  to  an  important  and  disputed  question:  Does  the  EPA  have  the  authority  to 

regulate  greenhouse  gases  under  the  Clean  Air  Act?221  Let  us  simply  stipulate  that  the 

relevant provisions of the Act are ambiguous. Under Chevron, the EPA would appear to 

have the power to regulate greenhouse gases if it chooses to do so. But under Mead and 

Brown & Williamson, it would be easy to argue that Congress, and not the EPA, should 

decide whether the EPA ought to be regulating greenhouse gases, a fundamental question 

                                                 
219 Id  
220 Id. at 191. 
221 See sources cited supra note 196. 

46 

 

about the reach of federal environmental law. And so, in fact, the EPA’s General Counsel 

has argued under President Bush.222 

1. Step Zero again. Is this argument convincing? The answer depends on whether 

MCI  and  Brown  &  Williamson  should  be  read  to  establish  an  independent  Step  Zero 

constraint  on  the  application  of  Chevron,  suggesting  that  certain  fundamental  questions 

must  be  resolved  judicially  rather  than  administratively.  I  believe  that  despite  some  of 

their language, MCI and Brown & Williamson should not be so understood; for the future, 

they are best regarded as Step One cases, not as Step Zero cases. The reason is that there 

is  no  justification  for  the  conclusion  that  major  questions  should  be  resolved  judicially 

rather  than  administratively.  In  fact,  there  are  two  problems  with  that  conclusion.  The 

first is that as with the distinction between jurisdictional and nonjurisdictional questions, 

the  difference  between  interstitial  and  major  questions  is  extremely  difficult  to 

administer;  and  if  sensibly  administered,  it  raises  doubts  about  an  array  of  decisions, 

including Chevron itself. The second is that expertise and accountability, the linchpins of 

Chevron’s legal fiction, are highly relevant to the resolution of major questions.  

Assume,  for  example,  that  the  statutes  in  MCI  and  Brown  &  Williamson  were 

genuinely ambiguous—that the relevant sources of interpretation could plausibly be read 

to  support  or  to  forbid  the  agency  action  at  issue.  If  so,  the  argument  for  judicial 

deference  would  be  exceptionally  strong.  In  MCI,  the  FCC  was  deciding  fundamental 

questions  about  the  structure  of  the  telecommunications  market—hardly  an  issue  for 

judicial resolution, and one for which expertise and accountability are relevant. In Brown 

& Williamson, the FDA was taking action against one of the nation’s most serious public 

health  problems,  in  a  judgment  that  had  a  high  degree  of  public  visibility  and  required 

immersion in the subject at hand. Perhaps Congress could not easily be taken to delegate 

the resolution of these questions to administrative agencies. But would it really be better 

to  understand  Congress  to  have  delegated  the  resolution  of  those  questions  to  federal 

courts? I have referred to the concern that on major questions, interest-group power and 

agency self-dealing might produce a real risk, one that is sufficient to call for a reduced 

degree  of  judicial  deference.  But  that  concern  is  not  well-grounded  in  any  empirical 

                                                 
222 See Memorandum from Robert E. Fabricant, supra note 197. 

47 

 

literature, and in any case the standard Chevron framework provides ample constraints on 

bias and self-dealing. 

2.  Chevron  v.  nondelegation.  The  best  response  would  suggest  that  MCI  and 

Brown  &  Williamson  should  not  be  understood  to  say  that  major  questions  will  be 

resolved by courts rather than agencies. They should be taken to impose a more powerful 

limit on administrative discretion, in the form of a background principle to the effect that 

in  the  face  of  ambiguity,  agencies  will  be  denied  the  power  to  interpret  ambiguous 

provisions in a way that would massively alter the preexisting statutory scheme.223  

On  this view,  Mead and Brown & Williamson are not Step Zero decisions; they 

are discretion-denying decisions. They do not say that courts, rather than agencies, will 

interpret  ambiguities.  They  announce,  far  more  ambitiously,  that  ambiguities  will  be 

construed  so  as  to  reduce  the  authority  of  regulatory  agencies.  But  it  would  not  much 

matter if this principle is described in terms of Chevron Step Zero or Chevron Step One. 

The key idea is that agencies would not receive deference when they attempt to exercise 

their authority in ways that produce large-scale changes in the structure of the statutory 

programs that they are administering. 

The best justification for this conclusion would rely on an analogy. In some cases, 

well-established  background  principles  operate  to  “trump”  Chevron.  Agencies  are  not 

permitted  to  interpret  statutes  so  as  to  apply  beyond  the  territorial  boundaries  of  the 

United  States.224  Nor  are  they  allowed  to  interpret  ambiguous  statutes  to  apply 

retroactively.225  An  agency  cannot  construe  an  ambiguous  statute  so  as  to  raise  serious 

constitutional  doubts.226  In  these  and  other  contexts,  courts  have  insisted  on  a  series  of 

nondelegation canons, which require legislative rather than merely executive deliberation 

on  the  issue  in  question.227  Congress  will  not  lightly  be  taken  to  have  delegated  to 

agencies  the  choice  of  how  to  resolve  certain  sensitive  questions.  Perhaps  MCI  and 

Brown  &  Williamson  can  be  understood  to  build  on  these  nondelegation  canons  to 

                                                 
223 For a valuable discussion, see John Manning, The Nondelegation Doctrine as A Canon of Avoidance, 2000 S. CT. REV. 223. 
224 EEOC v Arabian American Oil Co, 499 U.S. 244, 248 (1991). 
225 Bowen v Georgetown University Hospital, 488 U.S. 204, 208 (1988). 
226 See id. at 208–09 (1988). 
227 For general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons, 67 U. CHI. L. REV. 315 (2000). 

48 

 

suggest  a  more  general  principle:  Fundamental  alterations  in  statutory  programs,  in  the 

form of contractions or expansions, will not be taken to be within agency authority.228 

For those who are enthusiastic about the nondelegation doctrine, this background 

principle  will  have  considerable  appeal,  above  all  because  the  principle  requires 

Congress,  rather  than  agencies,  to  decide  critical  questions  of  policy  (including, 

plausibly, the question whether significant deregulation of communications should occur, 

or whether the FDA should be authorized to regulate tobacco produces). But the principle 

faces  three  problems.  The  first  is  the  uncertain  foundations  of  the  argument  for  the 

nondelegation  doctrine  itself.229  As  a  matter  of  text  and  history,  the  doctrine  does  not 

have  a  clear  constitutional  pedigree,  and  to  say  the  least,  it  is  controversial  to  base  a 

principle  of  statutory  construction  on  a  doctrine  that  cannot  easily  be  rooted  in  the 

Constitution.  The  second  is  the  difficulty  of  administering  the  line  that  the  principle 

would  require  courts  to  maintain.  As  I  have  emphasized,  the  distinction  between  major 

questions and non-major ones lacks a metric. On its facts, Chevron itself might seem to 

be wrong, and perhaps Sweet Home as well.  

The third and most fundamental problem is that expertise and accountability are 

entirely relevant to questions about contraction or expansion of statutory provisions.230 If 

a  nondelegation  principle  is  meant  to  prevent  agencies  from  making  significant 

alterations  in  statutory  programs  on  their  own,  in  a  way  that  goes  beyond  the  ordinary 

operation of Step One, it would embed an unhealthy status quo bias into administrative 

law.  MCI  could  well  be  understood  as  embodying  such  a  bias.  But  because  regulatory 

programs  last  for  decades,  and  across  significantly  changed  circumstances,  agencies 

should  be  taken  to  have  the  discretion  to  construe  ambiguities  reasonably,  even  if  their 

constructions lead to large changes in the statute that they are administering. Indeed, this 

flexibility  is  a  primary  benefit  of  Chevron  itself,  allowing  adaptation  to  new 

understandings of both facts and values.  

But  suppose  that    the  nondelegation  principle  is  understood  not  to  include  a 

general status quo bias, but simply to ban agencies from expanding their authority, again 

in a way that goes beyond the ordinary operation of Step One. If so, then it is a modern 

                                                 
228 Cf. Manning, supra note 223 (discussing and challenging the use of nondelegation principles as a tool of statutory construction). 
229 See Eric A. Posner & Adrian Vermeule, Interring the Nondelegation Doctrine, 69 U. CHI. L. REV. 1721 (2002). 
230 See Manning, supra note 223. 

49 

 

version  of  the  old  (and  discredited)  idea  that  statutes  in  derogation  of  the  common  law 

should be narrowly construed.231 Brown & Williamson could be understood to reflect that 

idea.  If  so,  it  should  be  repudiated.  In  the  modern  state,  agencies  should  not  have  the 

authority  to  expand  their  authority  in  violation  of  statutory  limitations.  But  so  long  as 

agencies  are  reasonably  interpreting  statutory  ambiguities,  they  ought  to  receive 

deference  under  Chevron,  at  least  if  their  interpretation  does  not  violate  a  particular 

interpretive  principle,  such  as  the  principles  against  extraterritoriality,  retroactivity,  and 

serious constitutional doubts.  

I  conclude  that  MCI  and  Brown  &  Williamson  are  best  read  as  Step  One 

decisions. Despite the more general language that I have explored here, they should not 

be taken to suggest an additional reason to deny deference under Step Zero. 

 

Conclusion 

 

In  1984,  it  was  not  entirely  clear  whether  Chevron  was  a  synthesis  of 

existing law, as the Court appeared to believe at the time,232 or instead a genuine 

revolution, signaling a new era in the relationship between courts and regulatory 

agencies.  Justice  Scalia  saw  its  revolutionary  potential  and  sought  to  justify  a 

broad  reading  of  the  decision  as  well-suited  to  the  realities  of  modern 

government, above all by virtue of its clarity and simplicity. Judge Breyer, also a 

long-time specialist in administrative law, sought to domesticate the decision and 

to treat it as a codification of the best of existing practice, which called for case-

by-case  inquiries  into  the  fictional  instructions  of  rational  legislators.  The  most 

ambitious readings of Chevron see it as a recognition that resolution of statutory 

ambiguities often calls for judgments of both policy and principle, and as a firm 

suggestion  that  such  judgments  should  be  made  by  administrators  rather  than 

judges.  So  understood,  Chevron  is  a  natural  outgrowth  of  the  twentieth-century 

shift from judicial to administrative lawmaking. 

                                                 
231 See FTC v. American Tobacco Co., 264 U.S. 298, 305-06 (1924); FTC v. Eastman Kodak, 264 U.S. 619, 623-25 (1920); Jefferson 
Fordham & J. Russell Leach, Interpretation of Statutes In Derogation of the Common Law, 3 VAN. L. REV. 438 (1950). 
232 See Percival, supra note 2. 

50 

 

For  the  most  part,  current  disagreements  have  taken  the  form  of  a  dispute  over 

Chevron  Step  Zero—the  inquiry  into  whether  the  Chevron  framework  applies  at  all. 

Justice Breyer has succeeded in ensuring case-by-case assessments of whether Congress 

intended  to  delegate  law-interpreting  power  to  agencies.  To  be  sure,  those  assessments 

are less case-by-case than he suggested that they should be in 1986; if the agency action 

has  the  force  of  law,  Chevron  applies,  and  agency  decisions  that  result  from  formal 

procedures are taken to have the force of law.233 But even if agency action lacks the force 

of law and is not a product of formal procedures, Chevron might apply on the basis of an 

inquiry into the particular nature of the decision at stake. After Mead and Barnhart, then, 

Chevron seems to supply a clear rule, but only in the domain of agency decisions having 

the  force  of  law.  The  Christensen-Mead-Barnhart  trilogy  thus  represents  a  significant 

triumph for Justice Breyer’s efforts to domesticate Chevron.  

At the same time, Sweet Home, MCI, and Brown & Williamson seem to be Step 

Zero  decisions  in  Step  One  guise.234  They  are  informed,  and  explicitly  so,  by  a  doubt 

about whether Congress should generally be taken to have given agencies the authority to 

restructure  administrative  schemes,  either  by  significantly  reducing  or  significantly 

expanding their nature and coverage.  

These restrictions on the reach of Chevron create a great deal of complexity, and 

in a way that disregards the best justifications for the deference rule. The Court seems to 

have  opted  for  standards  for  rules  in  precisely  the  context  in  which  rules  make  most 

sense: numerous and highly repetitive decisions in which little is to be gained, in terms of 

accuracy, by a more particularized approach. Because the scope of review is a threshold 

issue is nearly every administrative law case,  the rise of sustained controversy over the 

meaning  of  Step  Zero  introduces  needless  uncertainty.  I  have  suggested  that  courts  can 

handle  the  initial  Step  Zero  trilogy  either  by  noticing  that  the  choice  between  Chevron 

and Skidmore usually will not matter, or by treating most cases as Barnhart cases rather 

than as Christensen or Mead cases. Just as Mead threatens to domesticate Chevron, future 

courts can use Barnhart to domesticate Mead. I have also suggested that MCI and Brown 

& Williamson, if rightly decided, are best read as Step One cases; it follows that future 

                                                 
233 As  I  have  noted,  some  agency  action  does  not  have  the  force  of  law  even  if  based  on  formal  procedures;  the  decisions  of  the 
NLRB are examples. 
234 Cf. Manning, supra note 223 (exploring Brown & Williamson in nondelegation terms). 

51 

 

courts  should  downplay  the  Court’s  unnecessary  emphasis  on  what  Congress  could  not 

have  meant  to  delegate.  That  emphasis  threatens  to  give  courts  a  kind  of  interpretive 

primacy  with  respect  to  the  very  questions  for  which  the  Chevron  framework  is  best 

suited.  

Constraints  on  administrative  discretion,  rooted  in  the  rule  of  law,  remain  a 

central  part  of  administrative  law,  and  indeed  serve  to  give  that  subject  its  basic  point. 

But those constraints can and should be supplied through other means, above all through 

an emphasis on the  limitations recognized  in Chevron itself. Sometimes legal  epicycles 

are necessary to ensure against the arbitrariness introduced by inflexible rules. But in this 

context,  the  extraordinary  complexity  introduced  by  the  emerging  law  of  Step  Zero 

serves no useful purpose. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Professor Cass R. Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 

csunstei@uchicago.edu 

52 

 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An 
Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of 
Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study 
(August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An 
Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial 
Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) 
(April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and 
Firm‐Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main 
Bank System (August 1993) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication 
(September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 
William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of 
Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption 
(January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) 
Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty 
Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 
1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 

53 

 

37. 

38. 

39. 
40. 

41. 

42. 
43. 

44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 

66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 

70. 

53.  

J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: 
Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good 
Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost‐Benefit State (May 1996) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership 
of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right‐to‐Carry Concealed 
Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health‐Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially 
Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 
William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from 
California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of 
Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of 
Laissez‐Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes 
on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  
William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation 
Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The 
Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law 
(March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better 
Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and 
Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police 
Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Second‐Order Decisions (June 1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm 
Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self‐Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of 
Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” 
(January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular 
Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 

54 

 

71. 

72. 
73. 

74. 

75. 
76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 
81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 
95. 

96. 

97. 
98. 
99. 

100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 

Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal 
Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 
Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right‐to‐
Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A 
Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) 
William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? 
(June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long‐Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of 
Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? 
Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 

Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law 

and Economics (September 1999) 

Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 

Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost‐Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 

Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case 

of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 

87. 

Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics 

(November 1999) 

88. 

Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost‐Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are 

Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 
1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative 
Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts 
(January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift 
(February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to 
Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti‐Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised May 
2002)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  

55 

 

105. 

106. 
107. 

108. 

109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 

113. 

114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 
118. 
119. 

120. 
121. 

122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 

126. 
127. 
128.   
129. 

130. 

131.   

132. 
133. 

134. 

135. 
136. 

137. 

138. 
139. 

140. 

Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November 
2000) 
Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System 
(November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations:  A 
Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 
William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) 
Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious Liability, Class 
Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An Economic Approach 
(December 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 
Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer Finance (February 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) (March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost‐Benefit Analysis:  A Positive Political Theory 
Perspective (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital Age (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the Conceptual 
Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) 
Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal 
Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)  
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 
2001) 
Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for Centralized 
Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent 
Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry:  Creating Cooperation through 
Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Allocation  of  the  Commons:  Parking  and  Stopping  on  the  Commons 
(August 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption 
Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts 
Perspective (September 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) 
Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections 
and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha “Solution” (February 
2002) 

 

 

56 

 

141. 
142. 

143. 

144. 

145. 
146. 

147. 

148. 

149. 
150. 

151. 
152. 

153. 

154. 
155. 

156. 
157. 
158. 

159. 

160. 
161 

162. 

163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 

170. 

171. 
172. 
173. 
174. 

175. 

Edna Ullmann‐Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) 
Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. 
Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) 
Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute 
Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal Studies 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, 
forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success or Failure (March 
2002) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The 
Antitrust Bulletin) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture 
February 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) 
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation?  
Deeper and Wider Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002; revised 
March 2003) 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference 
Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) 
Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as 
Insurer? (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on 
Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) 
Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the 
Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract 
Law (September 2002) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the 
File‐Swapping Networks (September 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Does the X‐Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) 
Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) 
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) 
Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis 
(November 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for the Regulation of 
Public Health (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxation and Risk‐Taking with Multiple Tax Rates (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act of 
1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 

57 

 

176. 

177. 

178. 

179. 

180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 

187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191.  
192. 
193. 
194. 

195. 

196. 

197. 

198. 

199. 

200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 
204. 

205. 
206. 
207. 

208. 

209. 

210. 
211. 
212. 

David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short‐Term Assets 
(January 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 
Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities 
and Verizon (January 2003) 
William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An 
Economic Perspective (February 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) 
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life‐Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) 
Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) 
David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September 
2003) 
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the 
Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 
and 2000? (September 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage 
(September 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September 
2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts 
of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)  
Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure 
Time (October 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003) 
David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) 
David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright Law (April 
2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of 
Statistical Lives (February 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A Critique of the 
Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceutical Patents: 
Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004) 
Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004) 

58 

 

213. 

214. 

215. 

216. 
217. 
218. 

219. 

220.  

221. 
222. 
223. 
224. 

225. 
226. 
227. 
228. 
229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 
233. 
234. 
235. 

236. 

237. 
238. 

239. 

240. 
241. 

242. 
243. 
244. 

245. 
246.  
247. 

248. 
249. 
 

Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Labor 
within and between Law Firms (April 2004) 
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of 
Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry (April 2004) 
James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the Market for 
Underwriting Business (July 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004) 
Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, Company Stock, 
Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets 
(August 2004, revised October 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross‐Cultural Risk 
Perceptions (August 2004) 
M. Todd Henderson and James C. Spindler, Corporate Herroin: A Defense of Perks (August 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Cyber Security: Of Heterogenity and Autarky (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Unbundling Scope‐of‐Permission Goods: When Should We Invest in Reducing 
Entry Barriers? (September 2004) 
Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing through Law (September 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of the Use of Citations in the Law (2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and the Environment (October 2004) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Cordell Hull, the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act, and the WTO (October 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Contract Interpretation (November 2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, A Social Networks Theory of Privacy (December 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Minimalism at War (December 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman, How the Law Responds to Self‐Help (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, The Decline of the International Court of Justice (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, Is the International Court of Justice Biased? (December 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, Public vs. Private Enforcement of International Economic Law: Of Standing and 
Remedy (February 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Serial Entrepreneurs and Small Business Bankruptcies 
(March 2005) 
Eric A. Posner, There Are No Penalty Default Rules in Contract Law (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright and the DMCA: Market Locks and Technological Contracts (March 
2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? The Relevance of 
Life‐Life Tradeoffs (March 2005) 
Alan O. Sykes, Trade Remedy Laws (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Rewinding Sony: The Evolving Product, Phoning Home, and the Duty of 
Ongoing Design (March 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Irreversible and Catastrophic (April 2005)  
James C. Spindler, IPO Liability and Entrepreneurial Response (May 2005) 
Douglas Lichtman, Substitutes for the Doctrine of Equivalents: A Response to Meurer and Nard 
(May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, A New Progressivism (May 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird, Property, Natual Monopoly, and the Uneasy Legacy of INS v. AP (May 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Private Debt and the Missing Lever of Corporate Governance 
(May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Administrative Law Goes to War (May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Chevron Step Zero (May 2005) 

 

59 

 

