University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2005 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Celebrating God, Constitutionally 
Celebrating God, Constitutionally 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Celebrating God, Constitutionally," 83 University of Detroit Mercy Law Review 567 
(2005). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

MCELROY LECTURE

Celebrating God,  Constitutionally

CASS  R. SUNSTEIN*

In  recent  years,  the  Supreme  Court  has  often  been  confronted  with
"ceremonial  deism."  As  I understand  the  term  here,  ceremonial  deism  is
categorized  by  the  following  features.  First,  it  is  not  coercive;  no  one  is
being required  to do or  to say  anything.  Second, it involves  public  displays
that  refer  generally  to  God,  without  choosing  any  particular  conception  of
God.  Third,  it  involves  activities  that  are  either  specifically  honored  by
tradition  or essentially  indistinguishable  from  activities  that  are  specifically
honored  by tradition.

Ceremonial  deism  has a  core  and a  periphery.'  The core might  be  said
to  include  the use of the  words  "In  God We  Trust" on  currency  and  as  the
national  motto,  legislative  prayers,  public  oaths  that  refer  to  God  and  that
use the  Bible, and  the use  of the phrase  "God  Save  This  Honorable  Court"
to  begin  judicial  proceedings.  The  periphery  includes  the  words  "under
God"  in the Pledge  of  Allegiance,  prayers  at  public  university  ceremonies,
and  displays  of  religious  symbols  on  public  property.  All  I  mean  by
ceremonial  deism, then,  is  non-coercive public  displays that refer  to  God in
the  way  that  is time  honored  and fits with our traditions.

That's  the  topic.  In  these  remarks,  I  have  two  goals.  The  first  is  to
explore  how  the  constitutional  law  might  evaluate  ceremonial  deism. 
In
the first  part  of these remarks,  I  will  try to  illuminate  current  constitutional
debate  by  attempting  to  identify  the  approaches  that  are behind  the  current
controversy.

The second  goal  is  to  argue that  federal  courts,  including  the  Supreme
Court,  should  generally  permit  ceremonial  deism.  This  means  that  the
Supreme  Court  should  get  out  of  the  business  of attacking  references  to
God,  if  they  are  in  fact  vindicated  by  tradition  or  if  they  are  hard  to
distinguish,  in  principle,  from  those  references  that  are  vindicated  by
tradition.  The  underlying  idea  is  that  if a  practice  is  longstanding  and  if  it
does  not  offend  existing  decisions,  then  courts  should  impose  a  heavy
burden  on those  who  strike  down  the practices.  Here  is  an effort  to  free  up
other  institutions,  including  state  government,  from  the  heavy  hand  of

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor,  Law  School  and Department
of  Political  Science,  University  of  Chicago.  This  essay  is  a  lightly  revised  version  of  the
transcript  of  the  McElroy  Lecture,  delivered  at  the  University  of  Detroit  Mercy  School  of
Law,  on  March 7,  2006.  The  author  would like  to  thank  members  of  the community  of the
law  school  for  their  extraordinary  kindness  and  generosity  on  that  occasion.  Readers  are
asked to  make  allowances  for  an  essay that draws on  an oral  presentation.

1.  See Steven  B.  Epstein,  Rethinking the Constitutionality of Ceremonial Deism, 96

COLUM.  L. REv.  2083  (1996).

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 567 2005-2006

568 

UNIVERSITY  OF DETROITMERCY LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  83:567

constitutional  law  insofar  as  those  institutions  are  engaging  in  ceremonial
deism.  The  harm  done  by  ceremonial  deism,  if  there  is  any,  is  purely
It  involves  feelings  rather  than  material  effects.  Note  in  this
symbolic. 
regard that  we  have  a  diverse  country,  most of whose  citizens  are  religious
believers.  Public  inferences  to  God  should  not  be  struck  down  by federal
courts  in  light  of the kind of diversity  we  have.

That's  the basic  argument.  What  I'm  going to  do  now  is  to  begin  by
exploring  theories  of  constitutional  interpretation  first.  After  that,  I  will
explore  ceremonial  deism  in  particular.  The  theories  are  going  to be  a  bit
abstract  and  I  will  be  exploring  four  of them.  Each  has  been  with  us  for
about  200  years  now,  and  they  often  have  been  in  the  background.  We
ought to bring  them to the foreground.2

The  first  approach  to  constitutional  interpretation  might  be  called
bipartisan restraint.  It  is  associated  with  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  who
practiced  it,  and  to  a  large extent  Chief Justice  John  Marshall,  who  usually
practiced  it  also.  There  is  no  practitioner  of  bipartisan  restraint  on  the
current  Supreme  Court  -
though  members  of  the  Senate  Judiciary
Committee  have  shown  some  interest  in  bipartisan restraint  at least  for  the
last year.

What  bipartisan  means  is  that  the  Court should strike  laws  down  only
if the  violation  of the  Constitution  is  clear  and  unambiguous.  People  who
believe  in  bipartisan  restraint emphasize  that the  Court is  composed  not by
sages  but by lawyers.  The Court  consists of people who  are educated in  the
law.  Advocates  of  bipartisan  restraint  think  that  the  Constitution  is
ambiguous,  as it  certainly  is,  and  they  insist  that  laws  should  not be  struck
down  unless  they're  unambiguously  in  violation  of the  Constitution  of the
United  States.

At  the  turn  of  the  century  a  law  professor  named  James  Bradley
Thayer  argued  for  bipartisan  restraint. 3  Thayer  argued  that  because  the
American  Constitution  is  often  ambiguous, 
those  who  decide  on  its
meaning  must  inevitably  exercise  discretion.  Laws 
that  "will  seem
unconstitutional  to  one  man,  or body  of men,  may  reasonably  not  seem  so
to  another;  ... 
there  is  often  a  range  of  choice  and  judgment."4  
In  Thayer's  view,
"whatever  choice  is  rational  is  constitutional. 5   Thayer's  argument,  in
brief,  was  that courts  should  strike  down laws  only  "when  those  who have
the  right  to  make  laws  have  not  merely  made  a  mistake,  but  have  made  a

the constitution  often admits  of different  interpretations;...

2.  The  approaches  are  explored  in  detail,  with  references,  in  CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,
RADICALS  IN  ROBES: WHY  EXTREME  RIGHT-WING  JUDGES  ARE WRONG  FOR  AMERICA  (Basic
Books  2005).

3.  See  James  Bradley  Thayer,  The  Origin and Scope  of the American Doctrine of

Constitutional Law, 7  HARV.  L. REv.  129  (1893).

4. 
5. 

Id. at 144.
Id.

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 568 2005-2006

2006]

CELEBRATING  GOD, CONSTITUTIONALLY

very  clear  one-so  clear  that  it  is  not  open  to  rational  question. ''6  The
question  for  courts  "is  not  one  of  the  mere  and  simple  preponderance  of
reasons  for  or  against,  but  of what  is  very  plain  and  clear,  clear  beyond  a
reasonable  doubt.",7

I  said  that  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  was  a  practitioner  of  bipartisan
restraint.  As  he  once  said,  "If  my  fellow  citizens  want  to  go  to  Hell,  I'll
help  them.  It's  my job."8  Holmes  has  no  followers  on the  current  Court;
there's  no  one  who  is  consistently  willing  to uphold  legislation,  including
in  the  area  of separation  of church  and  state,  against  constitutional  attack.
So that's one  approach  and some  of my remarks  will be an effort to  cover  it
a little bit.

The  second  approach  that  has  got  a  lot  of  attention  in  recent  years:
originalism.  Originalists  believe,  not  that  the  Supreme  Court  should
uphold  every  law  that  is  not  clearly  unconstitutional,  but  instead  that  the
Court should  go in  a  time  machine.  The  Court should  recover  the  original
understanding  of  the  document. 
the
Constitution means  what it meant  at the time  it  was  ratified.  For  evaluating
the idea  of ceremonial  deism,  or  separation  of church  and  State,  the  task is
to recover  the  original understanding  of those  who gave us  the Constitution
of the United States.  This  might be said to be a "time  travel"  conception  of
the constitutional  law.

Hence  originalists 

insist  that 

There's  a  lot  to  be  said  on  behalf  of  originalism. 

It  attempts  to
vindicate  the  rule  of law  by  reducing  the  discretion  of federal  judges.  It
insists  that,  instead  of allowing  federal  judges  to  make  their  own decisions
about  what  religious  freedom  requires  in  a  diverse  society, judges  ought  to
figure  out  what  We  the  People  thought  was  meant  by  the  Establishment
Clause at the time  the Constitution  was ratified.  Here  there is  a  democratic,
as well  as  a rule of law reason,  for originalism.

But there are  two  large problems  with the  originalist project.  The first
is  it  may  be somewhat  contradictory.  If the  original  understanding  is  to be
binding,  it must be because  the original  understanding  was  that  the original
understanding  would be  binding.  If the original understanding  was  not that
the  original  understanding  would  be  binding,  then  the  originalist  project
defeats itself.  For  the idea  of this  theory to  work, it  has to  be a case that  the
people  who  gave  us  the  free  exercise  clause  and  the  establishment  clause
and  other  clauses  of  the  Constitution  specifically  meant  their  specific
understandings  to bind prosperity.

Id.
Id. at  151.

6. 
7. 
8.  Oliver  W.  Holmes,  Letter from  Holmes to  Harold J.  Laski (Mar. 4,  1920),  in  I
HOLMES-LASKI  LETTERS:  THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  MR.  JUSTICE  HOLMES  AND  HAROLD  J.
LASKI,  1916-1935,  248-49  (Mark DeWolfe  Howe  ed.,  1953).

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 569 2005-2006

570 

UNIVERSITY  OF DETROIT MERCY LA W REVIEW 

[Vol.  83:567

Unfortunately,  there's  a  lot  of reason  historically  to  think they  did not
mean  to  entrench  their  specific  views. 9  
In  that  case,  the  originalist
approach  defeats  itself,  because  the  approach  was  not  that  of  those  who
originally  ratified  the Constitution.

There  is  a  further  problem. 

The  originalist  approach  for 

the
Constitution  would  cause  serious  problems  for  our  system  of  rights  and
with  our  present  institutions.  I'll  give  you  just  one  example  from  the  area
I'm focusing  on  in this  set  of remarks.  Justice  Thomas  has  argued  that the
separation  of  church  and  state  does  not  apply  to  state  government.'0 
It
follows,  from  this view, that if people  wanted to  establish a  state church  for
California  or  Massachusetts  or  Michigan  that  would  be  fine  as  far  as  the
national  Constitution  is  concerned.  And  if  the  state  wants  to  favor  a
particular  religion  through  funds  or  through  any  other  approach,  the  state
government  runs  into  no  constitutional  problem  because  the  Establishment
Clause doesn't  apply to  state government-only  to national  government.

the  establishment  clause 

The  real  problem  with  Thomas'  approach,  in  my  view,  is  he's
probably right  on history.  It may  well be a stretch  to  say that, as a  matter of
history, 
is 
in  the  Fourteenth
Amendment  according  to  the  original  understanding.  He  may  well  have
the  history right,  I  think.  But  if his  approach  were  accepted,  we  would  so
alter  our current understandings  at the  level  of state government  as to  make
our  system  essentially  unrecognizable. 
If  we  were  to  unleash  religious
struggle  on  state  legislature,  unconstrained  by  the  Establishment  Clause,
then  we  would  turn the  United States  into  a  very  different  country  than it's
been  for fifty years  or more.

incorporated 

So  my  suggestion  with  respect  to  originalism  is,  first,  that  it  may
embed  a  theory  of  interpretation  that  is  not  the  theory  of  the  original
ratifiers  of the Constitution.  And second,  it  would transform our document
in  ways  that  would  alter  radically  and  for  the  worse  the  system  of
government  by  which  we  have  long  lived.  We  have  now  explored  two
theories  of interpretation,  bipartisan  restraint  by Justice  Holmes  on  the  one
hand, originalism of Justice  Thomas on the  other.

Now  let  me  turn  to  the  third  approach  which  I'm  going  to  call
perfectionism.  This  is  an  approach  that  has  played  a  dominant  role  in  the
area  of religion  in  the  last  forty  or  fifty  years.  We  might  treat  William
Brennan  as 
The
perfectionists  believe  that  the  Constitution  sets  out  strong  aspirations  for
freedom  in  general  and  for  religious  freedom  in  particular."  Under  their
view,  the particular  meaning  of these  aspirations  is  transformed  from  one

the  leading  perfectionist  in  the 

last  half-century. 

9.  H.  Jefferson  Powell,  The  Original Understanding of Original Intent, 98  HARv.  L.

REv.  885  (1985).

denied, 542  U.S. 961  (2004).

(Belknap  Press 2006).

10. 

See Elk  Grove  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Newdow,  542  U.S.  1, 49-50  (2004),  reh'g

11. 

For  an  example  of  perfectionism,  see  RONALD  DWORKIN,  JUSTICE  IN ROBES

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 570 2005-2006

2006]

CELEBRATING GOD, CONSTITUTIONALLY

generation  to  another.  Justice  Breyer  has  defended  a  kind  of perfectionist
approach  to  the  Constitution,  saying  the  document  is  not  static  and  it
changes  over  time.12  Certainly  Americans  have  learned  more  about  how to
live  with  one  another,  and  as  we  do,  perhaps  our  understanding  of  the
requirements  of religious liberty  are  being altered.

liberty  hold  their  source  to  this  approach 

Many  of the  dominant  ideas  for  last  thirty  years  or  so  in  the  area  of
religious 
to  constitutional
interpretation.  For  example,  the  wall  of  separation  between  church  and
state  is  a  metaphor  that  is  the  result  of the perfectionist  approach,  trying to
make  our system  of religious  liberty as  good as  it possibly can  be.  (I do  not
mean  to  endorse  the  metaphor,  which  seems  to  me  misleading,  and
damaging;  I  mean  simply to  note that it  is a perfectionist  idea.)

Also  perfectionist  is  the  idea  of  "neutrality"  between  religion  and
nonreligion  or  neutrality  across  religious.  That idea  is  less  dangerous  and
damaging-indeed  it  has  considerable  appeal-but  it  has  an  unmistakable
perfectionist  feature.  The  ratifiers  of the  First Amendment  did not  believe
in  neutrality  in  a  strong  sense.  The  notion  of  neutrality  between  religion
and  nonreligion  and  across  religions  is  more a  development  of the  last fifty
years  of than in the founding  period.

In  my  view,  there  is  a  lot  of nobility  to  the  perfectionist  approach  to
the  Constitution, but  let  me  outline some  problems  with  it.  The  first  is  if
our  judges  are  trying to  perfect  our constitutional  ideas  by  trying  to figure
out  what  free exercise  means  or respecting  what establishment  means,  they
may  blunder.  Judges  have  no  special  access  to  moral  or  political  truth.  If
judges  are  trying  to  figure  out  how  best  to  understand  our  constitutional
aspirations,  it is  possible that  they  will  make  our constitutional  system  less
perfect  and  not more  so.  If judges  have  no privileged  access  to political  or
moral  truth,  then to  entrust  them with  the task  of putting  our  aspirations  in
the  best  light  is  risky  just  because  of  the  inevitable  fallibility  of judges.
Even  if  judges  were  not  fallible  in  this  way,  democracy  and  self
government  have  their  claims,  do  they  not?  Perfectionism  threatens  to
unsettle  our  ability  to  rule ourselves.  If  we entrust  our judges  with  the task
of  figuring  out  what  free  exercise  of  religion  means  or  what  respecting
establishment  of  religion  really  means,  we  might  compromise  self-
government.  If we  entrust judges  with the  task  of figuring  out  our  deepest
aspirations,  we  might  be  asking  them to  do  something  better  done  by  our
citizens  and ordinary people,  not just judges.

The  fourth approach,  which is  the  final  one,  would be  written  in  small
letters.  It's  call  minimalism.  Minimalists  believe  in  little  constitutional
law  rather  than  in  big  heroic  constitutional 
law.  They  believe  that
constitutional  law should  be little in  the two  different  ways.  First,  suppose
that the  Supreme  Court  is  confronting  a  problem  like  the  use  of the  word,
Under God, in  the Pledge of Allegiance.  Minimalists  want judges  to take  a

12.  See  STEPHEN BREYER,  ACTIVE  LIBERTY  (Knopf 2005).

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 571 2005-2006

572 

UNIVERSITY  OF DETROIT MERCY LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  83:567

like 

rather 

incremental 

small  step  and  focus  on the  use of the  words  "under  God"  in  the Pledge  of
Allegiance,  not  a  large  step  that  resolves  all  sorts  of questions  of religious
liberty  and establishment.
Hence  minimalists 

than  earth-shaking
decisions.  They  prefer  nudges  over  earthquakes.  In  addition,  minimalists
like  shallowness  rather  than  depth.  That  is  very  different  from what  you
In  constitutional
would  want  in  a  romantic  relationship  or  in  a  teacher! 
law,  minimalists  want  shallowness  for  the  following  reason:  They  think
that  theoretical  depth,  in  the  constitutional  domain,  forces  judges  to  take
stands  on issues that most  deeply divide us.  They  want  to avoid that.  They
like  shallowness  in  the  form of rulings  and rationale  that  we  can  all  agree
on,  notwithstanding  our  diversity  and our  plurality.  So  by  shallowness,  I
mean  an  outcome  and  an argument  that  we can  accept  notwithstanding  our
disagreements  on foundational  issues.  For example,  people  can agree  right
now in the  United  States  that government  cannot censor speech  unless  there
is  a  clear  and  present  danger.  And  we  agree  on  that  despite  our
disagreement  on  theological  issues  and  political  issues.  Across  many
differences,  we  support  freedom  of  speech  against  censorship.  What
minimalists  want  to  do is  to achieve  a big  goal  for  a  diverse  nation,  which
is  to  make  it  possible  for  people  to  agree  where  agreement  is  necessary,
while  also  making  it  unnecessary  for  people  to  agree  where  agreement  is
not possible.

Justice  O'Connor,  recent  retiree  from  the  Supreme  Court,  was  a
practitioner  of  m-inimalism.13  There  are  two  objections  to  the  minimalist
approach  that  one  might  make.  One  is  that  it  is  unpredictable.  Justice
O'Connor  could  not  easily  be  pigeon-holed;  people  didn't  know  how  she
would vote in hard cases.  And  so the  narrowness  that she prized  might be  a
problem  for  those  who  want  to  know  what  the  law  is.  Narrow  decisions
leave a great  deal of uncertainty.  Shallowness  is  also a  problem  if the  deep
theory  would be right.  If there  is  an excellent  deep  theory, then  we  should
opt for depth.  But often we  can't  find one.  And  even  if some people think
they  have  the  right  theory,  some  of our  fellow  citizens  will  not  agree  to  it,
and it  is  respectful  for  our fellow  citizens  not to  insist on  that theory if  we
can't get them  to agree to it.

I  am  done  with  these  abstract  remarks  about  constitutional  theory.
Now it  is  time  to  talk  about ceremonial  deism  in particular.  In terms  of the
approaches  I  have  described,  it's  clear  that  if  you  believe  in  bipartisan
restraint,  as  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  then  the  answer  is  clear:  There  is
absolutely  nothing  wrong  with  the public  ceremony  that  refers  to  God,  that
mentions  the  Ten  Commandments,  or that  uses  the  Bible.  Indeed,  there  is
nothing wrong  with  public displays of the Ten  Commandments,  or with  the
inclusion  of the  words  "under  God"  in  the  Pledge  of  Allegiance.  Those

13. 
(2006).

See Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Problems with Minimalism, 58  STAN.  L. REv.  1899,  1901-02

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 572 2005-2006

2006]

CELEBRATING  GOD, CONSTITUTIONALLY

who  believe  in  bipartisan  restraint  find  ceremonial  deism  easy  and  fine.
The  Constitution  does  not  clearly  or  unambiguously  forbid  references,  in
public, to  God.  For  those who believe  in bipartisan restraint,  these  cases  do
not present  serious challenges;  judges  should simply back  off.

Something  similar  is probably  true  if  you  are  an originalist  and  if you
accept  the  originalist  approach  of Justices  Scalia  and  Thomas.  Under  that
approach,  ceremonial  deism 
Justice
Thomas'  view,  if you  will  recall,  is  that  the  Establishment  Clause  does  not
apply  to  states  at  all. 
If  a  university  or  state  wants  to  recognize  the
existence  of  God,  there  is  no  problem.  Justice  Scalia  does  not  take  that
view  but  he  is  able  to  point  to  a  great  deal  of  history  suggesting  that
ceremonial  deism  is  legitimate.' 4   For  originalists,  as  for  advocates  of
bipartisan restraint,  these  questions  are easy.

is  constitutionally  acceptable. 

Many  perfectionists  reach  a  very  different  conclusion.  They  believe
that the  state must be neutral  as between  religion and non-religion,  and  also
neutral  as  between  some  religions  other  religions.1 5  They  ask:  What  is
neutral  in  state  recognition  of the  existence  of God?  After  all,  millions of
Americans  are  agnostic  or  atheist,  and  many  others  do  not  accept
monotheism.  For perfectionists  who  insist  on genuine  neutrality,  it is  clear
that  ceremonial  deism  is  in  constitutional  trouble,  hence,  for  example,  the
view  that  the  pledge  of the  allegiance  cannot  constitutionally  contain  the
words  "under  God."  Under  this  view,  it  is  not  possible  to  celebrate  God
constitutionally.

The  minimalists  are  split.  Some of them,  such as  Justice Breyer,  want
to  go  case  by  case,16  making  fine  decisions  amongst  different  kinds  of
religious  displays.  For  such  minimalists,  it  is  important  to  pay  close
attention  to  context,  which  will  make  some  forms  of  ceremonial  deism
constitutionally  valid  and  other  forms  invalid.  I  want  to  identify  here  the
intellectual  parent  of minimalism  and  explore how  his  views  might bear on
the problem.

I  mean  to  refer  here  to  the English  social  theorist Edmund  Burke,  who
believed  that  each  of us  has  a  private  stock  of wisdom.17  Each  person  in
this  room  has  such  a  private  stock.  But  what  each  of  us  knows,  as  an
individual,  is  pitiful  really  compared  to  what  tradition  knows.  This  is  not
because  the  individuals  who  constitute  traditions  were  smarter  or  wiser
than  each  of  us;  it  is  because  traditions  contain  the  knowledge  of  so
many-not  of  dozens  or  hundreds  or  thousands  but  of  millions  of

14.  See  Scalia  opinions  in  the  Ten Commandments  cases  (Van  Orden  v.  Perry,  125  S.
Ct.  2854,  2864  (2005)  (Scalia,  J.,  concurring);  McCreary  Cty.,  KY,  v.  ACLU,  125  S.  Ct.
2722,  2748  (2005)  (Scalia,  J.,  dissenting  and  joining  in  Part  II  and  III  of  the  majority
opinion)).
15. 
16. 
17.  For  elaboration  and  citations,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Burkean  Minimalism,  105

See Epstein, supra note  1, for citations and  careful  elaboration.
See Van  Orden, 125  S. Ct.  at 2868  (Breyer, J.,  dissenting).

MICH. L. REV.  353  (2006).

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 573 2005-2006

574 

UNIVERSITY  OF DETROIT MERCY  LAW REVIEW  [Vol.  83:567

individual  minds.  Burke rejected  the  revolutionary  temperament  because  of
its  theoretical  ambition. 18   Burke's  key  claim  is  that  the  "science  of
like  every  other
constructing  a  commonwealth,  or  reforming 
experimental  science,  not  to  be taught  a  priori."'19  To  make  this  argument,
Burke  opposes  theories  and abstractions,  developed  by  individual  minds,  to
traditions,  built  up  by  many  minds  over  long  periods.  In  his  most  vivid
passage,  Burke writes:

it, 

is, 

We  wished  at the  period  of the  Revolution,  and  do  now  wish,  to
derive  all  we  possess  as  an inheritance from  our forefathers....
The  science  of government  being  therefore  so  practical  in  itself,
and  intended  for such  practical  purposes,  a  matter  which requires
experience,  and  even  more  experience  than  any  person  can  gain
in  his  whole life,  however  sagacious  and  observing  he may  be,  it
is  with  infinite  caution  that  any  man  ought  to  venture  upon
pulling  down  an  edifice  which  has  answered  in  any  tolerable
degree,  for  ages  the  common  purposes  of society,  or  on building
it  up  again,  without  having  models  and  patterns  of  approved
utility  before his  eyes. 20
Thus  Burke  stresses  the  need  to  rely  on  experience,  and  in  particular
the experience  of generations;  and he  objects  to "pulling  down an  edifice,"
a  metaphor  capturing  the understanding  of social  practices  as reflecting  the
It  is  for  this  reason
judgments  of numerous  people  extending  over  time. 
that  Burke  describes  the  "spirit  of  innovation"  as  "the  result  of  a  selfish
temper  and  confined  views," 2 1 and  offers  the  term  "prejudice"  as  one  of
enthusiastic  approval,  noting  that  "instead  of  casting  away  all  our  old
prejudices,  we  cherish  them to  a  very considerable  degree., 22  Emphasizing
the  critical  importance  of  stability,  Burke  adds  a  reference  to  "the  evils  of
ten  thousand  times  worse  than  those  of
inconstancy  and  versatility, 
obstinacy  and  the blindest prejudice., 23

In  short,  Burke  thought  that  legal  structures  and  individual  rights
should  be  built  up  with  careful  reference  to  longstanding  practice.  In  the
domain  of  religion,  this  was,  in  many  ways,  Chief  Justice  Rehnquist's
approach  to constitutional  questions.  Chief Justice  Rehnquist  analyzed hard
Strikingly,  Chief  Justice
questions  by  reference 
Rehnquist's  defense  of the  use of the  words  "under  God"  in  the  Pledge  of
Allegiance  is an  almost  entirely Burkean  exercise,  stressing  practices rather

traditions. 

to  our 

18.  Edmund  Burke,  Reflections  on  the  Revolution  in  France, in  THE  PORTABLE

EDMUND  BURKE,  416-51  (Isaac  Kramnick  ed. 1999)  (1790).

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 

Id. at 442.
Id. at 451.
Id. at 428.
Id. at 451.
Id.

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 574 2005-2006

2006]

CELEBRATING  GOD, CONSTITUTIONALLY

than  reasons  for  practices. 24  Indeed,  Chief Justice  Rehnquist's  view  of the
Establishment Clause has  a persistent  Burkean  feature, at least  insofar as  he
would  permit  public  recognition  of  God  by  reference  not  to  theories  or
principle,  but by reference  to history  alone.25

At  least for ceremonial  deism,  I  think that Chief Justice Rehnquist  was
right.  The Burkean  approach  that bases  constitutional  law  on longstanding
traditions,  rather  than  on  theories  and abstractions,  has  a  lot to  recommend
it.

What  I've just done  is  to suggest  that  minimalists  who  are  inspired by
Burke have  no problem  with  ceremonial  deism.  So too  for the  originalists
is  only  the
and  for  those  who  believe 
perfectionists  who  have  trouble.  I  think the  Burkean  minimalists  are  right,
and I  want to  clarify that judgment in  the remarks  that remain.

in  bipartisan  restraint. 

It 

One  objection  of ceremonial  deism  is  that  if  we  allow  it,  we are  on  a
slippery  slope  to  invocation  specifically  of religious  values  in  a  way  that
would  undermine  rather  than  support  our constitutional  tradition  of respect
for  diversity. 
I  want  to  address  that  objection  by  building  up  cases  now
with minimalist fashion.  And I'm going to start  with  the cases  in  which the
argument for striking  down  legislation  is  strongest.  I  will  end  with  cases in
which  the  argument  for  striking  down  legislation  is  weakest.  And  there  is
going  to  be  a  specific  point  in  which  we  switch  from  the  imposition  of
particular  religious  convictions,  which  is  not  legitimate,  to  ceremonial
deism,  which  is  legitimate.  I  hope  that  by  virtue  of the  specificity  of the
cases,  the slippery  slope  problem will dissipate.
the  strongest  case 

involves
for 
mandatory  school  prayer.  The  prohibition  of  school  prayer  has  been  with
us  for  a  long,  long  time  and  it's  very  hard  when  you're  dealing  with
children  to  speak  of ceremonial  deism rather  than  inculcation  of the state's
preferred  religious  beliefs.  I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that it is  entirely  clear
that the  Supreme  Court  was  originally right  to  strike  down  school  prayer;
the issues  were  hard.  But the  Court's decisions  are  well  engrained  and  my
defense of ceremonial  deism does not  support mandatory  school prayers.

invalidating 

legislation 

First, 

A  somewhat  harder  case  but  also  a  good  one  for  Supreme  Court
invalidation  was  a  case  from  a few  years  ago  when  a  state  legislature  said
that the  Ten  Commandments  had  to  be  posted  on  a  wall  of  every  public
school  classroom. 26  That's  not the  easiest  case  in  the  world  but  it's  not  so

24.  See  Elk  Grove  Unified  School  Dist.  v.  Newdow,  542  U.S.  1,  26-32  (Rehnquist,
C.J.,  concurring).  What  is  striking  about  Chief  Justice  Rehnquist's  opinion  is  its  nearly
exclusive  reliance  on  historical  practices,  treated  as  closely  analogous  to  the  use  of  the
words  "under God"  in  the  Pledge of  Allegiance.  Emphasizing  those  practices,  Chief Justice
Rehnquist  makes  almost  no  effort  to  defend  them  in  principle,  in  a  way  that  fits  well  with
one understanding  of Burke.

25.  See,  e.g.,  Van  Orden  v.  Perry,  125  S.  Ct.  2854  (2005)  (plurality  opinion  of

Rehnquist,  C.J.).

26.  See  Stone  v.  Graham,  449 U.S.  39 (1980).

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 575 2005-2006

576 

UNIVERSITY  OF DETROIT MERCY LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  83:567

far  from  school  prayer.  This  case  involved  children,  not  adults.  It's  not
it's  the  educational  setting.  To  display  the  Ten
purely  ceremonial; 
Commandments  on  every  public  school  classroom  seems  to  be  an  effort  to
inculcate  in  children  a  set  of religious  convictions,  and  it  is  not  the  states'
business  to do that.

The  third  case  is  a  little harder  for an  aggressive  Supreme  Court  role.
The  third  case  is  also  a  case  from  a  few  years  ago,  in  which  the  state
legislature  didn't  mandate  any  prayers,  but  said  one  minute  would  be  set
aside  for  voluntary  prayer  or  meditation.27  This  is  harder  for the  Supreme
Court  to  strike  down,  because  there  is  no reference  to  any  particular  set  of
religious  conviction.  But in  my  view,  this  case did  not  involve  ceremonial
in  the  process  of
deism,  for  it  was  an  effect  to  enlist  public  schools 
religious  practice,  and  the  Supreme  Court  knew  that.  The  Court  was
probably  right to strike  the  legislation down.

Thus  far,  I  have  given  three  cases  in  which  the  Supreme  Court
properly  validated  the  legislation;  but  now  we're  going  to  ceremonial
deism.  Last  year  the  Supreme  Court  was  confronted  with  two  cases  in
which  the  Ten  Commandments  were  put  on  public  property. 
If  the
argument  thus  far  is  correct,  the  Supreme  Court  was  right,  in  one  of those
cases,  to  accept  the  display of  the Ten  Commandments  on public  property,
as part  of a  general  celebration  of our history.  But the Supreme  Court  was
wrong  to  strike  down  the  posting  of  the  Ten  Commandments  on  the
courthouse.  After  all,  the  courthouse  had  many  other  historical  influences
displayed,  including  secular  ones.  This  was  not  a  case  in  which  religious
I  suggest  that  a  display  of  the  Ten
symbols  were  the  only  ones. 
Commandments,  if  it  is  part  of  a  series  of  displays  that  are  not  solely
religious,  is  part  of  legitimate  ceremonial  deism.  The  state  is  entitled  to
recognize  that  the  Ten  Commandments  helped  to  give  rise  to  the  legal
system  in  which  we  now  live.  To  recognize  that  role  is  not  to  commit
yourself, as  the state  did not, to  a particular  set of religious  convictions.

It follows  that the Supreme  Court was  wrong to  set  its face  against  the
Ten  Commandments  in  the  courthouses  as  part  of  the  historical  display.
Now  let's  consider  cases  that  are  easier  for  the  government,  and  whose
facts  make it  harder  and harder  for  the Supreme  Court to  play an  aggressive
In  what  seems  on  reflection  to  be  a  surprising  decision,  the  Court
role. 
struck down  a  public  prayer  at  a  graduation  ceremony.2 8  Why  is  it invalid
for  graduation  ceremonies  to  include  prayers,  if those  ceremonies  contain  a
great  deal  more  than  prayers?  The  relevant  ceremony  did  not  require
anyone  to  do  anything.  It  did  not  use  public  funds.  It  did  not  mandate  or
It  simply  recognized  the  existence  of  religious
coerce  any  behavior. 
convictions  in  the  relevant  community.  From  the  standpoint  of  Burkean
minimalism, the Court's decision  was  a blunder.

27.  Wallace  v. Jaffree,  472 U.S.  38  (1985).
28.  Lee  v.  Weisman,  505  U.S.  577 (1992).

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 576 2005-2006

2006]

CELEBRATING GOD, CONSTITUTIONALLY

Let's  now  pause  over  the  Pledge  of Allegiance  which  we  began.  In
my  view,  the ceremonial  deism  that is involved  here  is  not  illegitimate, and
the  Supreme  Court  ought  to  find  the use  of the  words  "under  God"  to  be
constitutional  and  not problematic.  The Pledge of Allegiance,  which  many
of us  said  in  school,  is  not  a  religious  ceremony.  It  is  not  itself a  prayer.
There  are  two  words  in  the  Pledge,  and these  two  words  are  a  recognition
of what  90%  or  so  of Americans  believe,  in  a  context  in  which  no  one  is
forced  to say those  words  if they  don't want to  do so.  The use of the  words
"under  God"  in  the Pledge  of Allegiance  might  offend  some  people,  but  it
hardly  establishes  an  official  religion.  In context,  these  two  words  are not
the sort  of thing the Supreme Court  should concern  itself with invalidating.
Here  is  the  last  case:  a  Christmas  display  in  which  a  badly  divided
Supreme  Court  rejected  a  constitutional  attack.2 9  The  Court  said  that  the
Christmas  display  served  a  secular  purpose,  which  was  to  celebrate  the
holiday.  At  first  glance,  the  Court's  idea  that  a  Christmas  display  has  a
secular  purpose  seems  quite  odd.  It  is  Christmas,  after  all,  not  Holiday-
ness.  But on  reflection,  there  is  a  lot  to  be  said for  the  Court's  reasoning.
What  the  locality  was  essentially  doing  in  this  case  was  recognizing  that  a
number  of  citizens  celebrate  Christmas;  the  locality  was  acknowledging
that practice.  This was  not by the  way a  Christmas  display  to the exclusion
of a  Hanukkah  display or  other  displays;  they  were there  too.  The  locality
was  going  beyond  ceremonial  deism,  to  be  sure. 
It  was  not  simply
recognizing  the  existence  of God.  But  its  Christmas  display  was  part  of a
general  holiday  celebration,  not  an  effort  to  inculcate  a  particular  set  of
religious  convictions.

By  way  of summary:  I  have  had  two  goals  here.  The  first is  to  try  to
sketch  some  theories  of  constitutional  interpretation  and  to bring  them  to
bear  on  religious  liberty  and  the  Establishment  Clause  in  particular.  The
theories,  to  recapitulate,  are bipartisan  restraint,  originalism,  perfectionism,
and minimalism.

My  second  goal  is  to  defend  ceremonial  deism.  I  have  argued  in  favor
of  an  approach  that  recognizes  our  history  and  respect  for  religious
practices  and  beliefs  in  a way  that doesn't force  anyone  to  do anything,  but
that  acknowledges  widespread  commitments.  Such  acknowledgement  is
not  an  offense  to the Constitution  of the  United  States.  Those  are my  two
goals  but  I  actually  have a  broader  goal that  I  haven't  yet identified.  In our
society  today,  we  have  real  issues  of justice  and  liberty  and  equality  that
constitutional  law  might help to  address.  Some  of those  issues  involve  the
war  on  terror-the  uses  and  limits  of presidential  power  in  the  context  of
national  security  and  the  place  of civil  liberties  too.  In  addition,  we  have
continuing  free  speech issues  on  university  campuses  and  state legislatures.
In  the  religious  context,  we  have  very  serious  constitutional 
issues
emerging  that  have  to  do  with  the  teaching  of intelligent  design  in public

29.  See  Lynch  v.  Donnelly,  465  U.S.  668  (1984).

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 577 2005-2006

578 

UNIVERSITY  OF DETROIT MERCY LA W REVIEW 

[Vol.  83:567

schools.  Mandatory 
constitutional problems  going  well beyond  what I've described here.

intelligent  design  raises 

teaching  of 

serious

The  attack  on  ceremonial  deism,  I  suggest,  is  a  diversion  from  the
serious  issues.  That  attack  insults  religious  believers  and  simultaneously
insults  American  citizens  more  generally.  The  insult does  not  do  a  lot  of
good  for  nonbelievers  and  members  of  religious  minorities.  Ours  is  a
secular  Constitution;  there  is  no  doubt  about  that.  But  under  that  secular
Constitution, it  is nonetheless  possible to  celebrate God  constitutionally.

HeinOnline  -- 83 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 578 2005-2006

