Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Chevron Step Zero" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 249, 2005). 
Chevron Step Zero  
Cass R. Sunstein  
T H E   L A W   S C H O O L   T H E   U N I V E R S I T Y  O F   C H I C A G O   
  May 2005  
  
This paper can be downloaded without charge at:  The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html  and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection:  
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=739129   
The most famous case in administrative law, Chevron U.S.A. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., has come to be seen as a counter-Marbury, or even a McCulloch v. Maryland, for the administrative state. But in the last period, new debates have broken out over Chevron Step Zero—the initial inquiry into whether Chevron applies at all. These debates are the contemporary location of a longstanding dispute between Justice Scalia and Justice Breyer over whether Chevron is a revolutionary decision, establishing an across-the-board rule, or instead a mere synthesis of preexisting law, inviting a case-by-case inquiry into congressional instructions on the deference question. In the last decade, Justice Breyer’s case-by-case view has enjoyed significant victories. Two trilogies of cases—one explicitly directed to the Step Zero question, another implicitly so directed—suggest that the Chevron framework may not apply (a) to agency decisions not preceded by formal procedures and (b) to agency decisions that involve large-scale questions about agency authority. Both of these trilogies threaten to unsettle the Chevron framework, and to do so in a way that produces unnecessary complexity for judicial review and damaging results for regulatory law. These problems can be reduced through two steps. First, courts should adopt a broader understanding of Chevron’s scope. Second, courts should acknowledge that the argument for Chevron deference is strengthened, not weakened, when major questions of statutory structure are involved. 
Over twenty years after its birth, the Supreme Court’s decision in Chevron U.S.A. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.1 shows no sign of losing its influence. On the contrary, the decision has become foundational, even a quasi-constitutional text—the undisputed starting point for any assessment of the allocation of authority between federal courts and administrative agencies. Ironically, Justice Stevens, the author of Chevron, had no broad ambitions for the decision; the Court did not mean to do anything dramatic.2 But shortly after it appeared, Chevron was quickly taken to establish a new * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of Political Science, University of Chicago. I am grateful to Douglas Lichtman, Richard Posner, Adrian Vermeule, and participants in the work-in-progress lunch at the University of Chicago Law School for valuable comments on a previous draft. Blake Roberts provided valuable research assistance. 1 467 U.S. 837 (1984). As a sign of Chevron’s influence, consider the fact that the decision was cited 2,414 times in its first decade (between 1984 and January 1, 1994), 2,584 times in its next six years (between January 1, 1994 and January 1, 2000), and 2,235 times in its next five years (between January 1, 2000 and January 28, 2005). LEXIS search, March, 2005. 2 See Robert Percival, Environmental Law in the Supreme Court: Highlights from the Marshall Papers, 23 ENVTL. L. REP. 10606, 10613 (1993). In fact it is possible, and fascinating, to trace a series of opinions in which Justice Stevens expressed reservations about the broad reading of Chevron, and attempted to domesticate the decision. See, e.g., Young v. Community Nutrition Institute, 476 U.S. 974, 985 (1986) (Stevens, J., dissenting); INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987); Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of approach to judicial review of agency interpretations of law,3 going so far as to establish a kind of counter-Marbury for the administrative state. It seemed to declare that in the face of ambiguity, it is emphatically the province and duty of the administrative department to say what the law is.4 
Chevron also appeared to have imperialistic aspirations, cutting across countless areas of substantive law and the full range of procedures by which agencies might interpret statutory law. Some of those ambitions have been realized, for Chevron has had a fundamental impact on areas as disparate as taxation,5 labor law,6 environmental protection,7 immigration,8 foods and drugs,9 and highway safety.10 In all of these areas, and many more, Chevron has signaled a substantial increase in agency discretion to make policy through statutory interpretation. For this reason, Chevron might well be seen not only as a kind of counter-Marbury, but even more fundamentally as the administrative state’s very own McCulloch v. Maryland,11 permitting agencies to do as they wish so long as there is a reasonable connection between agency choices and congressional instructions. This grant of permission seemed to depend on a distinctive account of legal interpretation, one that sees resolution of statutory ambiguity as involving judgments of principle and policy, and insists that the executive, not the courts, should be making those judgments.12 Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687 (1995). See also Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576, 595 n.2 (2000) (Stevens, J., dissenting) (endorsing “fully” Justice Breyer’s narrow reading of Chevron). 3 See, e.g., Kenneth Starr, Judicial Review in the Post-Chevron Era, 3 YALE J. REG. 283 (1986); Richard Pierce, Chevron and its Aftermath: Judicial Review of Agency Interpretations of Statutory Provisions, 41 VAND. L. REV. 301 (1988). On the real-world consequences of Chevron, see Peter Schuck and E. Donald Elliott, To the Chevron Station: An Empirical Study of Federal Administrative Law, 42 DUKE L.J. 984 (1989). Schuck and Elliott find a significant effect from Chevron, an increase in affirmance rates from 71% in the pre-Chevron year of 1984 to 81% in the post-Chevron year of 1985. Over more extended periods, studies are hard to conduct, because prospective litigants will adjust their mix of cases to the rules governing judicial review of agency action; when challenges are hard to sustain under doctrines of deference, fewer challenges will be brought. On the other hand, agencies and their lawyers may adjust their own practices to deference doctrines as well, and hence take legal risks that they would not assume if courts were less likely to defer. Relevant findings, exploring the importance of whether a panel is composed of Republican or Democratic appointees to the application of Chevron, can be found in Frank Cross and Emerson Tiller, Judicial Partisanship and Obedience to Legal Doctrine: Whistleblowing on the Federal Courts of Appeals, 107 YALE L.J. 2155 (1998) (finding that allRepublican panels are particularly willing to strike down agency action at the behest of an industry challenge, notwithstanding Chevron). 4 See Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. 137, 177 (1803) (“It is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial department to say what the laws is.”). 5 Atlantic Mutual Ins. Co. v. Commissioner, 523 U.S. 382 (1998); Tate & Lyle v. Commissioner, 87 F.3d 99 (3d Cir. 1996). 6 See NLRB v. United Food Workers Union, 484 U.S. 112 (1987); Cavert Acquisition Co. v. NLRB, 83 F.3d 598 (3d Cir 1996). 7 See Chemical Manufacturers Association v. NRDC, 470 U.S. 116 (1985). 8 See INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987). 9 Medtronic, Inc. v. Lohr, 518 U.S. 470 (1996). 10 Geier v. American Honda Motor Co., 529 U.S. 861 (2000). 11 17 U.S. 316 (1819). 12 See infra notes 40-44. 
In the last fifteen years, however, the simplest interpretations of Chevron have unraveled. Like a novel or even a poem, the decision has inspired fresh and occasionally even shocking readings. In some cases, the Court appears to have moved strongly in the direction of pre-Chevron law, in an evident attempt to reassert the primacy of the judiciary in statutory interpretation. At times, the effort to re-establish judicial supremacy has been quite explicit.13 But the result has not been a restoration of pre-Chevron principles; it has instead been the addition of several epicycles to the Chevron framework, producing not only a decrease in agency authority, but also a significant increase in uncertainty about the appropriate approach. More than at any time in recent years, a threshold question—the scope of judicial review—has become one of the most vexing in regulatory cases.14 
Chevron famously creates a two-step inquiry for courts to follow in reviewing agency interpretations of law.15 The first step asks whether Congress has “directly spoken to the precise question at issue,” an inquiry that requires an assessment of whether Congress’s intent “is clear” and “unambiguously expressed.”16 The second step asks whether the agency’s interpretation is “permissible,” which is to say reasonable in light of the underlying law.17 It is an understatement to say that a great deal of judicial and academic attention has been paid to the foundations and meaning of Chevron’s two-step inquiry.18 But in the last period, the most important and confusing questions have involved neither step. Instead they involve Chevron Step Zero—the initial inquiry into whether the Chevron framework applies at all.19 The Supreme Court has issued several important Step Zero decisions,20 which clarify a number of questions but also offer complex and conflicting guidance. As we shall see, the area is pervaded by legal fictions about congressional understandings, and the proliferation of fictions has vindicated the 13 See INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987); Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687 (1995); FDA v. Brown & Williamson, 529 U.S. 120 (2000). 14 A detailed discussion can be found in Lisa Schultz Bressman, How Mead Has Muddled Judicial Review of Agency Action, VALD. L. REV. (forthcoming 2005). 15 467 U.S. at 842-44. 16 Id. at 842-43. 17 Id. at 843. 18 See, e.g., Thomas Merrill, Judicial Deference to Executive Precedent, 101 YALE L.J. 969 (1992); Clark Byse, Judicial Review of Administrative Interpretation of Statutes: An Analysis of Chevron’s Step Two, 2 ADMIN. L.J. 255 (1988); Thomas Merrill, Textualism and the Future of the Chevron Doctrine, 72 WASH U. L.Q. 351 (1994); Richard Pierce, Chevron and its Aftermath: Judicial Review of Agency Interpretations of Statutory Provisions, 41 VAND. L. REV. 301 (1988); Note, “How Clear is Clear” in Chevron’s Step One?, 118 HARV. L. REV. 1687 (2005); Kenneth Starr, Judicial Review in the Post-Chevron Era, 3 YALE J. REG. 283 (1986). 19 I borrow the term from Thomas W. Merrill and Kristin E. Hickman, Chevron’s Domain, 89 GEO. L.J. 833, 836 (2001). 20 Christensen v. Harris County, 529 U.S. 576 (2000); United States v. Mead, 533 U.S. 218 (2001); Barnhart v. Walton, 535 U.S. 212 (2002). fears of those who have insisted on the importance of a simple answer to the Step Zero question.21 
My principal purpose here is to provide an understanding of the foundations and nature of the Step Zero dilemma, and to suggest how that dilemma should be resolved. Step Zero has become the central location of an intense and longstanding disagreement between the Court’s two administrative law specialists, Justice Breyer and Justice Scalia.22 In fact it is impossible to understand the current debates without reference to this disagreement. In the 1980s, the two converged, apparently independently, on a distinctive understanding of Chevron, one that roots the decision in a theory of implicit congressional delegation of law-interpreting power to administrative agencies.23 Both justices explicitly recognized that any understanding of legislative instructions is a “legal fiction”24; both approved of resort to that fiction. But the two sharply disagreed about its meaning and content. Here, as elsewhere, Justice Scalia seeks clear and simple rules, intended to reduce the burdens of decision-making for lower courts and litigants.25 And here, as elsewhere, Justice Breyer prefers a case-by-case approach, one that eschews simplicity in the interest of (what he sees as) accuracy.26 This kind of disagreement, involving a classic rules-standards debate,27 echoes throughout the law, but as we shall see, it has distinctive resonance in the context of judicial review of agency interpretations of law. 
On an important matter, Justice Scalia’s approach has largely triumphed, at least thus far: When agency decisions have the force of law, or follow a formal procedure, Chevron supplies a simple rule, notwithstanding early efforts to cabin its reach.28 In recent years, however, Justice Breyer’s approach has enjoyed a partial but significant victory, on the theory that Chevron should not be taken to cede law-interpreting power to 21 See Mead, 533 U.S. at 239, 245-47 (Scalia, J., dissenting); Adrian Vermeule, Mead in the Trenches, 71 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 847 (2003). 22 Justice Breyer taught administrative law for many years at Harvard Law School; Justice Scalia did the same at the University of Virginia Law School and the University of Chicago Law School. 23 Stephen Breyer, Judicial Review of Questions of Law and Policy, 38 ADMIN. L. REV. 363 (1986); Antonin Scalia, Judicial Deference to Agency Interpretations of Law, 1989 DUKE L.J. 511. 24 This point is emphasized and explored in David J. Barron and Elena Kagan, Chevron’s Nondelegation Doctrine, 2001 SUP. CT. REV. 201. 25 See Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law As a Law of Rules, 56 U. CHI. L. REV. 1175 (1989). 26 See Stephen Breyer, On the Uses of Legislative History in Interpreting Statutes, 65 S. CAL. L. REV. 845 (1992). 27 See Louis Kaplow, Rules v.s Standards: An Economic Analysis, 42 Duke LJ 557 (1992); Kathleen Sullivan, Foreword: The Justices of Rules and the Justices of Standards, 106 Harv L Rev 22 (1992). 28 INS v. Cardoza Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987). As we shall see, this claim must be qualified by reference to recent developments involving major questions. See infra 198-231. agencies in circumstances in which it is implausible to infer a congressional delegation. A trilogy of cases, unambiguously directed to Step Zero, has suggested that when agencies have not exercised delegated power to act with the force of law, Chevron may not provide the governing framework.29 In a separate trilogy of cases,30 the Court has also raised Step Zero questions simply because it has suggested the possibility that deference will be reduced, or even nonexistent, if a “major question” is involved, one that goes to the heart of the regulatory scheme at issue. The apparent theory is that Congress should not be taken to have asked agencies to resolve those questions. 
I suggest that both trilogies point in unfortunate directions. As for the first: The “force of law” test is a crude way of determining whether Chevron deference is appropriate, and it introduces far too much complexity into the deference issue. The Court is apparently seeking to allow Chevron deference only or mostly when agency decisions have followed procedures that guarantee a kind of deliberation and reflectiveness. But that goal, however appealing, cannot justify the high level of complexity that the first trilogy has introduced. As for the second: Major questions are not easily distinguished from less major ones, and the considerations that underlie Chevron apply with more, not less, force when major questions are involved. To be sure, it is possible to defend a background principle that limits agency discretion when constitutionally sensitive interests are at stake.31 But that principle should not be converted into a general presumption in favor of limiting agency authority—a presumption that would encode a kind of status quo bias, or possibly even a strong antiregulatory “tilt,” into the Chevron framework. 
My argument, in short, is that where fairly possible, the Step Zero question should be resolved in favor of applying the standard Chevron framework—a framework that has the dual virtues of simplifying the operation of regulatory law and giving policymaking authority to institutions that are likely to have the virtues of specialized competence and political accountability. The Court’s emerging steps in favor of a more complex framework, calling for independent judicial judgment in certain circumstances, are a product of an evident desire to constrain agency discretion when such discretion seems particularly unlikely to be fairly exercised.32 But the Court’s goals can be accomplished in much simpler and better ways, above all by insisting on the rule of law constraints embodied in Steps One and Two, and on continued judicial review for arbitrariness. 
This Article comes in five parts. Part II explores the early debates over Chevron, with particular emphasis on the striking contrast between then-Judge Breyer’s effort to domesticate the decision by reading it to permit case-by-case inquiries and Justice Scalia’s insistence that Chevron is a dramatic development that establishes an across-theboard presumption. Part III investigates Step Zero trilogy in which the Court has held that Chevron applies to agency decisions having the force of law or backed by relatively formal procedures, while requiring a case-by-case inquiry into whether Chevron applies to less formal agency action. Part IV explores cases in which the Court has also failed to apply Chevron in the ordinary way, apparently on the theory that major questions, involving the basic reach of regulatory statutes, are for courts rather than agencies. Part V briefly concludes. 
In Chevron, the Court announced its two-step approach without giving a clear sense of the theory that justified it. The case itself involved the decision of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to define “stationary source”33 under the Clean Air Act as an entire factory, rather than each pollution-emitting unit within the plant. The Supreme Court insisted that because the statute was ambiguous, the EPA could supply whatever (reasonable) definition it chose. But why, exactly, should agencies be permitted to interpret statutory ambiguities as they see fit, subject only to the limitations of reasonableness? The Court emphasized that Congress sometimes explicitly delegates law-interpreting power to agencies34; if the Clean Air Act had said “stationary source (as defined by the Administrator),” judges would have to accept administrative judgments. 32 See Bressman, supra note 14. 33 42 U.S.C. § 7502 (c). 34 467 U.S. at 844. Of course the Clean Air Act contained no explicit delegation. But the Court added that “sometimes the legislative delegation to an agency on a particular question is implicit rather than explicit.”35 If so, the court must accept any reasonable interpretation. 
But why should a court find an implicit delegation in the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) or the Clean Air Act, the governing statutory provisions in Chevron itself? The APA does not appear to delegate law-interpreting power to agencies; on the contrary, it specifies that the “reviewing court shall decide all relevant questions of law, [and] interpret statutory provisions.”36 This phrase seems to suggest that ambiguities must be resolved by courts and hence that the Chevron framework is wrong. But by empowering the EPA to issue regulations, perhaps the Clean Air Act is best taken to say that the agency is implicitly entrusted with the interpretation of statutory terms. If so, the reviewing court must continue to follow the APA and decide “all relevant questions of law”; but the answer to the relevant questions will depend on what the EPA has said, because under the Clean Air Act, the law is what the EPA says it is.37 In Chevron, the Court referred to this possibility, noting that Congress might have wanted the agency to strike the relevant balance with the belief “that those with great expertise and charged with responsibility for administering the provision would be in a better position [than courts or Congress itself] to do so.”38 But the Court did not insist that Congress in fact so thought. On the contrary, it said that Congress’s particular intention “matters not.”39 
Instead the Court briefly emphasized judges’ lack of expertise and, in more detail, their lack of electoral legitimacy. In interpreting law, the agency may “properly rely upon the incumbent administration’s views of wise policy to inform its judgments. While agencies are not directly accountable to the people, the Chief Executive is.”40 Hence it would be appropriate for agencies, rather than judges, to resolve “competing interests which Congress itself either inadvertently did not resolve, or intentionally left to be resolved in light of everyday realities.”41 35 Id. 36 5 U.S.C. § 706. 37 See Henry Monaghan, Marbury and the Administrative State, 83 COLUM. L. REV. 1 (1983). 38 467 U.S. at 865. 39 Id. 40 Id. 41 Id. 
The Chevron Court’s approach was much clearer than the rationale that accounted for it. The Court’s reference to expertise suggested one possible rationale: Perhaps the Court was saying that the resolution of statutory ambiguities sometimes calls for technical expertise, and that in such cases deference would be appropriate. On this view, having roots in the New Deal’s enthusiasm for technical competence,42 specialized administrators, rather than judges, should make the judgments of policy that are realistically at stake in disputes over ambiguous terms. But the Court’s emphasis on accountability suggested a second possibility: Perhaps the two-step inquiry is based on a healthy recognition that in the face of ambiguity, agency decisions must rest on judgments of value, and those judgments should be made politically rather than judicially. On this view, having roots in legal realism,43 value choices are a significant part of statutory construction, and those choices should be made by democratically accountable officials. This reading suggests a third and more ambitious possibility: Perhaps Chevron is rooted in separation of powers, requiring courts to accept executive interpretations of statutory ambiguities in order to guard against judicial displacement of political judgments.44 
In the 1980s, then-Judge Breyer45 and Justice Scalia, both administrative law specialists, rejected these readings of Chevron. They agreed that Chevron must rest on a simple idea: Courts defer to agency interpretations of law when and because Congress has told them to do so. As we shall see, this reading of Chevron has prevailed. If Congress wanted to do so, it could entrench Chevron, by providing that statutory ambiguities must be resolved by agencies; and if Congress sought to overrule Chevron, by calling for independent judicial judgments about legal questions, it could do precisely that. Judge Breyer and Justice Scalia agreed that the national legislature retains control of the deference question, and in this sense Chevron must rest on an understanding of what Congress has instructed courts to do. But their shared emphasis on implicit delegation led Judge Breyer and Justice Scalia to quite different understandings of Chevron’s scope and limitations. Where Judge Breyer sought to domesticate Chevron, treating it as a kind of 42 See JAMES LANDIS, THE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS (1935). 43 See Karl Llewellyn, Some Realism About Realism, 44 HARV. L. REV. 1222 (1931). 44 See Douglas Kmiec, Judicial Deference to Executive Agencies, 2 ADMIN. L.J. 269, 277-28 (1988). 45 For ease of exposition, I shall henceforth refer to “Judge Breyer” when speaking of his 1986 essay, Stephen Breyer, Judicial Review of Questions of Law and Policy, 38 Admin. L. Rev. 363 (1986). “problem” to be solved by reference to established principles, Justice Scalia saw Chevron as a genuinely revolutionary decision, one that would fundamentally alter the relationship between agencies and reviewing courts, and renovate what had long been the law. 
B. Against “Any Simple General Formula”: Breyer’s Plea for Complexity 
Chevron was decided in 1984. In that same year, Judge Breyer, writing for the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, tried to make sense of the Court’s decision.46 His explanation of Chevron pointed to a delegation of law-interpreting authority to agencies. When Congress has not made an express delegation, Judge Breyer wrote, “courts may still infer from the particular statutory circumstances an implicit congressional instruction about the degree of respect or deference they owe the agency on a question of law.”47 The inference would be intensely particularistic; it would rest on an inquiry into “what a sensible legislator would have expected given the statutory circumstances.”48 The expectations of the sensible legislator would depend on an inquiry into institutional competence: “The less important the question of law, the more interstitial its character, the more closely related to the everyday administration of the statute and to the agency's (rather than the court's) administrative or substantive expertise, the less likely it is that Congress (would have) ‘wished’ or ‘expected’ the courts to remain indifferent to the agency's views. Conversely, the larger the question, the more its answer is likely to clarify or stabilize a broad area of law, the more likely Congress intended the courts to decide the question themselves.”49 
Thus Judge Breyer’s approach squarely endorsed the implicit delegation theory, but in a way that required a case-by-case inquiry into what “a sensible legislator would have expected given the statutory circumstances.” With an interstitial question closely connected to “the everyday administration of law,” or calling for agency expertise, deference would be warranted. But with a “larger” question, one whose answer would “stabilize a broad area of law,” an independent judicial assessment would be required. 46 Mayburg v. HHS, 740 F.2d 100, 106 (1st Cir. 1984). 47 Id. 48 Id. 49 Id. 
In 1986, Judge Breyer explored these issues far more systematically, in an essay that has proved to be extremely, and indeed increasingly, influential.50 Judge Breyer’s basic claim was straightforward. In the immediate aftermath of Chevron, existing doctrine seemed to argue for deferential judicial review of agency interpretations of law but stringent judicial review of agency judgments about policy.51 In this sense, the governing standards were “anomalous,” because a rational system would call for “stricter review of matters of law, where courts are more expert, but more lenient review of matters of policy, where agencies are more expert.”52 In Judge Breyer’s view, judicial review should be specifically tailored to the “institutional capacities and strengths” of the judiciary.53 For that tailoring, the simple approach set out in Chevron was hopelessly inadequate. 
Judge Breyer began by emphasizing that before Chevron, courts had been inconsistent on the question of judicial review of agency interpretations of law, with competing strands of deference and independence.54 In order to reconcile the conflict, Judge Breyer noted that courts might defer to agencies either because agencies have a “better understanding of congressional will”55 or because Congress explicitly or implicitly delegated interpretive power to agencies.56 Judge Breyer added, crucially, that the idea of a “legislative intent to delegate the law-interpreting function” is “a kind of legal fiction.”57 When courts find such an intent, they are really imagining “what a hypothetically ‘reasonable’ legislator would have wanted (given the statute’s objectives),” and “looking to practical facts surrounding the administration of a statutory scheme.”58 
In Judge Breyer’s view, this imagining should lead to a case-by-case inquiry into Congress’s hypothesized intentions. If the question calls for special expertise, the agency is more likely to be able to answer it correctly; hence an ordinary question of agency administration would call for deference.59 But if the question is “an important one,” an 50 See Stephen Breyer, Judicial Review of Questions of Law and Policy, 38 ADMIN. L. REV. 363 (1986). 51 Id. at 364-65. 52 Id. at 397. 53 Id. at 398. 54 Id. at 365-67. 55 Id. at 368. 56 Id. at 369. 57 Id. at 370. 58 Id. 59 Id. independent judicial approach is preferable. “Congress is more likely to have focused upon, and answered, major questions, while leaving interstitial matters to answer themselves in the course of the statute’s daily administration.”60 (That sentence has proved to be especially important, as we shall soon see.) Judge Breyer added that a court should “consider the extent to which the answer to the legal question will clarify, illuminate or stabilize a broad area of the law,” and whether “the agency can be trusted to give a properly balanced answer.”61 Judge Breyer insisted that the reconciliation of the apparently conflicting lines of cases depends on inquiries of this sort. 
At this stage Judge Breyer was confronted with an obvious question about the relationship between his views and the Court’s approach in Chevron. To answer that question, he embarked on a new discussion with a revealing title: “The Problem of the Chevron Case.”62 He noted that Chevron could be read as embodying “the complex approach” that he endorsed; but it could also be seen “as embodying a considerably simpler approach,” one that accepts any reasonable agency interpretation in the face of ambiguity.63 Not surprisingly, Judge Breyer argued strenuously against that latter approach. Notwithstanding “its attractive simplicity,” he urged, the broad reading could not survive “in the long run.”64 
Judge Breyer offered three reasons for this conclusion. The first involves the sheer diversity of situations in which courts might be asked to defer to agency interpretations. No simple formula can fit so “many different types of circumstances, including different statutes, different kinds of application, different substantive regulatory or administrative problems, and different legal postures.”65 Second, and ironically, a simple rule will increase delay and complexity. Under Chevron, courts will sometimes have to remand a case to an agency to establish a reasonable interpretation; because judges are at least as likely to produce the correct interpretation, such Chevron remands will be “a waste of time.”66 Third, the simple view “asks judges to develop a cast of mind 60 Id. 61 Id. at 371. 62 Id. at 372. 63 Id. at 373. 64 Id. at 373. 65 Id. 66 Id. at 378. that often is psychologically difficult to maintain.”67 The reason is that after a detailed examination of a legal question, it is difficult “to believe both that the agency’s interpretation is legally wrong, and that its interpretation is reasonable.”68 
In the end, Judge Breyer concluded, these “factors will tend to force a less univocal, less far-reaching interpretation of Chevron.” Inevitably, “we will find the courts actually following more varied approaches,” without adhering to any “single simple judicial formula.”69 Judge Breyer urged, in short, that Chevron should be read in accordance with the most sensible understanding of what had preceded it, which entailed a case-specific inquiry into Congress’s fictional instructions on the question of deference.70 Far from being a revolution, or even a radical departure, Chevron should be taken to codify the best understanding of existing law. 
Writing just three years later, Justice Scalia defended Chevron in exactly the same terms as Judge Breyer (though without referring to his essay).71 He began by insisting that the decision ultimately rested on a reading of congressional instructions—and hence that prominent justifications for the decision, pointing to agency expertise and separation of powers, were irrelevant.72 Quoting a lower court, Justice Scalia said that the deference judgment must be “a function of Congress’ intent on the subject as revealed in the particular statutory scheme at issue.”73 For Justice Scalia, as for Judge Breyer, the central issue is what Congress has told courts to do, for the national legislature maintains ultimate authority over the deference question. 
Justice Scalia also agreed with Judge Breyer’s reading of pre-Chevron law. The lower courts had tried to decide the deference question on a case-by-case basis, producing a statute-by-statute evaluation that was a recipe for confusion. “Chevron, however, if it is 67 Id. at 379. 68 Id. at 379. 69 Id. at 381. 70 Candor compels an acknowledgement that an extremely young man, writing in the same period, analyzed the Chevron issue in terms akin to those used by Judge Breyer. See Cass R. Sunstein, Constitutionalism After the New Deal, 101 HARV. L. REV. 421, 465-70 (1987). A somewhat older man believes that the conclusion in id., favoring case-by-case inquiries into the deference question, was mistaken. 71 Antonin Scalia, Judicial Deference to Agency Interpretations of Law, 1989 Duke L.J. 511. 72 Id. at 512-13. 73 Id. at 516. to be believed, replaced this statute-by-statute evaluation (which was assuredly a font of uncertainty and litigation) with an across-the-board presumption that, in the case of ambiguity, agency discretion is what is meant.”74 Here again Justice Scalia is in complete accord with Judge Breyer; but where Judge Breyer challenges the presumption as unacceptably simplistic, Justice Scalia defends it on exactly that ground—and hence as a dramatic departure from what preceded it. 
How might that presumption be defended? Returning to the touchstone of legislative instructions, Justice Scalia acknowledges that Chevron is “not a 100% accurate estimation of modern congressional intent”75; deference does not always capture what Congress wants. But “the prior case-by-case evaluation was not so either”76—a point that might be buttressed with the suggestion that such evaluations will increase the burdens of decision while also producing a degree of error from inevitably fallible judges. In the end, Justice Scalia agrees with Judge Breyer on yet another point: Any account of congressional instructions reflects “merely a fictional, presumed intent.”77 A judgment about that fictional and presumed intent, Justice Scalia seems to say, should also be based on a judgment about what would amount to a sensible instruction by a sensible legislature. 
But what makes sense should be informed by a central point: any fictional or presumed intent will operate “principally as a background rule of law against which Congress can legislate.”78 And by emphasizing this point, Justice Scalia marks his crucial departure from Judge Breyer. “If we are speaking of fictional intent, Chevron, taken to provide a simple background rule, is unquestionably better than what preceded it,” simply because “Congress now knows that the ambiguities it creates, whether intentionally or unintentionally, will be resolved, within the bounds of permissible interpretation, not by the courts but by a particular agency, whose policy biases will ordinarily be known.”79 Thus Justice Scalia offers a dynamic rather than static understanding of Chevron. Where Judge Breyer asks whether a univocal deference rule accurately reflects (fictive) congressional understandings, Justice Scalia focuses on the effects of a deference rule on 74 Id. 75 Id. at 517. 76 Id. 77 Id. 78 Id. 79 Id. subsequent congressional activity – a focus that, in his view, argues for clarity and simplicity. 
To this Justice Scalia added two points about the scope of Chevron, thus defended. First, the emphasis on “real or presumed legislative intent to confer discretion” should obliterate the old idea that longstanding and consistent interpretations would receive more deference than recent and inconsistent ones.80 Second, and more fundamentally, Justice Scalia suggested the distinct possibility that under Chevron, it would be necessary to revise a “distinction of yesteryear,” which involves “the distinction among the various manners in which the agency makes its legal views known.”81 Even mere litigating positions might receive Chevron deference, for “if the matter at issue is one for which the agency has responsibility, if all requisite procedures have been complied with, and if there is no doubt that the position urged has full and considered approval of the agency head, it is far from self-evident that the agency's views should be denied their accustomed force simply because they are first presented in the prosecution of a lawsuit.”82 
At this point Justice Scalia offered a jurisprudential suggestion, one that has turned out to be quite prescient. In his view, “there is a fairly close correlation between” enthusiasm for Chevron and a commitment to textualist methods of interpretation.83 “One who finds more often (as I do) that the meaning of a statute is apparent from its text and from its relationship with other laws, thereby finds less often that the triggering requirement for Chevron deference exists.”84 Those who reject plain meaning, and are “willing to permit the apparent meaning of a statute to be impeached by the legislative history, will more frequently find agency-liberating ambiguity, and will discern a much broader range of ‘reasonable’ interpretation that the agency may adopt and to which the courts must pay deference. The frequency with which Chevron will require that judge to accept an interpretation he thinks wrong is infinitely greater.”85 80 Id. at 519. 81 Id. 82 Id. 83 Id. at 521. 84 Id. 85 Id. 
Justice Scalia noticed that Chevron had not yet marked a revolution in the law. “The opinions we federal judges read, and the cases we cite, are full of references to the old criteria of ‘agency expertise,’ ‘the technical and complex nature of the question presented,’ ‘the consistent and long-standing agency position’—and it will take some time to understand that those concepts are no longer relevant, or no longer relevant in the same way.”86 
“in the long run Chevron will endure and be given its full scope—not so much because it represents a rule that is easier to follow and thus easier to predict (though that is true enough), but because it more accurately reflects the reality of government, and thus more adequately serves its needs.”87 
Where Judge Breyer predicted a disintegation of Chevron’s “univocal” approach, on the ground that it was ill-suited to reality, Justice Scalia contended that Chevron would be given its full scope, and amount to a major and novel development, precisely because of its univocal quality. As we shall see, Breyer’s prediction appears to have proved to be more accurate; but in important respects the jury is still out. 
It should be clear that the disagreement between Judge Breyer and Justice Scalia involves the pervasive choice between standards and rules. Judge Breyer urged that no rule could solve the deference problem, simply because it would produce so much inaccuracy. Justice Scalia can be taken to have responded that a rule is likely to be as accurate as any standard and that it has the further advantage of reducing decisional burdens on courts. Seeing a deference rule as relevant to Congress’ subsequent performance, Justice Scalia emphasizes, as Judge Breyer does not, that a simple rule will provide better guidance to subsequent legislators. If the choice between rules and standards turns in part on the costs of error and the costs of decisions,88 then Judge Breyer and Justice Scalia might be seen as disagreeing about exactly how to assess those costs. 86 Id. 87 Id. 88 See Kaplow, supra note. 
D. Reading Deference Doctrines Jurisprudentially: Chevron As Erie If Chevron is read in light of the shared concerns of Judge Breyer and Justice Scalia, it can be understood as a natural outgrowth of the twentieth-century shift from judicial to agency lawmaking.89 In numerous contexts, judge-made law has been replaced by administrative regulation, often pursuant to vague or open-ended guidance. The replacement has been spurred by dual commitments to specialized competence and democratic accountability—and also by an understanding of the need for frequent shifts in policy over time, with new understandings of fact and with new values as well. For banking, telecommunications, and environmental protection – among many other areas – changing circumstances often require agencies to adept old provisions to unanticipated problems. Despite the Court’s lack of ambition for its decision, the Chevron opinion, approving a bold and novel initiative by the Reagan Administration, did speak explicitly of the role of expertise and accountability in statutory interpretation. And if interpretation of unclear terms cannot operate without some judgments of the interpreter’s own,90 then the argument for Chevron, as the appropriate legal fiction, seems overwhelming. Indeed, Chevron can be seen in this light as a close analogue to Erie Railroad v. Tompkins91—as a suggestion that law and interpretation often involve no “brooding omnipresence in the sky” but instead discretionary judgments to be made by appropriate institutions. For resolution of statutory ambiguities, no less than for identification of common law, federal courts may not qualify as appropriate. 
I am suggesting, then, that Justice Scalia’s argument about the need for a clear background rule can be strengthened with a strong emphasis on Judge Breyer’s claims about expertise, an appreciation of the pressing need for agency flexibility over time, and a recognition that when agencies interpret ambiguities, a judgment of value, operating under the President, is often involved. As we shall see, many of the post-Chevron cases, 89 An illuminating study is Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor, A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins of Workers’ Compensation (1999). See also Jerry Mashaw, Due Process in the Administrative State (1983), for a valuable discussion in the context of social security disability determinations. 90 There is a connection here between Chevron and Ronald Dworkin’s view on interpretation, as set out in Law’s Empire (1985). Dworkin contends that interpretation requires a judicial judgment about “fit” with existing materials and also about “justification” of those materials; his conception of law as integrity asks judges to put existing materials in their “best constructive light.” In modern government, courts are often less capable of accomplishing this task than are agencies, precisely because of their comparatively lesser expertise and accountability. Hence acceptance of Dworkin’s account of interpretation, or any account in the same general family, is easily enlisted on behalf of Chevron. 91 304 U.S. 64 (1938). read in their context, testify to the importance of these points. But if Chevron is read both broadly and ambitiously, it runs immediately into Judge Breyer’s objection that it is too crude and univocal. 
The disagreements between Justices Scalia and Breyer could manifest themselves at multiple points. Suppose that the question involves Chevron Step One. We should expect a degree of simplicity from Justice Scalia, in the form of deference to the agency’s interpretation unless the text unambiguously forbids it; and the expectation is met in many cases.92 We might expect Justice Breyer to be less willing to find statutory language to be plain and hence to be willing to defer to agencies even when Justice Scalia is not; and there is evidence to this effect as well.93 
In these respects, the tempting idea that Justice Scalia’s enthusiastically proChevron approach will be more deferential to agencies is only partly right. If Justice Scalia is correct to say that Chevron enthusiasts are also likely to insist on plain meaning, then those who favor the “simple” reading of Chevron will be more likely to find Step One violations. There is some evidence that this is true.94 And in an important case that actually upholds an agency’s interpretation, the Court went out of its way to reject the strong and simple version of Chevron in favor of the weaker and more complex version—with explicit citation to the 1986 essay by then-Judge Breyer.95 
In fact, the 1980s disagreement might have been expected to involve something far larger than Step Zero. While Justice Scalia would adopt a general rule of deference to agency interpretations, Justice Breyer would call for a case-by-case inquiry into (fictional, hypothesized) legislative expectations. The major locus of the disagreement, however, has become much narrower. It involves the threshold question whether Chevron is applicable at all—a question ignored by Judge Breyer in 1986 and prominently 92 See Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687, 699 (1995) (Scalia, J., dissenting); Gen. Dynamics Land Sys. v. Cline, 540 U.S. 581 (2004); Smith v. City of Jackson, 125 S. Ct. 1536 (2005). 93 See MCI Telecommunications Corp. v. AT&T, 512 U.S. 218 (1994). 94 Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687 (1995); MCI Telecommunications Corp., 512 U.S.. 95 Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon, 515 U.S. 687 (1995). presaged by Justice Scalia in 1989. In Chevron’s first decade, this question was largely invisible, at least in the Court itself; and a number of decisions applied the Chevron framework without serious consideration of any Step Zero. 
Consider, for example, Young v. Community Nutrition Institute.96 That case involved a provision saying that “the Secretary [of Health and Human Services] shall promulgate regulations limiting the quantity [of any poisonous or deleterious substance added to any food] to such extent as he finds necessary for the protection of public health."97 The interpretive question, one of considerable practical importance, was whether “to such extent as he finds necessary” modified “shall promulgate,” so as to allow the Secretary not to act at all, or instead modified “limiting the quantity,” so as to require him to issue regulations, but with such severity as he chose. The agency had settled on the former interpretation, but not through any formal procedure; instead the agency’s informal understanding was involved. Without even pausing to consider the applicability of the Chevron framework, the Court gave deference to the agency and upheld its interpretation.98 
Does Young suggest that all agency interpretations of law should receive Chevron deference? If the underlying theory involves implicit (and fictional) delegation, the real question is when Congress should be understood to have delegated law-interpreting power to a regulatory agency. The broadest imaginable answer would be simple: Whenever an agency makes an interpretation of law, that interpretation falls under the Chevron framework. This answer would eliminate Step Zero altogether. But everyone should be willing to agree that the answer is too broad. Suppose, for example, that an agency is interpreting the Administrative Procedure Act. Is the FDA permitted to interpret the APA’s provisions governing reviewability, and hence to decide, within the bounds of reasonableness, whether its own decisions are reviewable? Is the NLRB’s understanding of the APA’s substantial evidence test controlling, or does the Court interpret that test on its own? The clear answer to such questions is that Chevron is 96 476 U.S. 974 (1986). 97 21 U.S.C. § 346. 98 FDIC v. Philadelphia Gear Corp., 476 U.S. 426, 438-439 (1986); Mead Corp. v. Tilley, 490 U.S. 714 (1989); NationsBank of N.C., N.A. v. Variable Annuity Life Ins. Co., 513 U.S. 251, 255 (1995); Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation v. LTV Corp., 496 U.S. 633, 642-643, 647-648 (1990). appear best to permit the resolution of ambiguities to come from a politically accountable actor. 
Nor is this particular example hypothetical. It lies at the heart of the looming litigation over the validity of the EPA’s recent decision to regulate mercury, a hazardous pollutant, under a trading system.184 Indeed the example is a version of Chevron itself, which involved the EPA’s decision to adopt a modest kind of (intrafirm) trading system through its definition of “source.” Chevron hardly involved an interstitial question of the sort at issue in the everyday administration of the Clean Air Act; it involved a significant rethinking of the definition of the statutory term “source.”185 Of course we are speaking of legal fictions, but why should it be assumed that Congress (fictionally) intended the courts, rather than agencies, to define that term? Isn’t that a bad and unhelpful fiction? 
Judge Breyer’s central response is that “Congress is more likely to have focused upon, and answered, major questions, while leaving interstitial matters to answer themselves in the course of the statute’s daily administration.”186 But this is unconvincing. If Congress has in fact focused upon, and answered, major questions, agencies must accept those answers under Chevron Step One. By hypothesis, we are dealing not with such cases but with those in which statutes are ambiguous, and the only question is whether to accept an agency’s resolution or instead to rely on the interpretation chosen by a federal court. For “major questions,” the agency’s specialized fact-finding competence and democratic accountability might well be more relevant, not less. 
A better justification for the distinction between interstitial and major questions would involve agency incentives. Perhaps there is less reason to trust agencies when they are making large-scale judgments about statutory meaning. Perhaps parochial pressures, such as those imposed by interest groups, will distort agency decisions in one or another direction; perhaps agency self-interest, such as the expansion of administrative authority, will increase the likelihood of bias. Judge Breyer might believe that on interstitial questions, involving everyday administration, agencies can be trusted, but that the same is not true when a major decision is involved. And if agencies were systematically less 184 See Lisa Heinzerling & Rene Stenzor, A Perfect Storm: Mercury and the Bush Administration, 34 ENV. L. REPT. 10297 (2004). 185 See ROBERT PERCIVAL ET AL., ENVIRONMENTAL LAW AND POLICY (2003). 186 Id. reliable on major questions, the argument for a reduced degree of deference would be quite plausible. 
Nonetheless, that argument faces large problems. As I have noted, the line between interstial and major questions is thin. If the line can be drawn, it is hardly clear that courts are in a substantially better position to resolve the “major” questions than agencies are. Perhaps agencies are responding to parochial pressures, but it is also possible that their judgments are a product of specialized competence and democratic will; no sustained evidence justifies the suggestion that when agencies make decisions on major questions, bias and self-interest are the motivating factors. In any case, Chevron deference does not give agencies a blank check. It remains the case that agency decisions must not violate clearly expressed legislative will, must represent reasonable interpretations of statutes, and must not be arbitrary in any way.187 These constraints produce significant checks on agency self-interest and bias if they should be present. 
As we have seen, Judge Breyer’s challenge to the simple reading of Chevron refers more generally to the psychological difficulty, for judges, of believing that an agency interpretation is both reasonable and wrong; and that difficulty is likely to be heightened for major questions. Perhaps he is right. But it is hardly unfamiliar for judges to think “wrong but reasonable.” They might believe, for example, that a jury’s verdict is incorrect but not clearly erroneous, or that some statutes, even major ones, are hard to defend but not “irrational.”188 In any case, doctrines of deference ought not to be based on the psychological difficulties of judges. Perhaps Judge Breyer’s point should be taken as purely predictive—as a claim that judges are unlikely to follow the simplified version of Chevron generally or for major questions. If so, the path of the law is certainly a point in his favor; indeed, the decisions of the past twenty years suggest that he was uncannily prescient. But he clearly means his point as a normative one—as a challenge to the simplified reading of Chevron—and to this extent, the psychological point is neither here nor there.189 187 See note supra. 188 See, e.g., Williamson v. Lee Optical, 348 U.S. 483 (1955). 189 Perhaps Judge Breyer ought to be taken to be venturing a version of “ought implies can,” through the suggestion that the Supreme Court should not ask judges to maintain an attitude that is psychologically unrealistic. So stated, the argument is logical, but the use of lenient standards of review suggests that judges can indeed maintain that attitude. Chevron applies to jurisdictional disputes,190 and this particular Step Zero question remains unsettled in the lower courts.191 It is easy to understand the opposing views. Chevron rests on a theory of implied delegation, and perhaps Congress should not be taken to have intended to delegate to agencies the power to decide on the scope of their own authority. That question, it might be thought, ought to be answered by an independent institution, not by the agency itself. Thus Justice Brennan urged that judgments about jurisdiction “have not been entrusted to the agency” and might well “conflict with the agency's institutional interests in expanding its own power.”192 In his view, “agencies can claim no special expertise in interpreting a statute confining its jurisdiction,” and Congress cannot be presumed to ask “an agency to fill ‘gaps’ in a statute confining the agency's jurisdiction.”193 
On the other hand, any exemption of jurisdictional questions is vulnerable on two grounds. First, the line between jurisdictional and nonjurisdictional questions is far from clear, and hence any exemption threatens to introduce more complexity into the world of Chevron. Thus Justice Scalia argued that “there is no discernible line between an agency's exceeding its authority and an agency's exceeding authorized application of its authority.”194 Second, the theory that underlies Chevron might well support, rather than undermine, its application to jurisdictional questions. If an agency is asserting or denying jurisdiction over some area, it is either because democratic forces are leading it to do so or because its own specialized competence justifies its jurisdictional decision. Thus Justice Scalia urged that “Congress would naturally expect that the agency would be responsible, within broad limits, for resolving ambiguities in its statutory authority or jurisdiction.”195 Of course the claim about what “Congress would naturally expect” is a fiction; but perhaps it is the most useful one. 194 Id. at 345 (Scalia, J., concurring in the judgment). 195 Id. 190 Miss. Power & Light Co. v. Mississippi, 487 U.S. 357 (1988). 191 See, e.g., Alaska v. Babbitt, 72 F.3d 698 (9th Cir. 1995) (deferring on jurisdictional issue involving definition of “public lands”); Cavert Acquisition Corp. v. NLRB, 83 F.3d 598 (3d Cir. 1996) (deferring on jurisdictional issue involving definition of “employee”); United Trans. Union v. Surface Transp. Bd., 183 F.3d 606 (7th Cir. 1999) (refusing to defer on jurisdictional issue). A recent discussion can be found in NRDC v. Abraham, 355 F.3d 179 (2d Cir. 2004), in which the court, after finding a Step One violation, adds that “it seems highly unlikely that a responsible Congress would implicitly delegate to an agency the power to define the scope of its own power” — and then suggested that Mead (!) provided the appropriate framework. See id. at 199-200. 192 487 U.S. at 387 (Brennan, J., dissenting). 193 Id. 
Consider a prominent example. During the Clinton Administration, the EPA contended that it could assert jurisdiction over greenhouse gases under ambiguous provisions of the Clean Air Act.196 During the Bush Administration, the EPA contended that it could not do so.197 The difference is undoubtedly attributable to some combination of political commitments and readings of relevant evidence. If this is so, there is every reason, one might well think, to give deference to the agency’s jurisdictional judgment under Chevron. 
While the Court has not recently spoken to the question of jurisdiction, it has issued three decisions that bear on the Step Zero question whether Chevron applies to major questions. The meaning of these decisions is far from clear, and it remains to be seen whether they will be taken to carve out a distinct exception to Chevron. But the Court has given strong indications that this is what it means to do, in a way that has an unmistakable link with Judge Breyer’s distinction between incremental and major questions. Ironically, Justice Breyer dissented from the most important and explicit of these decisions—which borrowed, with citation, his central argument. 
(1) An “unlikely” delegation: MCI. The first case in the trilogy is MCI Telecommunications Corp. v. American Telephone and Telegraph.198 The 1934 Communications Act permits the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to “modify” the statutory requirement that carriers file tariffs and charge customers in accordance with the tariffs that have been filed.199 As part of a program of partial deregulation, the FCC issued a regulation providing that only AT&T, as the dominant long-distance carrier, would have to file tariffs; other carriers need not do so. 
At first glance, this was a straightforward Step One question, and by a 6 to 3 vote, the Court held that the agency’s decision was unlawful under Step One. Much of Justice Scalia’s opinion for the Court emphasized the dictionary definition of “modify”—a 196 See Note, Trapped in the Greenhouse?, 54 DUKE L.J. 147 (2004); Note, Carbon Dioxide: A Pollutant in the Air, but Is the EPA Correct that It is Not an Air Pollutant?, 104 Colum. L. Rev. 1996 (2004). 197 Id.; see Memorandum from Robert E. Fabricant, EPA General Counsel, to Marianne L. Horinko, Acting EPA Administrator, at http://www.epa.gov/airlinks/co2petitiongcmemo8-28.pdf. 198 512 U.S. 218 (1994). 199 49 U.S.C. § 203. definition that, in the Court’s view, permitted only “moderate” or “modest” rather than fundamental change. But as Justice Stevens’s dissenting opinion pointed out, a longestablished meaning of “modify”—“to limit or reduce in extent or degree”—was fully compatible with the FCC’s decision. Perhaps, then, MCI could be taken as an odd case in which the Court found a Step One violation because of an emphasis, characteristic in Justice Scalia’s opinions, on what most dictionaries say. And perhaps Justice Scalia’s opinion should be taken as a vindication of his promise, in 1989, that as an advocate of “plain meaning” approaches to interpretation, he would be entirely willing to invoke Chevron Step One to strike down agency action. 
But the Court offered a strong clue that something else was involved. It noted that rate filings are “the essential characteristic of a rate-regulated industry.”200 In this light, it “is highly unlikely that Congress would leave the determination of whether an industry will be entirely, or even substantially, rate-regulated to agency discretion.”201 Thus the Court’s analysis of whether the agency’s decision was a “modification” was undertaken with reference to “the enormous importance to the statutory scheme of the tariff-filing provision.”202 This discussion, and the suggestion about what “Congress would leave” to the agency, seems to suggest that a kind of Step Zero inquiry might be involved, one that raised a question whether Congress intended to delegate this “enormous” question to a regulatory agency. And indeed, the Court’s emphasis on the important, and hardly interstitial, nature of the question at issue might easily be taken as a partial endorsement of Justice Breyer’s approach to the Chevron question. 
(2) Where’s Chevron?: “some degree of deference.” The Court provided a related clue in Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon.203 At issue was a provision of the Endangered Species Act that makes it unlawful to “take” a member of an endangered species.204 The word “take” is in turn defined to mean “harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect, or to attempt to engage in any such conduct.”205 By regulation, the Department of the Interior adopted a broad understanding of the word “take,” interpreting it to include “significant habitat 200 512 U.S. at 231. 201 Id. 202 Id. 203 515 U.S. 687 (1995). 204 16 U.S.C. § 1538(a)(1). 205 16 U.S.C. § 1532(19). modification or degradation where it actually kills or injures wildlife by significantly impairing essential behavioral patterns, including breeding, feeding, or sheltering.”206 Small landowners and logging companies challenged this definition as unlawfully broad. 
Two different opinions would have been unsurprising from the Court. The Court might have upheld the regulation by treating the case as a simple rerun of Chevron itself, involving an ambiguous term (“harm”) and a reasonable agency interpretation of that term. Alternatively, the Court might have struck down the regulation under Chevron Step One on the ground that the term “harm” appears in the context of verbs suggesting intentionality (“harass, pursue, hunt, short, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect”). Perhaps the context forbids an interpretation that would include mere habitat modification and unintended injury to members of endangered species. And indeed, Justice Scalia, true to his account in 1989 and continuing his emphasis on dictionaries in MCI, was willing to find a “plain meaning” of the statute that prohibited the agency’s understanding.207 But the Court did neither of these things. Instead it embarked on its own, entirely independent construction of the statute, suggesting the correctness of the broad construction. For most of the Court’s opinion, it would be reasonable to ask: Where is Chevron? Why does the Court fail to point to statutory ambiguity and the agency’s interpretation? 
After parsing the statute independently, the Court turned to Chevron in a brief paragraph, noting (finally!) that Congress had “not unambiguously manifested its intent” to forbid the regulation.208 And then the Court added a singularly odd sentence: “The latitude the ESA gives the Secretary in enforcing the statute, together with the degree of regulatory expertise necessary to its enforcement, establishes that we owe some degree of deference to the Secretary’s reasonable interpretation.” At that point the Court did not cite Chevron or indeed any of its other decisions on the general question. Instead its citation reads, in full: “See Breyer, Judicial Review of Questions of Law and Policy, 38 Admin. L. Rev. 363, 373 (1986).”209 As it happens, p. 373 of this essay contains the heart of Judge Breyer’s attack on Chevron, on the ground that the proper judicial attitudes 206 50 C.F.R. 17.2 (1994). 207 515 U.S. at 714 (Scalia, J., dissenting). The Court might have invalidated the regulation by reference to some canon of construction, perhaps involving the protection of property rights; and indeed, Justice Scalia’s opinion contains an opening gesture in that direction. Id. 208 Id. at 703. 209 Id. at 703-04. toward review of questions of law cannot “be reduced to any single simple verbal formula.” 
The key paragraph in Sweet Home is cryptic, to be sure, but the Court’s opinion might well be read in a way that fits with the general approach in MCI. The scope of the words “take” and “harm” is not an interstitial question; it goes to the heart of the Endangered Species Act. Narrow definitions would constrict the range of the statutory ban; broad definitions work, in a sense, to expand the agency’s jurisdiction. For this reason, Sweet Home did not present the sort of minor question, involved in everyday administration, which Judge Breyer treated as the core case for judicial deference to agency interpretation. On the other hand, both expertise and accountability are relevant to interpretation of this provision of the Act, and a judgment about the breadth of the term “harm” certainly requires knowledge of the underlying facts. Unlike in MCI, the agency was not fundamentally altering any central feature of the statute. Hence “some degree of deference” was due. But the Court’s refusal to produce a simple Chevron opinion, and its only citation, appear to endorse Breyer’s position on the proper approach. 
(3) “Congress could not have intended to delegate”: Brown & Williamson. It might have been an overreaction to see MCI and Sweet Home as offering a serious qualification of Chevron, or as suggesting that major questions would be treated in any special way. But consider FDA v. Brown & Williamson.210 At issue there was whether the FDA had authority to regulate tobacco and tobacco products. The agency pointed to the statutory language, which defines drug to include “articles (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the body.”211 It would certainly be plausible to argue that under this language and with the assistance of Chevron, the FDA could assert authority over tobacco. At the same time, it could have been concluded that this was a question of agency jurisdiction, for which Chevron deference was inapposite. But the Court took a far more complicated route. Much of its opinion emphasized the wide range of tobacco-specific legislation enacted by Congress in the last decades—legislation that, in the Court’s view, should “preclude an interpretation of the FDCA that grants the FDA authority to regulate tobacco products.”212 This argument had a degree of fragility, as the Court appeared to appreciate; repeals by implication are disfavored,213 and the Court’s failure to allow the agency to interpret ambiguous terms, merely because of subsequent legislation, was the equivalent of a finding of an implied repeal. 
Perhaps for this reason, the Court added a closing word. It said that its inquiry into the Step One question “is shaped, at least in some measure, by the nature of the question presented.”214 Chevron, the Court noted, is based on “an implicit delegation,” but in “extraordinary cases,” courts should “hesitate before concluding that Congress has intended such an implicit delegation.”215 Just as in Sweet Home, the Court cited no case for this key proposition, but instead resorted to only one source: Judge Breyer’s 1986 essay. On this occasion, however, it went beyond the citation to offer a quotation, encapsulating one of Judge Breyer’s central arguments, that there is a difference between “major questions,” on which “Congress is more likely to have focused,” and “interstitial matters.” At that point the Court drew a direct connection with MCI: “As in MCI, we are confident that Congress could not have intended to delegate a decision of such economic and political significance to an agency in so cryptic a fashion.”216 
Ironically, Justice Breyer dissented from the Court’s conclusion; even more ironically, he offered a powerful rebuttal to his own argument in 1986. He acknowledged the possibility that courts should accept a “background canon of construction” to the effect that decisions with enormous social consequences “should be made by democratically elected Members of Congress rather than by unelected agency administrators.”217 In this way he suggested, even more clearly than the Court, that some decisions, rejecting agency interpretations of statutes, might be rooted in nondelegation principles that reflect a reluctance to take ambiguous provisions as grants of “enormous” discretion to agencies. But he found any such background principle inapplicable to the problem at issue. The reason was that the decision to regulate tobacco is one for which the incumbent administration “must (and will) take responsibility.”218 212 529 U.S. at 157. 213 TVA v. Hill, 437 U.S. 153 (1978). 214 529 U.S. at 159. 215 Id. 216 Id at 160. 217 Id. at 190 (Breyer, J., dissenting). 218 Id. 
Because of its high visibility, that decision will inevitably be known to the public, and officials will be held accountable for it. “Presidents, just like Members of Congress, are elected by the public. Indeed, the President and Vice President are the only public officials whom the entire Nation elects.”219 An agency’s “decision of this magnitude— one that is important, conspicuous, and controversial” will inevitably face “the kind of public scrutiny that is essential in any democracy. And such a review will take place whether it is the Congress or the Executive Branch that makes the relevant decision.”220 
There is a close link between Justice Breyer’s arguments on this count and the Court’s emphasis on procedural safeguards in Mead. Those safeguards might be seen as a check on administrative arbitrariness, a check that reduces the need for independent judicial scrutiny of agency interpretations of law. So too, a high degree of public visibility, ensuring the operation of political safeguards, might be seen as a surrogate for independent judicial scrutiny. I believe that Justice Breyer is correct on this point and that his argument casts serious doubt on his own argument to the contrary in 1986. It is that issue to which I now turn. 
Suppose that Brown & Williamson is taken to suggest that Chevron deference is not due for agency decisions involving questions of great “economic and political significance.” This position would have exceedingly large implications. Return, for example, to an important and disputed question: Does the EPA have the authority to regulate greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act?221 Let us simply stipulate that the relevant provisions of the Act are ambiguous. Under Chevron, the EPA would appear to have the power to regulate greenhouse gases if it chooses to do so. But under Mead and Brown & Williamson, it would be easy to argue that Congress, and not the EPA, should decide whether the EPA ought to be regulating greenhouse gases, a fundamental question 219 Id 220 Id. at 191. 221 See sources cited supra note 196. about the reach of federal environmental law. And so, in fact, the EPA’s General Counsel has argued under President Bush.222 
MCI and Brown & Williamson should be read to establish an independent Step Zero constraint on the application of Chevron, suggesting that certain fundamental questions must be resolved judicially rather than administratively. I believe that despite some of their language, MCI and Brown & Williamson should not be so understood; for the future, they are best regarded as Step One cases, not as Step Zero cases. The reason is that there is no justification for the conclusion that major questions should be resolved judicially rather than administratively. In fact, there are two problems with that conclusion. The first is that as with the distinction between jurisdictional and nonjurisdictional questions, the difference between interstitial and major questions is extremely difficult to administer; and if sensibly administered, it raises doubts about an array of decisions, including Chevron itself. The second is that expertise and accountability, the linchpins of Chevron’s legal fiction, are highly relevant to the resolution of major questions. 
Assume, for example, that the statutes in MCI and Brown & Williamson were genuinely ambiguous—that the relevant sources of interpretation could plausibly be read to support or to forbid the agency action at issue. If so, the argument for judicial deference would be exceptionally strong. In MCI, the FCC was deciding fundamental questions about the structure of the telecommunications market—hardly an issue for judicial resolution, and one for which expertise and accountability are relevant. In Brown & Williamson, the FDA was taking action against one of the nation’s most serious public health problems, in a judgment that had a high degree of public visibility and required immersion in the subject at hand. Perhaps Congress could not easily be taken to delegate the resolution of these questions to administrative agencies. But would it really be better to understand Congress to have delegated the resolution of those questions to federal courts? I have referred to the concern that on major questions, interest-group power and agency self-dealing might produce a real risk, one that is sufficient to call for a reduced degree of judicial deference. But that concern is not well-grounded in any empirical 222 See Memorandum from Robert E. Fabricant, supra note 197. literature, and in any case the standard Chevron framework provides ample constraints on bias and self-dealing. 
Brown & Williamson should not be understood to say that major questions will be resolved by courts rather than agencies. They should be taken to impose a more powerful limit on administrative discretion, in the form of a background principle to the effect that in the face of ambiguity, agencies will be denied the power to interpret ambiguous provisions in a way that would massively alter the preexisting statutory scheme.223 
On this view, Mead and Brown & Williamson are not Step Zero decisions; they are discretion-denying decisions. They do not say that courts, rather than agencies, will interpret ambiguities. They announce, far more ambitiously, that ambiguities will be construed so as to reduce the authority of regulatory agencies. But it would not much matter if this principle is described in terms of Chevron Step Zero or Chevron Step One. The key idea is that agencies would not receive deference when they attempt to exercise their authority in ways that produce large-scale changes in the structure of the statutory programs that they are administering. 
The best justification for this conclusion would rely on an analogy. In some cases, well-established background principles operate to “trump” Chevron. Agencies are not permitted to interpret statutes so as to apply beyond the territorial boundaries of the United States.224 Nor are they allowed to interpret ambiguous statutes to apply retroactively.225 An agency cannot construe an ambiguous statute so as to raise serious constitutional doubts.226 In these and other contexts, courts have insisted on a series of nondelegation canons, which require legislative rather than merely executive deliberation on the issue in question.227 Congress will not lightly be taken to have delegated to agencies the choice of how to resolve certain sensitive questions. Perhaps MCI and Brown & Williamson can be understood to build on these nondelegation canons to 223 For a valuable discussion, see John Manning, The Nondelegation Doctrine as A Canon of Avoidance, 2000 S. CT. REV. 223. 224 EEOC v Arabian American Oil Co, 499 U.S. 244, 248 (1991). 225 Bowen v Georgetown University Hospital, 488 U.S. 204, 208 (1988). 226 See id. at 208–09 (1988). 227 For general discussion, see Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons, 67 U. CHI. L. REV. 315 (2000). suggest a more general principle: Fundamental alterations in statutory programs, in the form of contractions or expansions, will not be taken to be within agency authority.228 
For those who are enthusiastic about the nondelegation doctrine, this background principle will have considerable appeal, above all because the principle requires Congress, rather than agencies, to decide critical questions of policy (including, plausibly, the question whether significant deregulation of communications should occur, or whether the FDA should be authorized to regulate tobacco produces). But the principle faces three problems. The first is the uncertain foundations of the argument for the nondelegation doctrine itself.229 As a matter of text and history, the doctrine does not have a clear constitutional pedigree, and to say the least, it is controversial to base a principle of statutory construction on a doctrine that cannot easily be rooted in the Constitution. The second is the difficulty of administering the line that the principle would require courts to maintain. As I have emphasized, the distinction between major questions and non-major ones lacks a metric. On its facts, Chevron itself might seem to be wrong, and perhaps Sweet Home as well. 
The third and most fundamental problem is that expertise and accountability are entirely relevant to questions about contraction or expansion of statutory provisions.230 If a nondelegation principle is meant to prevent agencies from making significant alterations in statutory programs on their own, in a way that goes beyond the ordinary operation of Step One, it would embed an unhealthy status quo bias into administrative law. MCI could well be understood as embodying such a bias. But because regulatory programs last for decades, and across significantly changed circumstances, agencies should be taken to have the discretion to construe ambiguities reasonably, even if their constructions lead to large changes in the statute that they are administering. Indeed, this flexibility is a primary benefit of Chevron itself, allowing adaptation to new understandings of both facts and values. 
But suppose that the nondelegation principle is understood not to include a general status quo bias, but simply to ban agencies from expanding their authority, again in a way that goes beyond the ordinary operation of Step One. If so, then it is a modern 228 Cf. Manning, supra note 223 (discussing and challenging the use of nondelegation principles as a tool of statutory construction). 229 See Eric A. Posner & Adrian Vermeule, Interring the Nondelegation Doctrine, 69 U. CHI. L. REV. 1721 (2002). 230 See Manning, supra note 223. version of the old (and discredited) idea that statutes in derogation of the common law should be narrowly construed.231 Brown & Williamson could be understood to reflect that idea. If so, it should be repudiated. In the modern state, agencies should not have the authority to expand their authority in violation of statutory limitations. But so long as agencies are reasonably interpreting statutory ambiguities, they ought to receive deference under Chevron, at least if their interpretation does not violate a particular interpretive principle, such as the principles against extraterritoriality, retroactivity, and serious constitutional doubts. 
I conclude that MCI and Brown & Williamson are best read as Step One decisions. Despite the more general language that I have explored here, they should not be taken to suggest an additional reason to deny deference under Step Zero. 
In 1984, it was not entirely clear whether Chevron was a synthesis of existing law, as the Court appeared to believe at the time,232 or instead a genuine revolution, signaling a new era in the relationship between courts and regulatory agencies. Justice Scalia saw its revolutionary potential and sought to justify a broad reading of the decision as well-suited to the realities of modern government, above all by virtue of its clarity and simplicity. Judge Breyer, also a long-time specialist in administrative law, sought to domesticate the decision and to treat it as a codification of the best of existing practice, which called for caseby-case inquiries into the fictional instructions of rational legislators. The most ambitious readings of Chevron see it as a recognition that resolution of statutory ambiguities often calls for judgments of both policy and principle, and as a firm suggestion that such judgments should be made by administrators rather than judges. So understood, Chevron is a natural outgrowth of the twentieth-century shift from judicial to administrative lawmaking. 231 See FTC v. American Tobacco Co., 264 U.S. 298, 305-06 (1924); FTC v. Eastman Kodak, 264 U.S. 619, 623-25 (1920); Jefferson Fordham & J. Russell Leach, Interpretation of Statutes In Derogation of the Common Law, 3 VAN. L. REV. 438 (1950). 232 See Percival, supra note 2. 
For the most part, current disagreements have taken the form of a dispute over Chevron Step Zero—the inquiry into whether the Chevron framework applies at all. Justice Breyer has succeeded in ensuring case-by-case assessments of whether Congress intended to delegate law-interpreting power to agencies. To be sure, those assessments are less case-by-case than he suggested that they should be in 1986; if the agency action has the force of law, Chevron applies, and agency decisions that result from formal procedures are taken to have the force of law.233 But even if agency action lacks the force of law and is not a product of formal procedures, Chevron might apply on the basis of an inquiry into the particular nature of the decision at stake. After Mead and Barnhart, then, Chevron seems to supply a clear rule, but only in the domain of agency decisions having the force of law. The Christensen-Mead-Barnhart trilogy thus represents a significant triumph for Justice Breyer’s efforts to domesticate Chevron. 
At the same time, Sweet Home, MCI, and Brown & Williamson seem to be Step Zero decisions in Step One guise.234 They are informed, and explicitly so, by a doubt about whether Congress should generally be taken to have given agencies the authority to restructure administrative schemes, either by significantly reducing or significantly expanding their nature and coverage. 
These restrictions on the reach of Chevron create a great deal of complexity, and in a way that disregards the best justifications for the deference rule. The Court seems to have opted for standards for rules in precisely the context in which rules make most sense: numerous and highly repetitive decisions in which little is to be gained, in terms of accuracy, by a more particularized approach. Because the scope of review is a threshold issue is nearly every administrative law case, the rise of sustained controversy over the meaning of Step Zero introduces needless uncertainty. I have suggested that courts can handle the initial Step Zero trilogy either by noticing that the choice between Chevron and Skidmore usually will not matter, or by treating most cases as Barnhart cases rather than as Christensen or Mead cases. Just as Mead threatens to domesticate Chevron, future courts can use Barnhart to domesticate Mead. I have also suggested that MCI and Brown & Williamson, if rightly decided, are best read as Step One cases; it follows that future 233 As I have noted, some agency action does not have the force of law even if based on formal procedures; the decisions of the NLRB are examples. 234 Cf. Manning, supra note 223 (exploring Brown & Williamson in nondelegation terms). courts should downplay the Court’s unnecessary emphasis on what Congress could not have meant to delegate. That emphasis threatens to give courts a kind of interpretive primacy with respect to the very questions for which the Chevron framework is best suited. 
Constraints on administrative discretion, rooted in the rule of law, remain a central part of administrative law, and indeed serve to give that subject its basic point. But those constraints can and should be supplied through other means, above all through an emphasis on the limitations recognized in Chevron itself. Sometimes legal epicycles are necessary to ensure against the arbitrariness introduced by inflexible rules. But in this context, the extraordinary complexity introduced by the emerging law of Step Zero serves no useful purpose. Professor Cass R. Sunstein University of Chicago Law School 1111 East 60th Street Chicago, IL 60637 csunstei@uchicago.edu  2.  William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An  Economic Approach (July 1991)  Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of  Tort (August 1991)  Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991)  Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992)  Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992)  Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992)  Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992)  William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992)  William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study  (August 1992)  Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An  Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992)  Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992)  Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial  Japan (March 1993)  Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993)  Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does)  (April 1993)  Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and  Firm‐Specific Human Capital (August 1993)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main  Bank System (August 1993)  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication  (September 1993)  Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993)  Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993)  Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994)  Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994)  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994)  J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994)  Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994)  Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of  Software (August 1994)  Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994)  David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994)  Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption  (January 1995)  Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995)  Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty  Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995)  Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April  1995)  Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995)  Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995)  Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996)  37.  
David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short‐Term Assets  (January 2003)  Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996  Telecommunications Act? (January 2003)  Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities  and Verizon (January 2003)  William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An  Economic Perspective (February 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003)  Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003)  Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003)  Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003)  Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003)  Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May  2003)  Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003)  Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003)  Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003)  Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life‐Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003)  Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003)  Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003)  David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September  2003)  William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the  Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985  and 2000? (September 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage  (September 2003)  Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September  2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts  of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)   Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure  Time (October 2003)  Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003)  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003)  David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004)  David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004)  Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright Law (April  2004)  Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004)  Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of  Statistical Lives (February 2004)  Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A Critique of the  Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004)  Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceutical Patents:  Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004)  Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004)  Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004)  Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004)    
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Labor  within and between Law Firms (April 2004)  Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of  Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry (April 2004)  James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the Market for  Underwriting Business (July 2004)  Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004)  Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004)  Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, Company Stock,  Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets  (August 2004, revised October 2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross‐Cultural Risk  Perceptions (August 2004)  M. Todd Henderson and James C. Spindler, Corporate Herroin: A Defense of Perks (August 2004)  Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death (August 2004)  Randal C. Picker, Cyber Security: Of Heterogenity and Autarky (August 2004)  Randal C. Picker, Unbundling Scope‐of‐Permission Goods: When Should We Invest in Reducing  Entry Barriers? (September 2004)  Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing through Law (September 2004)  Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of the Use of Citations in the Law (2000)  Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and the Environment (October 2004)  Kenneth W. Dam, Cordell Hull, the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act, and the WTO (October 2004)  Richard A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Contract Interpretation (November 2004)  Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, A Social Networks Theory of Privacy (December 2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Minimalism at War (December 2004)  Douglas Lichtman, How the Law Responds to Self‐Help (December 2004)  Eric A. Posner, The Decline of the International Court of Justice (December 2004)  Eric A. Posner, Is the International Court of Justice Biased? (December 2004)  Alan O. Sykes, Public vs. Private Enforcement of International Economic Law: Of Standing and  Remedy (February 2005)  Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Serial Entrepreneurs and Small Business Bankruptcies  (March 2005)  Eric A. Posner, There Are No Penalty Default Rules in Contract Law (March 2005)  Randal C. Picker, Copyright and the DMCA: Market Locks and Technological Contracts (March  2005)  Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? The Relevance of  Life‐Life Tradeoffs (March 2005)  Alan O. Sykes, Trade Remedy Laws (March 2005)  Randal C. Picker, Rewinding Sony: The Evolving Product, Phoning Home, and the Duty of  Ongoing Design (March 2005)  Cass R. Sunstein, Irreversible and Catastrophic (April 2005)   James C. Spindler, IPO Liability and Entrepreneurial Response (May 2005)  Douglas Lichtman, Substitutes for the Doctrine of Equivalents: A Response to Meurer and Nard  (May 2005)  Cass R. Sunstein, A New Progressivism (May 2005)  Douglas G. Baird, Property, Natual Monopoly, and the Uneasy Legacy of INS v. AP (May 2005)  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Private Debt and the Missing Lever of Corporate Governance (May 2005) Cass R. Sunstein, Administrative Law Goes to War (May 2005) Cass R. Sunstein, Chevron Step Zero (May 2005) 
