University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2005

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

The Availability Heuristic, Intuitive Cost-Benefit
Analysis, and Climate Change
Cass R. Sunstein

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "The Availability Heuristic, Intuitive Cost-Benefit Analysis, and Climate Change" ( John M. Olin Program in Law
and Economics Working Paper No. 263, 2005).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 263 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
The Availability Heuristic, Intuitive Cost‐Benefit Analysis, 
and Climate Change 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
November 2005 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=844444  

Final draft 9/26/05 
Forthcoming in Climatic Change 
All rights reserved 
 
 

The Availability Heuristic, Intuitive Cost-Benefit Analysis, and Climate Change 

Cass R. Sunstein 
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, Law School and Department of 
Political Science, University of Chicago. 
 
773-702-9498 
csunstei@uchicago.edu 
 
 
 
 
 

Abstract. Because risks are on all sides of social situations, it is not possible to be 
“precautionary” in general. The availability heuristic ensures that some risks stand out as 
particularly salient, whatever their actual magnitude. Taken together with intuitive cost-
benefit  balancing,  the  availability  heuristic  helps  to  explain  differences  across  groups, 
cultures, and even nations in the assessment of precautions to reduce the risks associated 
with climate change. There are complex links among availability, social processes for the 
spreading  of  information,  and  predispositions.  If  the  United  States  is  to  take  a  stronger 
stand against climate change, it is likely to be a result of available incidents that seem to 
show that climate change produces serious and tangible harm. 

 
 
 
1. Introduction 

 

 

 

“Many Germans believe that drinking water after eating  cherries is  deadly; they 
also  believe  that  putting  ice  in  soft  drinks  is  unhealthy.  The  English,  however,  rather 
enjoy  a  cold  drink  of  water  after  some  cherries;  and  Americans  love  icy  refreshments” 
(Henrich et al., 2001). 
 
 
“The  most  important  factor  contributing  to  the  increased  stringency  of  health, 
safety and environmental regulation in Europe has been a series of regulatory failures and 
crises  that  placed  new  regulatory  issues  on  the  political  agenda  and  pressured  policy 
makers  to  adopt  more  risk  averse  or  precautionary  policies.  .  .  .  The  regulatory  failure 
associated with BSE significantly affected the attitude of the European public toward GM 
foods.  .  .  .  Consumer  and  environmental  regulations  are  likely  to  become  more 
innovative,  comprehensive  and  risk  averse  as  a  response  to  a  widespread  public 
perception of regulatory failures” (Vogel, 2003). 

Precautions against What? 

It  has  become  standard  to  say  that  with  respect  to  risks,  Europe  and  the  United 

States  can  be  distinguished  along  a  single  axis:  Europe  accepts  the  Precautionary 

Principle,  and  the  United  States  does  not.  On  this  view,  Europeans  attempt  to  build  a 

“margin of safety” into public decisions, taking care to protect citizens against risks that 

cannot  be  established  with  certainty.  By  contrast,  Americans  are  reluctant  to  take 

precautions, requiring clear evidence of harm in order to justify regulation. These claims 

seem  plausible  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the  United  States  appears  comparatively 

unconcerned about the risks associated with climate change and genetic modification of 

food; in those contexts, Europeans favor precautions, whereas Americans seem to require 

something akin of proof of danger. To be sure, the matter is quite different in the context 

of  threats  to  national  security.  For  the  war  in  Iraq,  the  United  States  (and  England) 

followed a kind of Precautionary Principle, whereas other nations (most notably France 

and Germany) wanted clearer proof of danger. But for most threats to safety and health, 

and  for  climate  change  in  particular,  many  people  believe  that  Europe  is  precautionary 

and the United States is not. 

But this opposition between Europe and America is false, even illusory (Wiener 

and  Rogers,  2002).  It  is  simply  wrong  to  say  that  Europeans  are,  in  general,  more 

precautionary than Americans. As an empirical matter, neither is “more precautionary.” 

Europeans  are  not  more  averse  to  risks  than  Americans.  They  are  more  averse  to 

particular risks, perhaps most prominently the risks associated with climate change; but 

Americans  have  their  own  preoccupations  as  well.  No  nation  can,  even  in  principle, 

commit itself to precaution as such (Sunstein, 2005; Sunstein 2003a). The real problem 

with the Precautionary Principle, at least in its strongest forms, is that it is incoherent. It 

purports to give guidance, but it fails to do so, because it condemns the very steps that it 

requires. The reason is simple: Precautions always give rise to risks of their own. 

As a starting point, it is reasonable to think that judgments about precautions will 

be based on a form of intuitive cost-benefit balancing. If the costs of precautions are high, 

they  are  less  likely  to  be  appealing;  so  too  if  the  benefit  are  low.  This  point  applies  to 

climate change as to all other problems, and it helps to explain the massive differences 

between  the  United  States  and  Europe  with  respect  to  that  topic.  In  addition,  the 

availability heuristic is often the source of people’s fears about certain risks (Rohrmann 

2 

Precautions against What? 

and Renn, 2000).1 If a particular risk is cognitively “available”—both vivid and salient—

then  people  will  have  a  heightened  fear  of  the  risk  in  question.  If  people  in  one  nation 

fear the risks associated with climate change, and people in another nation fear the risks 

associated  with  terrorism,  the  availability  heuristic  is  likely  to  be  the  reason.  But  this 

point misses some complexities, about intuitive cost-benefit balancing, social influences 

and cultural predispositions; I shall turn to these in due course. The availability heuristic 

does not operate in a social or cultural vacuum. 

In  short,  I  suggest  that  cross-cultural  differences  in  both  risk  perception  and  in 

precautions are produced, in large part, by availability, which operates in the context of 

social  influences  and  intuitive  attention  to  both  costs  and  benefits.  In  the  context  of 

climate  change,  many  Americans  believe  that  far  more  would  be  lost  than  gained  by 

extensive  precautions;  in  Europe,  the  opposite  is true.  It  is  important,  for  example,  that 

the risks associated with climate change are not salient to most Americans; it is important 

as well that efforts to control greenhouse gases would impose unusually high burdens on 

the United States. These points bear directly on cross-cultural differences with respect to 

climate  change.  If  the  United  States  will  ultimately  show  more  concern  about  the  risks 

associated  with  climate  change,  it  is  likely  to  be  a  product  of  a  shift  in  intuitive  cost-

benefit balancing—with available incidents, apparently linking climate change to serious 

harm, playing a large role.  

 

2. The Mirage of Precaution 

 
Despite  its  formal  enthusiasm  for  the  Precautionary  Principle,  European  nations 

are not “more precautionary” than the United States. Simply as a logical matter, societies, 

like individuals, cannot be highly precautionary with respect to all risks. Each society and 

each person must select certain risks for special attention. In these respects, the selectivity 

of precautions is not merely an empirical fact; it is a conceptual inevitability. Comparing 

Europe  to  the  United  States,  Wiener  and  Rogers  (2002)  demonstrate  this  point 

empirically.  In  the  early  twenty-first  century,  for  example,  the  United  States  appears  to 

                                                 

1  Undoubtedly  a  great  deal  can  be  learned  from  use  of  the  psychometric  paradigm,  stressed  in 
Rohrmann  and  Renn  (2000,  p.  17-18).  I  stress  the  availability  heuristic  here  because  of  its  comparative 
simplicity, but the heuristic interacts in complex ways with psychometrics and with culture; I try at least to 
scratch some of the surfaces. 

3 

Precautions against What? 

take  a  highly  precautionary  approach  to  the  risks  associated  with  abandoned  hazardous 

waste dumps and terrorism, but not to take a highly precautionary approach to the risks 

associated  with  climate  change,  indoor  air  pollution,  poverty,  poor  diet,  and  obesity.  It 

would be most valuable to attempt to see which nations are especially precautionary with 

respect to which risks, and also to explore changes over time.  

A  nation-by-nation  study  commissioned  by  the  German  Federal  Environmental 

Agency goes so far as to conclude that there are two separate camps in the industrialized 

world:  “precaution  countries”  (Germany,  Sweden,  the  Netherlands,  and  the  United 

States) and “protection countries” (Japan, France, and the United Kingdom) (Sand, 2000, 

p.  448).  But  this  conclusion  is  ludicrously  implausible.  The  universe  of  risks  is  far  too 

large  to  permit  categorizations  of  this  kind.  The  most  general  point  is  that  no  nation  is 

precautionary  in  general  and  costly  precautions  are  inevitably  taken  against  only  those 

hazards that seem especially salient or insistent. The problem with the idea of precaution, 

and any general Precautionary Principle, is that it wrongly suggests that nations can and 

should adopt a general form of risk aversion (Sunstein, 2005). 

 

 

3. The Availability Heuristic 

I suggest that the Precautionary Principle becomes operational if and only if those 

who apply it wear blinders—only, that is, if they focus on some aspects of the regulatory 

situation  but  downplay  or  disregard  others.  But  this  suggestion  simply  raises  an 

additional question: What accounts for the particular blinders that underlie applications of 

the Precautionary Principle? What people’s attention is selective, why is it selective in the 

way  that  it  is?  Part  of  the  answer,  I  contend,  lies  in  an  understanding  of  behavioral 

economics  and  cognitive  psychology,  which  provide  important  clues  to  cross-cultural 

differences  in  risk  perception,  in  a  way  that  much  bears  on  social  judgments  about 

climate change. The availability heuristic is the place to start. 

3.1.  Availability  in  action.  It  is  well-established  that  in  thinking  about  risks, 

people rely on certain heuristics, or rules of thumb, which serve to simplify their inquiry 

(Kahneman  et  al.,  1982).  Heuristics  typically  work  through  a  process  of  “attribute 

substitution,”  in  which  people  answer  a  hard  question  by  substituting  an  easier  one 

(Kahneman and Frederick, p. 53). Should we be fearful of climate change? When people 

4 

Precautions against What? 

use  the  availability  heuristic,  they  assess  the  magnitude  of  risks  by  asking  whether 

examples of harm can readily be brought to mind (Tverksy and Kahneman, 2002, pp. 11-

14). If people can easily think of such examples, they are far more likely to be frightened 

than  if  they  cannot.  The  availability  heuristic  illuminates  the  operation  of  the 

Precautionary Principle, by showing why some hazards will be on-screen and why others 

will be neglected. The availability heuristic also tells us a great deal about differences in 

risk perceptions across groups, cultures, and even nations. 

For  example,  “a  class  whose  instances  are  easily  retrieved  will  appear  more 

numerous than a class of equal frequency whose instances are less retrievable” (Tversky 

and  Kahneman,  2002,  p.  11).  Consider  a  simple  study  showing  people  a  list  of  well-

known  people  of  both  sexes,  and  asking  them  whether  the  list  contains  more  names  of 

women or more names of men. In lists in which the men were especially famous, people 

thought that they were more names of men, whereas in lists in which the women were the 

more  famous,  people  thought  that  there  were  more  names  of  women  (Tversky  and 

Kahneman, 2002). 

This is a point about how familiarity can affect the availability of instances. A risk 

that  is  familiar,  like  that  associated  with  terrorism,  will  be  seen  as  more  serious  than  a 

risk that is less familiar, like that associated with sun-bathing. But salience is important as 

well. “For example, the impact of seeing a house burning on the subjective probability of 

such  accidents  is  probably  greater  than  the  impact  of  reading  about  a  fire  in  the  local 

paper” (Tversky and Kahneman, 2002). The point helps explain differences across time 

and space in much risk-related behavior, including decisions to take precautions. Whether 

people  will  buy  insurance  for  natural  disasters  is  greatly  affected  by  recent  experiences 

(Slovic, 2000, p. 40). If floods have not occurred in the immediate past, people who live 

on  flood  plains  are  far  less  likely  to  purchase  insurance.  In  the  aftermath  of  an 

earthquake,  insurance  for  earthquakes  rises  sharply—but  it  declines  steadily  from  that 

point, as  vivid memories recede. Note that the use of  the  availability  heuristic,  in  these 
contexts,  is  hardly  irrational.2  Both  insurance  and  precautionary  measures  can  be 

                                                 

2  Tversky  and  Kahneman  (1986)  emphasize  that  the  heuristics  they  identify  “are  highly  economical 
and  usually  effective,”  but  also  that  they  “lead  to  systematic  and  predictable  errors.”  Gerd  Gigerenzer, 
among  others,  has  emphasized  that  some  heuristics  can  work  extremely  well  (Gigerenzer  et  al.,  1999; 
Gigerenzer, 2000), and used this point as a rejoinder to those who stress the errors introduced by heuristics 

5 

Precautions against What? 

expensive,  and  what  has  happened  before  seems,  much  of  the  time,  to  be  the  best 

available guide to what will happen again. The problem is that the availability heuristic 

can lead to serious errors, in terms of both excessive fear and neglect. 

What, in particular, produces availability? An intriguing essay attempts to test the 

effects  of  ease  of  imagery  on  perceived  judgments  of  risk  (Sherman  et  al.,  2002).  The 

study  asked  subjects  to  read  about  an  illness  (Hyposcenia-B)  that  “was  becoming 

increasingly  prevalent”  on  the  local  campus.  In  one  condition,  the  symptoms  were 

concrete and easy to imagine—involving muscle aches, low energy, and frequent severe 

headaches.  In  another  condition,  the  symptoms  were  vague  and  hard  to  imagine, 

involving  an  inflamed  liver,  a  malfunctioning  nervous  system,  and  a  general  sense  of 

disorientation. Subjects in both conditions were asked to imagine a three-week period in 

which  they  had  the  disease  and  to  write  a  detailed  description  of  what  they  imagined. 

After  doing  so,  subjects  were  asked  to  assess,  on  a  ten-point  scale,  their  likelihood  of 

contracting  the  disease.  The  basic  finding  was  that  likelihood  judgments  were  very 

different in the two conditions, with easily-imagined symptoms making people far more 

inclined to believe that they were likely to get the disease.  

3.2.  Availability  and  cross-national  risk  perceptions  in  general.  The  availability 

heuristic helps to explains the operation of the Precautionary Principle and cross-national 

differences for a simple reason: Sometimes a certain risk, said to call for precautions, is 

cognitively  available,  whereas  other  risks,  including  those  associated  with  regulation 

itself, are not. In many cases where the Precautionary Principle seems to offer guidance, 

the reason is that some of the relevant risks are available while others are barely visible. 

Differences  across  nations,  in  the  perception  of  risks,  have  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the 

operation  of  the  availability  heuristic.  I  shall  turn  to  climate  change  shortly;  for  the 

moment, let us explore the hypothesis more generally. 

The  study  of  cross-cultural  risk  perceptions  remains  in  its  infancy  (Renn  and 

Rohrmann, 2000), and hence my claim must remain only a hypothesis, one that I cannot 

establish  to  be  true.  What  is  necessary,  and  what  is  lacking,  is  anything  like 

comprehensive information about cross-cultural risk perceptions, allowing us to test the 

                                                                                                                                                 
and biases. I do not mean to take a stand on the resulting debates. Even if many heuristics mostly work well 
in daily life, a sensible government can do much better than to rely on them. 

6 

Precautions against What? 

role of availability. And we shall shortly see some complexities that bear on the adequacy 

of the availability hypothesis. But for now, consider some supportive evidence: 

•  Within the United States, public concern about risks usually does track changes in 

the  actual  fluctuations  in  those  risks.  But  public  concern  outruns  actual 

fluctuations in the important case of “panics,” bred by vivid illustrations that do 

not  reflect  changes  in  levels  of  danger  (Loewenstein  and  Mather,  1990).  At 

certain points in the 1970s and 1980s, there were extreme leaps in concern about 

teenage  suicides,  herpes,  illegitimacy,  and  AIDS—leaps  that  did  not  correspond 

to  changes  in  the  size  of  the  problem.  Availability,  produced  by  “a  particularly 

vivid  case  or  new  finding  that  receives  considerable  media  attention,”  played  a 

major  role  in  those  leaps  in  public  concern  (Loewenstein  and  Mather,  1990,  p. 

172). Sometimes the concern led to unjustified precautions, as in the behavior of 

some parents who refused to allow their children to attend classes having students 

with signs of herpes. 

•  What accounts for people’s perception of their risk of being infected with HIV? 

Why are some people and some groups largely unconcerned about that risk, while 

other people and groups are highly focused on with it? A study of rural Kenya and 

Malawi suggests that availability plays a critical role (Behrman et al., 2003). The 

authors  find  that  risk  perception  is  a  product  of  discussions  that  “are  often 

provoked  by  observing  or  hearing  about  an  illness  or  death”  (Behrman  et  al., 

2003, p. 10) People “know in the abstract how HIV is transmitted and how it can 

be  prevented,”  but  they  are  unclear  “about  the  advisability  and  effectiveness  of 

the changes in sexual behavior that are recommended by experts” (Behrman et al., 

2003, p. 18). Perceptions of the risk of HIV transition are very much a function of 

social  networks,  with  pronounced  changes  in  belief  and  behavior  resulting  from 

interactions with other people expressing a high level of concern. The effects of 

social networks are thus asymmetric, with substantial effects from having “at least 

one  network  partner  who  is  perceived  to  have  a  great  deal  of  concern  about 

AIDS.”  The  authors  do  not  refer  explicitly  to  the  availability  heuristic,  but  their 

findings  are  compatible  with  the  suggestion  that  with  respect  to  AIDS,  risk 

perceptions are produced by availability. 

7 

Precautions against What? 

•  What accounts for the recent rise of precautionary thinking in Europe? Why have 

certain  environmental  and  health  risk  achieved  so  much  salience  in  England, 

France, and the European Union generally? A comprehensive study suggests that 

a few readily available incidents played a large role (Vogel, 2003). In the 1990s, a 

“wave  of  crises”  involving  food  safety,  above  all  mad  cow  disease,  led  to  the 

deaths  of  about  one  hundred  people,  with  especially  large  effects  on  public 

attitudes  (Vogel,  2003,  p.  568-569).  In  a  tribute  to  the  operation  of  availability, 

the  “regulatory  failure  associated  with  BSE  significantly  affected  the  attitude  of 

the  European  public  toward  GM  foods”  (Vogel,  2003,  p.  569).  An  additional 

“scandal  was  the  apparent  failure  of  French  government  officials  and  doctors  to 

protect haemopholiacs from blood contaminated with AIDS” virus, in a way that 

had  large  repercussions  for  public  opinion  in  France  (Vogel,  2003,  p.  570-571). 

The  conclusion  is  that  differences  between  European  and  American  policies  are 

not a product of deep-rooted cultural differences, but instead have a great deal to 

do  with  “widespread  public  perception  of  regulatory  failures,”  often  based  on 

particular, vivid, and widely salient events (Vogel, 2003, p. 580). 

5.3.  Availability,  climate  change,  catastrophe,  and  long-term  risks.  These  points 

have particular implications for risks from climate change that, by their very nature, are 

not likely to cause serious harms in the near future. The problem, a serious one, is that 

such  harms  will  not  be  cognitively  available  to  citizens,  at  least  not  ordinarily.  People 

will not “see” those harms until it is too late. In this way, the availability heuristic tends 

to help explain high discount rates, by which people do not take preventive action against 

even serious harms that will not come about for many years. For potentially catastrophic 

risks  whose  prevention  requires  long-term  investment,  there  are  built-in  obstacles  to 

serious regulatory efforts. If salient events, such as hurricane activity, can be associated 

with climate change, the likelihood of a response is increased. But for most people most 

of the time, these associations seem speculative. 

A real puzzle, in this light, is not that the United States is relatively unconcerned 

with climate change; it is that European nations are so willing to take action to combat it. 

How  do  we  explain  this  puzzle?  I  suggest  that  the  availability  heuristic  operates  as  an 

important  “input”  into  a  form  of  intuitive  cost-benefit  balancing,  and  that  when  the 

8 

Precautions against What? 

balance favors regulation, people will seek regulatory solutions even if social harms are 

not  clearly  “available.”  The  availability  heuristic  does  help  people  to  assess  the 

magnitude of a risk; people’s judgments about magnitude are greatly affected by use of 

the availability heuristic.  But availability is not the only factor. If the  costs  of reducing 

the  risk  are  also  “on  screen,”  and  if  they  seem  high,  then  people  will  not  be  so 

enthusiastic  about  extensive  precautions.  In  the  United  States,  intuitive  cost-benefit 

balancing, done with the assistance of the availability heuristic, does not clearly support 

significant precautions. For Europe, exactly the opposite is true.  

Of  course  cost-benefit  analysis  is  often  done  by  technocrats  in  and  out  of 

government,  usually  without  close  reference  to  the  availability  heuristic.  But  for  both 

intuitive  and  expert  practitioners  of  cost-benefit  analysis,  the  evaluation  of  global 

warming is very different in the United States from what it is in Europe. 

The crucial point here is that the United States appears to stand to lose much more 

from  aggressive  regulation  than  European  nation  do.  For  the  United  States,  the  likely 

costs of the Kyoto Protocol, for example, seem to exceed its likely benefits, at least on 

the  latest  numbers  (Nordhaus  and  Boyer,  2003,  p.  161).  The  picture  for  the  world  as  a 

whole  is  far  more  mixed,  with  Europe  anticipated  to  be  a  net  gainer,  and  with  Russia 

likely  to  gain  an  especially  large  amount  (Nordhaus  and  Boyer,  2003,  p.  162).  Hence 

those nations that favor aggressive controls on greenhouse gases are responding in large 

part  to  the  fact  that  they  are  likely  to  gain  more  than  they  lose.  In  such  circumstances, 

regulation will seem attractive if the risks of climate change are even mildly “available” 

to leaders and citizens. Compare in this regard the assessment of ozone depletion. In the 

end, the United States was highly supportive of extensive precautions, largely because a 

study from the Council of Economic Advisers suggested that the benefits of precautions, 

for  Americans,  greatly  outweighed  the  costs.  The  reason  for  this  conclusion  is  that 

reductions  in  skin  cancer  and  cataracts,  once  monetized,  suggested  that  the  decreasing 

costs  of  precaution  would  be  well-justified.  Hence  President  Reagan  himself,  no 

enthusiast  for  extensive  regulation,  strongly  supported  American  involvement  in  the 

Montreal Protocol.  

If  the  costs  of  reducing  greenhouse  gases  were  perceived  as  very  low,  the 

likelihood  of  American  involvement  in  precautionary  efforts  would  dramatically 

9 

Precautions against What? 

increase; so too if it were generally perceived that the United States had a great deal to 

gain from such reductions. But at the present time, many people believe that the United 

States  will  be  able  to  handle  the  costs  of  climate  change,  and  hence  that  expensive 

precautions are hard to justify simply from the standpoint of national self-interest. If this 

is so, then intuitive cost-benefit balancing, undertaken without readily available incidents 

of harm, is the source of the official position of the United States; it also helps to explain 

Europe’s greater willingness to engage in precautionary measures. 

Consider  the  recorded  views  of  Americans  about  environmental  protection  and 

climate  change  in  the  late  1990s.  About  63  percent  of  Americans  agreed  with  the 

following  statement:  “Protecting  the  environment  is  so  important  that  requirements  and 

standards cannot be too high and continuing environmental improvements must be made 
regardless of cost.”3 In the same general vein, 59 percent supported the Kyoto Treaty on 

global  warming,  with  only  21  percent  opposed.  But  in  the  same  period,  52  percent  of 

Americans said that they would refuse to support the Kyoto Treaty on global warming if 

“it would cost an extra $50 per month for an average American household.” In fact only 

11  percent  of  Americans  would  support  the  Kyoto  Treaty  if  the  monthly  expense  were 

$100  or  more.  How  can  we  explain  strong  majority  support  for  “environmental 

improvements  .  .  .  regardless  of  cost”  and  strong  majority  rejection  of  environmental 

improvements when the cost is high? The answer lies in the fact that people are not, in 

fact,  willing  to  spend  an  infinite  amount  for  environmental  improvements.  When  the 

costs  are  squarely  placed  “on  screen,”  people  begin  to  weigh  both  costs  and  benefits. 

Surveys in Europe suggests that significant numbers of citizens there are willing to pay a 

considerable amount to reduce the risks of global warming; but even there, the amount is 

not extremely high (Viscusi and Hirsch, 2005). For citizens as well as leaders, intuitive 

assessment of costs and benefits plays a large role in determining the level of precautions 

actually sought. 

But  let  us  simply  stipulate  (without  arguing)  that  the  United  States  ought  to  be 

doing more to control greenhouse gases than it is currently willing to do. If so, what can 

be  done  by  way  of  response?  A  clue  comes  from  President  Bush’s  efforts  to  activate 

                                                 

3  See  The  Program  on  International  Policy  Attitudes,  Americans  on  the  Global  Warming  Treaty, 

available at  
http://www.pipa.org/OnlineReports/GlobalWarming/glob_warm_treaty.html at Box 15. 

10 

Precautions against What? 

public  concern  about  the  catastrophic  risks  associated  with  terrorism:  Conjure  up  vivid 

images of what might happen when the relevant risks come to fruition. In this way, the 

availability  heuristic  might  be  enlisted  on  behalf  of  regulatory  controls.  In  connection 

with  the  Iraq  war,  the  Patriot  Act,  and  many  other  terrorism-related  initiatives,  vivid 

images  of  the  Sept.  11  attacks  helped  to  ensure  that  Americans  would  be  willing  to 

“invest”  in  initiatives  that  would  cost  a  great  deal.  Of  course  it  is  true  that  the  most 

serious harms associated with climate change are not likely to occur in the near-term, a 

contrast with the risks of terrorism, where a catastrophe could be around the corner.  

This  fact  makes  it  difficult  to  capture  people’s  attention  with  vivid  images  of 

harm—difficult,  but  not  impossible,  at  least  if  those  images  are  combined  with  moral 

appeals (involving obligations to future generations, whose members can be concrete, as 

in, “your children and your grandchildren”) and with efforts to quell fears about the high 

costs of regulatory controls. In other words, availability and salience are a promising way 

of promoting public attention to risks that will not materialize for a long time. If current 

hurricane  activity  can  be  associated  with  climate  change,  citizens  and  officials  will  be 

more  likely  to  favor  aggressive  action.  To  see  this  point,  it  is  necessary  to  shift  from 

individual judgments to social ones. 

 

 

4. Social Influences 

Thus far my emphasis has been on individual cognition. But to say the least, the 

availability heuristic does not operate in a social vacuum. What is readily “available” to 

some individuals, groups, cultures, and nations will not be available to all. In the context 

of  climate  change,  environmentalists,  in  and  out  of  government,  often  attempt  to  focus 

public attention on potentially catastrophic harms. Well-organized private groups play a 

central  role  in  activating  public  concern.  The  “social  amplification  of  risk”  is  a  well-

known phenomenon (Pigeon et al., 2003). When social amplification occurs, it is often a 

result of the availability heuristic, operating alongside social processes. 

The question suggests the need to attend to the social and cultural dimensions of 

fear  and  risk  perception.  In  many  cases  of  high-visibility,  low-probability  dangers,  the 

sources  of  availability  are  not  obscure.  The  mass  media  focus  on  those  risks;  people 

communicate  their  fear  and  concern  to  one  another;  the  widespread  fact  of  fear  and 

11 

Precautions against What? 

concern increases media attention; and the spiral continues until people move on. Hence 

the “risk of the month” syndrome, familiar in many societies, stems from the interaction 

between availability and social influences. Much of the time, however, what is available 

and salient to some is not available and salient to all.  

In  any  case  people  and  cultures  have  different  predispositions.  These 

predispositions play a large role in determining which, of the numerous possibilities, is 

salient.  Those  who  are  predisposed  to  believe  that  most  media  scares  are  false  or 

trumped-up will find cases in which public fears have been proved baseless. This is an 

example of an individual predispositions, but undoubtedly cultural forces, some deep and 

some less so, help account for differences across nations. Availability helps to determine 

beliefs,  to  be  sure;  but  beliefs  help  to  determine  availability  as  well.  Both  beliefs  and 

availability are endogenous to one another. When social and cultural forces interact with 

salience, to produce concern about one set of problems but not another, predispositions 

are crucial. Fears about the risks of climate change, and dismissal of those fears, can both 

be explained in this way. It is in this sense that availability can be a product of forces that 

must be explained independently. But let us now turn to how availability spreads. 

 

 

5. Cascades 

Sometimes  availability  and  salience  are  produced  through  social  bandwagons  or 

cascades,  in  which  apparently  representative  anecdotes  and  gripping  examples  move 

rapidly from one person to another (Heath et al., 2001; Heath, 1996). Consider a stylized 

example.  Andrew  hears  of  a  dangerous  event,  which  he  finds  to  be  revealing  or 

illustrative.  (The  event  might  involve  a  harmful  effect  produced  by  climate  change.) 

Andrew tells Barry, who would be inclined to see the event as not terribly informative, 

but who, learning Andrew’s reaction, comes to believe that the event does indeed reveal a 

great deal, and that a serious threat exists. Carol would tend to discount the risk, but once 

she  hears  the  shared  opinion  of  Andrew  and  Barry,  she  is  frightened  as  well.  Deborah 

will have to have a great deal of private information to reject what has become the shared 

opinion of Andrew, Barry, and Carol (Hirschleifer, 1995, p. 193-194). Stylized though it 

is,  the  example  shows  that  once  several  people  start  to  take  an  example  as  probative, 

12 

Precautions against What? 

many people may come to be influenced by their opinion, giving rise to cascade effects. 

Cultural and even national differences can be explained partly in this way. 

A distinctive feature of social cascades is that the people who participate in them 

are simultaneously amplifying the very social signal by which they are being influenced. 

By their very participation, those who join the cascade increase its size, making it more 

likely that others will join too.  

In the domain of risks and precautions, “availability cascades” are responsible for 

many social beliefs (Kuran and Sunstein, 1999). A salient event, affecting people because 

it  is  available,  tends  to  be  repeated,  leading  to  cascade  effects,  as  the  event  becomes 

available to increasingly large numbers of people. The point is amplified by the fact that 

fear-inducing  accounts,  with  high  emotional  valence,  are  especially  likely  to  spread 

(Heath  et  al.,  2001).  There  is  a  general  implication  here.  Because  different  social 

influences  can  be  found  in  different  communities,  local  variations  are  inevitable,  with 

different  examples  becoming  salient  in  each.  Hence  such  variations—between  say 

England  and  the  United  States,  or  between  Germany  and  France—might  involve 

coincidence  or  small  or  random  factors,  rather  than  large-scale  cultural  differences. 

Different judgments within different social groups, with different “available” examples, 

owe their origin to social processes of this sort. Return to my epigraph: “Many Germans 

believe that drinking water after eating cherries is deadly; they also believe that putting 

ice in soft drinks is unhealthy. The English, however, rather enjoy a cold drink of water 

after some cherries; and Americans love icy refreshments” (Henrich et al., 2001, p. 353-

354). 

 

 

 
There is a closely related phenomenon. When like-minded people deliberate with 

6. Group Polarization 

one  another,  they  typically  end  up  accepting a  more  extreme  version  of  the  views  with 

which  they  began  (Sunstein,  2003b).  This  is  the  process  known  as  group  polarization. 

Consider a few examples: 

•  After discussion, citizens of France become more critical of the United States and 

its intentions with respect to economic aid (Brown, 1985, p. 224).  

13 

Precautions against What? 

•  A  group  of  moderately  profeminist  women  becomes  more  strongly  profeminist 

after discussion (Myers, 1975). 

•  After discussion, whites predisposed to show racial prejudice offer more negative 

responses to the question whether white racism is responsible for conditions faced 

by African-Americans in American cities (Myers and Bishop, 1971).  

•  After  discussion,  whites  predisposed  not  to  show  racial  prejudice  offer  more 

positive responses to the same question, that is, they are more likely to find white 

prejudice to be the source of conditions faced by African-Americans in American 

cities (Myers and Bishop, 1971). 

•  Juries  inclined  to  award  punitive  damages  typically  produce  awards  that  are 

significantly higher than the awards chosen, before deliberation, by their median 

member (Sunstein et al., 2002). 

Group polarization will inevitably occur in the context of perceptions of risk; and 

hence  group  polarization  helps  to  account  for  cultural  and  even  national  differences.  If 

several  people  fear  climate  change,  and  speak  to  one  another,  their  fear  is  likely  to 

increase as a result of internal discussions. If some groups seem hysterical about certain 

risks, and other groups treat those risks as nonexistent, group polarization is likely to be a 

reason. Hence group polarization provides another explanation for the different fears of 

groups, localities, and even nations.   

Group  polarization  undoubtedly  occurs  in  connection  with  climate  change; 

indeed, it helps explain cross-cultural differences. An initial predisposition toward fear is 

likely to be aggravated as a result of collective deliberations. Within groups, a tendency 

toward  fear  or  neglect  breeds  its  own  amplification.  In  the  United  States,  group 

polarization  has  played  a  large  role  within  groups  concerned  or  less  concerned  about 

climate  change.  Those  who  believe  that  the  risks  are  trivial,  or  not  worth  addressing, 

often speak largely with one another, intensifying their antecedent belief. 

 

 

7. Media, Interest Groups, and Politicians 

It  should  be  clear  that  in  the  real  world,  some  voices  are  more  important  than 

others, especially when availability and salience are involved. In particular, the behavior 

and  preoccupations  of  the  media  play  a  large  role.  Knowing  the  importance  of  media 

14 

Precautions against What? 

coverage, well-organized private groups work extremely hard to promote public attention 

to particular risks. Some of these groups are altruistic; others are entirely self-interested.  

The common tactic is to publicize an incident that might trigger both availability 

and salience. Showing at least a working knowledge of the availability heuristic, private 

groups  seize  on  selected  incidents,  even  ones  expected  to  occur  in  the  future,  and 

publicize them to make them generally salient to the public. In all of these examples, the 

use of particular instances might be necessary to move the public, and legislatures, in the 

right directions. Certainly the social processes that interact with salience and availability 

can promote reform where it is needed.  

Politicians  engage  in  the  same  basic  project.  By  its  very  nature,  the  voice  of  an 

influential  politician  comes  with  amplifiers.  When  public  officials  bring  an  incident 

before  the  public,  a  seemingly  illustrative  example  is  likely  to  spread  far  and  wide.  A 

legal  enactment  can  itself  promote  availability;  if  the  law  responds  to  the  problems 

associated with climate change, people might well come to see those problems as readily 

available.  The  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  2001  would  inevitably  loom  large  no 

matter  what  President  George  W.  Bush  chose  to  emphasize.  But  the  President,  and  his 

White  House  generally,  referred  to  the  attacks  on  countless  occasions,  frequently  as  a 

way  of  emphasizing  the  reality  of  seemingly  distant  threats  and  the  need  to  incur 

significant  costs  to  counteract  them  (including  the  2003  Iraq  war,  itself  fueled  by 

presidential  speeches  including  vivid  narratives  of  catastrophic  harm).  And  there  is  no 

doubt  that  the  salience  of  these  attacks  played  a  large  role  in  affecting  political 

behavior—and that this role cannot be understood without reference to social influences. 

The  implications  for  cultural  differences  and  for  climate  change  should  be  clear.  If 

leaders  in  different  nations  draw  attention  to  different  risks,  there  will  be  large-scale 

differences in risk perceptions. 

 

 

8. Predispositions and Culture 

But all this does not provide the full picture. Beliefs and orientations are a product 

of availability, and social influences ensure both availability and salience. But as I have 

suggested, what is available is also a product of antecedent beliefs and orientations, both 

15 

Precautions against What? 

individual  and  social.  In  other  words,  availability  is  endogenous  to,  or  a  product  of, 
predispositions, individual, cultural, and national.4  

Why  do  some  people  recall  and  emphasize  incidents  in  which  a  failure  to  take 

precautions  led  to  serious  environmental  harm?  A  likely  reason  is  that  they  are 

predisposed  to  favor  environmental  protection.  And  why  do  some  people  recall  and 

emphasize incidents in which environmental protection led to huge costs for little gain? A 

likely  reason  is  that  they  are  predisposed  to  oppose  environmental  controls.  Here  is  an 

interaction  between  the  availability  heuristic  and  confirmation  bias—”the  tendency  to 

seek information to confirm our original hypotheses and beliefs” (Aronson, 1995, p. 150). 

Confirmation bias  plays a large role in different risk  perceptions across individuals and 

groups. If members of a culturally distinct group are predisposed to believe that climate 

change contains serious risks, apparently supportive illustrations will be memorable, and 

contrary ones will be discounted. 

Of course predispositions are not a black box, and they do not come from the sky. 

They have sources. Among their sources are availability and salience. After incidents of 

mad  cow  disease  in  England,  many  Europeans  lost  trust  in  the  relevant  authorities  and 

acquired a predisposition to fear, and to take and urge precautions against, associated and 

analogous  threats.  In  Europe,  the  growth  of  precautionary  thinking,  across  certain 

domains, had a great deal to do with particular salient incidents (Vogel, 2003). The desire 

to  combat  climate  change  was  spurred  in  this  way.  Hence  there  is  complex  set  of 

interactions,  with  heuristics  helping  to  constitute  predispositions,  which  are  in  turn 

responsible  for  the  real-world  operation  of  heuristics.  All  this  happens  socially,  not 

merely individually; and predispositions are not static. When people are in a group that is 

predisposed  in  a  particular  direction,  the  salient  examples  will  be  quite  different  from 

those that are salient in a group with an opposite predisposition. Here group polarization 

is  especially  important.  What  is  sometimes  described  as  “culture,”  or  as  “deep-rooted 

cultural differences,” may be no such thing. Cascade effects and polarization, interacting 

with availability, can be responsible for inclinations and variations that might well have 

taken another form. 

                                                 

4 On culture, an influential treatment is Douglas and Wildavsky (1984); a natural reading of their work 
and the work of those inspired by them is that availability is a product of cultural orientations, rather than 
vice versa. But see Vogel (2003) for a contrasting view. 

16 

Precautions against What? 

9. Conclusion 
 
Why are some groups and some nations concerned with the risks associated with 

climate change, and why are others much less so? A sensible default assumption is that 

they are motivated by a form of intuitive cost-benefit balancing. Nations usually follow 

their rational self-interest, and a nation that has relatively less to gain from precautions, 

and  relatively  more  to  lose,  will  naturally  be  interested  in  greater  precautions.  Contrast 

here  the  enthusiasm  of  the  United  States  for  precautionary  steps  to  reduce  ozone 

depletion  with  the  reluctance  of  the  United  to  endorse  such  steps  to  reduce  global 

warming. The difference has a great deal to do with that nation’s assessment of the costs 

and benefits of precautions. 

I  have  also  suggested  that  the  operation  of  the  Precautionary  Principle,  and 

differences in risk perception among nations, have a great deal to do with the availability 

heuristic, which helps to inform intuitive cost-benefit balancing. For the risks associated 

with  climate  change,  which  are  not  likely  to  come  to  fruition  in  the  near  future,  it  is 

difficult  to  promote  availability;  but  vivid  images  are  possible  to  provide  here  as  well. 

European nations are more concerned about climate change than the United States in part 

because certain environmental risks have become more salient in the former than in the 

later, and in part because both intuitive and formal cost-benefit analysis suggest that with 

expensive preventive measures, the United States is more likely to be a net loser. If that 

analysis  shifted,  through  declining  costs  of  control  or  through  more  vivid  incidents  of 

tangible  harm,  American  participation  in  international  agreements  would  be  far  more 

probable.  

Of course availability is a product of social influences. Cascade effects and group 

polarization play substantial roles in making one or another incident available to many or 

most. There are multiple equilibria here: Single incidents and small shocks can make an 

extraordinary difference. Moreover, what is available to some will not be available to all, 

in  part  because  of  social  influences,  and  in  part  because  of  individual,  cultural,  and 

national  predispositions.  It  follows  that  some  cultures  will  find  risks  of  climate  change 

“available” not because of simple facts about what citizens have to gain and to lose, but 

also  because  the  relevant  citizens  are  predisposed  to  focus  on  some  risks  but  not  on 

others.  But  even  across  cultural  differences,  intuitive  cost-benefit  balancing  can  be 

17 

Precautions against What? 

altered by available incidents; if vivid incidents become salient, aggressive regulation is 

far more likely to be forthcoming. 

 

 
 

References 
 
Aronson, E. (ed.): 1995, Readings about the Social Animal, W.H. Freeman, New York, p.  150.  
Behrman, J.R., Kohler, H.P., and Watkins, S.C.: 2003, ‘Social Networks, HIV/AIDS, and Risk 

Perceptions’, PIER Working Paper No. 03-007. http://ssrn.com/abstract=382844. 

Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., and Welch, I.: 1998, ‘Learning from the Behavior of Others: 
Conformity, Fads, and Informational Cascades’, J. Econ. Perspect. 12, 151-170. 

Brown, R.: 1985, Social Psychology, Free Press, New York, p. 224. 
Burnum, J.F.: 1987, ‘Medical Practice a la Mode: How Medical Fashions Determine Medical 

Care’, N. Engl. J. Med. 317, 1220-1222. 

Douglas, M. and Wildavsky, A.: 1982, Risk and Culture: An Essay on the Selection of Technical 

and Environmental Dangers, Univ. of California Press, Berkeley. 

Feigenson, N., Bailis, D., and Klein, W.: 2005, ‘Perceptions of Terrorism and Disease Risks: A 

Cross-national Comparison’, Univ. Missouri L. Rev., forthcoming. 

Gigerenzer, G.: 2000, Adaptive Thinking: Rationality in the Real World, Oxford Univ. Press, 

New York. 

Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P.M., and ABC Research Group: 1999, Simple Heuristics That Make Us 

Smart, Oxford Univ. Press, New York. 

Heath, C.,: 1996, ‘Do People Prefer to Pass Along Good or Bad News? Valence and Relevance as 

Predictors of Transmission Propensity’, Org. Behav. & Hum. Decis. Process. 68, 79-94. 
Heath, C., Bell, C., and Sternberg, E.: 2001, ‘Emotional Selection in Memes: The Case of Urban 

Legends’, J. Personality & Soc. Psych. 81, 1028-1041. 

Henrich, J., Albers, W., Boyd, R., Gigerenzer, G., McCabe, K.A., Ockenfels, A., and Young, 
H.P.: 2001, ‘Group Report: What is the Role of Culture in Bounded Rationality?’, in 
Gigerenzer, G. and Selten, R. (eds.), Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, pp. 343-360. 

Hirschleifer, D.: 1995, ‘The Blind Leading the Blind: Social Influence, Fads, and Informational 
Cascades’, in Tommasi, M. and Ierulli, K. (eds.), The New Economics of Human 
Behavior, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, pp. 188-216. 

Kahneman, D. and Frederick, S.: 2002, ‘Representativeness Revisited: Attribute Substitution in 

Intuitive Judgment’ in Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., and Kahneman, D. (eds.), Heuristics and 
Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, pp. 
49-82. 

Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., and Tversky, A. (eds.): 1982, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics 

and Biases, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge and New York. 

Kull, S.: 2000, ‘Americans on the Climate change Treaty’, PIPA. 

http://www.pipa.org/OnlineReports/GlobalWarming/buenos_aires_02.00.html  
Kuran, T. and Sunstein, C.R.: 1999, ‘Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation’, Stan. L. Rev. 

Loewenstein, G. and Mather, J.: 1990, ‘Dynamic Processes in Risk Perception’, J. Risk & Uncert. 

51, 683-768. 

3, 155-175. 

Myers, D.G.: 1975, ‘Discussion-Induced Attitude Polarization’, Hum. Relat. 28, 699-714  
Myers, D.G. and Bishop, G.D.: 1971, ‘The Enhancement of Dominant Attitudes in Group 

Discuission’, J. Personality & Soc. Psych. 20, 386-391. 

18 

Precautions against What? 

Nordhaus, W.D. and Boyer, J.: 2003, Warming the World: Economic Models of Climate change, 

Pidgeon N., Kasperson, R.F., and and Slovic, P: 2003. The Social Amplification of Risk, 

MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 161-162. 

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Posner, R.A.: 2004, Catastrophe: Risk and Response, Oxford Univ. Press, New York. 
Renn, O. and Rohrmann, B. (eds.): 2000, Cross-Cultural Risk Perception: A Survey of Empirical 

Studies, Kluwer Academic Publ., Dordrecht and Boston.  

The Program on International Policy Attitudes, Americans on the Global Warming Treaty, 

available at http://www.pipa.org/OnlineReports/GlobalWarming/glob_warm_treaty.html 
at Box 15. 

Rohrmann, B. and Renn, O.: 2000, ‘Risk Perception Research: An Introduction’, in Renn, O. and 

Rohrmann, B. (eds.), Cross-Cultural Risk Perception: A Survey of Empirical Studies, 
Kluwer Academic Publ., Dordrecht and Boston, pp. 11-54. 

Sherman, S.J., Cialdini, R.B., Schwartzman, D.F., and Reynolds, K.D.: 2002, ‘Imagining Can 
Heighten or Lower the Perceived Likelihood of Contracting a Disease: The Mediating 
Effect of Ease of Imagery’, in Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., and Kahneman, D. (eds.), 
Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, Cambridge Univ. Press, 
Cambridge and New York, pp. 98-102. 

Sjoberg, L., Kolarova, D., and Rucai, A.: 2000, ‘Risk Perception in Bulgaria and Romania’ in 

Renn, O. and Rohrmann, B. (eds.), Cross-Cultural Risk Perception: A Survey of 
Empirical Studies, Kluwer Academic Publ., Dordrecht and Boston, pp. 145-184. 

Slovic, P.: 2000, The Perception of Risk, Earthscan Publ., London and Sterling, Va., p. 40. 
Sunstein, C.R.: 2005, Laws of Fear: Beyond the Precautionary Principle, Cambridge Univ. Press, 

forthcoming. 

Sunstein, C.R.: 2003a, “Beyond the Precautionary Principle’, Univ. Pa. L. Rev. 151, 1003-1058. 
Sunstein, C.R.: 2003b, Why Societies Need Dissent, Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge. 
Sunstein, C.R., Hastie, R., Payne, J.W., Schkade, D.A., Viscusi, W.K.: 2002, Punitive Damages: 

How Juries Decide, Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago. 

Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D.: 2002, ‘Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases’ in 
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., and Tversky, A. (eds.), Judgment Under Uncertainty: 
Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge and New York, pp. 3-22. 

Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D.: 1986, ‘Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases’, in 
Arkes, H.R. and Hammond, K.R. (eds.), Judgment and Decision Making: An 
Interdisciplinary Reader, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge and New York, pp. 38-55. 

Viscusi, W.K. and Hirch, J.: 2005, “The Generational Divide in Support for Climate Change 

Policies: European Evidence,” Discussion Paper No. 504, Harvard Law School. 

Vogel, D.: 2003, ‘The Hare and the Tortoise Revisited: The New Politics of Consumer and 

Environmental regulation in Europe’, Brit. J. Pol. Sci. 33, 557-580. 

Wiener, J.B. and Rogers, M.D.: 2002, ‘Comparing Precaution in the United States and Europe’, J. 

Risk Res. 5, 317-349. 

 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Professor Cass Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 

csunstei@uchicago.edu 

19 

Precautions against What? 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

 
For a listing of papers 1–174 please go to Working Papers at http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
 
175. 
176. 

Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 
David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short‐Term Assets 
(January 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 
Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities 
and Verizon (January 2003) 
William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An 
Economic Perspective (February 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) 
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life‐Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) 
Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) 
David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September 
2003) 
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the 
Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 
and 2000? (September 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage 
(September 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September 
2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts 
of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)  
Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure 
Time (October 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003) 
David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) 
David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright Law (April 
2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of 
Statistical Lives (February 2004) 

177. 

178. 

179. 

180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 

187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191.  
192. 
193. 
194. 

195. 

196. 

197. 

198. 

199. 

200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 
204. 

205. 
206. 
207. 

20 

Precautions against What? 

220.  

208. 

209. 

210. 
211. 
212. 
213. 

214. 

215. 

216. 
217. 
218. 

219. 

221. 
222. 
223. 
224. 

225. 
226. 
227. 
228. 
229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 
233. 
234. 
235. 

236. 

237. 
238. 

239. 

240. 
241. 

242. 
243. 
244. 

245. 

Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A Critique of the 
Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceutical Patents: 
Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004) 
Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004) 
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Labor 
within and between Law Firms (April 2004) 
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of 
Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry (April 2004) 
James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the Market for 
Underwriting Business (July 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004) 
Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, Company Stock, 
Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets 
(August 2004, revised October 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross‐Cultural Risk 
Perceptions (August 2004) 
M. Todd Henderson and James C. Spindler, Corporate Heroin: A Defense of Perks (August 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Cyber Security: Of Heterogeneity and Autarky (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Unbundling Scope‐of‐Permission Goods: When Should We Invest in Reducing 
Entry Barriers? (September 2004) 
Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing through Law (September 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of the Use of Citations in the Law (2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and the Environment (October 2004) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Cordell Hull, the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act, and the WTO (October 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Contract Interpretation (November 2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, A Social Networks Theory of Privacy (December 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Minimalism at War (December 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman, How the Law Responds to Self‐Help (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, The Decline of the International Court of Justice (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, Is the International Court of Justice Biased? (December 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, Public vs. Private Enforcement of International Economic Law: Of Standing and 
Remedy (February 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Serial Entrepreneurs and Small Business Bankruptcies 
(March 2005) 
Eric A. Posner, There Are No Penalty Default Rules in Contract Law (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright and the DMCA: Market Locks and Technological Contracts (March 
2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? The Relevance of 
Life‐Life Tradeoffs (March 2005) 
Alan O. Sykes, Trade Remedy Laws (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Rewinding Sony: The Evolving Product, Phoning Home, and the Duty of 
Ongoing Design (March 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Irreversible and Catastrophic (April 2005)  
James C. Spindler, IPO Liability and Entrepreneurial Response (May 2005) 
Douglas Lichtman, Substitutes for the Doctrine of Equivalents: A Response to Meurer and Nard 
(May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, A New Progressivism (May 2005) 

21 

Precautions against What? 

Douglas G. Baird, Property, Natural Monopoly, and the Uneasy Legacy of INS v. AP (May 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Private Debt and the Missing Lever of Corporate Governance 
(May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Administrative Law Goes to War (May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Chevron Step Zero (May 2005) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Exclusionary Amenities in Residential Communities (July 2005) 
Joseph Bankman and David A. Weisbach, The Superiority of an Ideal Consumption Tax over an 
Ideal Income Tax (July 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Arden Rowell, On Discounting Regulatory Benefits: Risk, Money, and 
Ingergenerational Equity (July 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Boundedly Rational Borrowing: A Consumer’s Guide (July 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Ranking Law Schools: A Market Test? (July 2005) 
David A. Weisbach, Paretian Intergenerational Discounting (August 2005) 
Eric A. Posner, International Law: A Welfarist Approach (September 2005) 
Adrian Vermeule, Absolute Voting Rules (August 2005) 
Eric Posner and Adrian Vermeule, Emergencies and Democratic Failure (August 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird and Donald S. Bernstein, Absolute Priority, Valuation Uncertainty, and the 
Reorganization Bargain (September 2005) 
Adrian Vermeule, Reparations as Rough Justice (September 2005) 
Arthur J. Jacobson and John P. McCormick, The Business of Business Is Democracy (September 
2005) 
Adrian Vermeule, Political Constraints on Supreme Court Reform (October 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Availability Heuristic, Intuitive Cost‐Benefit Analysis, and Climate Change 
(November 2005) 

246.  
247. 

248. 
249. 
250. 
251. 

252. 

253. 
254. 
255. 
256. 
257. 
258. 
259. 

260. 
261. 

262. 
263. 

 

22 

