University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2005

A New Progressivism
Cass R. Sunstein

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "A New Progressivism" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 245, 2005).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 245 
(2D SERIES) 
 
 

 
 
A New Progressivism 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
May 2005 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=726443 

 

 

A New Progressivism 

 
Cass R. Sunstein* 

 

Abstract 

 
 
Based on an address for a conference on Law and Transformation in South Africa, this paper 
explores problems with two twentieth-century approaches to government: the way of markets and the 
way of planning. It urge that the New Progressivism simultaneously offers (1) a distinctive conception 
of  government’s  appropriate  means,  an  outgrowth  of  the  late-twentieth-century  critique  of  economic 
planning,  and  (2)  a  distinctive  understanding  of  government’s  appropriate  ends,  an  outgrowth  of 
evident failures with market arrangements and largely a product of the mid-twentieth-century critique 
of laissez faire. It emphasizes the need to replace bans and commands with appropriate incentives, and 
to  attend  to  social  norms  and  social  meanings  in  leading  human  behavior  in  welfare-promoting 
directions. The ultimate goal is to promote some of the goals associated with America’s New Deal and 
Europe’s  social  democracy,  but  without  using  the  crude,  inflexible,  and  often  counterproductive 
methods associated with those approaches. Some attention is devoted to the effects of globalization, the 
AIDS crisis, crime prevention, and the role of economic growth.  
 

Introduction: Means and Ends 

The  German  psychologist  Dietrich  Dorner  has  done  some  fascinating  experiments 
designed to see whether people can engage in successful social engineering.1 Dorner’s 

experiments are run via computer. Participants are asked to solve problems faced by 

the inhabitants of some region of the world; the problems may involve poverty, poor 

medical  care,  inadequate  fertilization  of  crops,  sick  cattle,  insufficient  water,  or 

excessive  hunting  and  fishing.  Through  the  magic  of  the  computer,  many  policy 

initiatives  are  available  (improved  care  of  cattle,  childhood  immunization,  drilling 

more wells), and participants can choose among them. Once particular initiatives are 

chosen,  the  computer  projects,  over  short  periods  and  then  over  decades,  what  is 

likely to happen in the region.  

In these experiments, success is entirely possible; some initiatives will actually 

make  for  effective  and  enduring  improvements.  But  most  of  the  participants—even 

the  most  educated  and  professional  ones—produce  calamities.  They  do  so  because 

                                                 
*  This  paper  is  based  on  a  keynote  address  on  a  conference  on  Law  and  Transformation  in  South 
Africa; readers are asked to make allowances for a paper originally intended for oral presentation. I am 
grateful to Lesley Wexler for superb research assistance and to Martha Nussbaum and Theunis Roux 
for many helpful comments and discussions. 
1 Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure (1997). 

2 

they  do  not  see  the  complex,  system-wide  effects  of  particular  interventions.  For 

example,  they  may  see  the  importance  of  increasing  the  number  of  cattle,  but  once 

they do that, they create a serious risk of overgrazing, and they fail to anticipate that 

problem.  They  may  understand  full  well  the  value  of  drilling  more  wells  to  provide 

water, but they do not anticipate the energy and environmental effects of the drilling, 

which  then  endangers  the  food  supply.  Only  the  rare  participant  is  able  to  see  a 

number  of  steps  down  the  road—to  understand  the  multiple  effects  of  one-shot 

interventions into the system. 

NOT A MIDPOINT 

Since  the  1980s,  many  nations  have  been  concerned  to  make  three  transitions.  The 

first involves the shift from an authoritarian system to some kind of democracy. The 

second  involves  the  creation  of  a  secure  system  of  individual  rights.  The  third 

involves  the  introduction  of  reforms  that  will  promote  economic  growth.    The 

relationships  among  the  three  transitions  are  complex  and  contested.  Are  rights 

necessary  for  democratic  self-government,  or  antithetical  to  it?  Might  democracy 

undermine  economic  growth,  at  least  if  people  are  demanding  measures  that  will 

make prosperity less likely? Will a stable system of rights weaken, or strengthen, the 

prospects for economic development? 

My  goal  in  this  essay  is  to  elaborate  an  understanding  of  government’s  role 

that promises, at once, to strengthen individual rights, to promote democratic self-rule, 

and  to  increase  economic  growth.  With  some  trepidation,  I  will  use  describe  this 

understanding  as  a  New  Progressivism.  New  Progressivists  attempt  to  combine  an 

appreciation of a great lesson of the first half of the twentieth century, the failure of 

markets, with an  appreciation of the great lesson of the second half of the  twentieth 

century, the failure of planning. New Progressivists offer a certain conception of both 

rights  and  democracy.  They  understand  rights  to  include  freedom  from  desperate 

conditions;  they  understand  democracy  to  require  a  certain  measure  of  deliberation 

and  reflection,  rather  than  automatic  responses  to  what  the  public  currently  wants. 

Because  freedom  from  desperate  conditions  is  a  right,  they  are  concerned  that  total 

reliance on is connected with a failure to protect individual rights. They also think that 

a deliberative democracy will supplement markets, and hence that a system of market 

 

 

 

 

3 

ordering alone does not allow a proper domain for democratic self-rule. The failure of 

planning is simultaneously a  failure in terms of economics, democracy, and rights. 

I  urge  that  the  New  Progressivism  simultaneously  offers  (1)  a  distinctive 

conception  of  government’s  appropriate  means,  an  outgrowth  of  the  late-twentieth-

century  critique  of  economic  planning,  and  (2)  a  distinctive  understanding  of 

government’s  appropriate  ends,  an  outgrowth  of  evident  failures  with  market 

arrangements  and  largely  a  product  of  the  mid-twentieth-century  critique  of  laissez 

faire.  For  this  reason  the  New  Progressivism  should  not  be  seen  as  a  compromise 

between  right  and  left,  or  as  an  effort  to  seek  some  midpoint  between  those  who 

believe  in  markets  and  those  who  reject  them.  Far  from  being  a  compromise  or  a 

midpoint, the New Progressivism offers both means and ends of its own. 

With respect to means, the New Progressivism rejects approaches prominently 

associated with both social democracy and the New Deal, on the ground that they are 

frequently ineffective or even counterproductive, especially from the economic point 

of view.  To the New Progressivists, social democrats are too often like participants in 

Dorner’s  experiments,  compromising  economic  and  other  goals  without  much  sense 

of  what  they  are  doing.  Those  who  endorse  the  New  Progressivism  are  insistently 

focused on consequences, and they know that initiatives designed to help people who 

need help might backfire in practice—and that good intentions are no excuse for bad 

consequences.  Above  all,  those  who  endorse  the  New  Progressivism  have  learned 

from the past fifty years of experience with markets and with efforts to discipline and 

constrain  markets.  They  are  alert 

to  side  effects  and  unintended  harmful 

consequences.  Wherever  possible,  they  attempt  to  use  market-oriented  strategies, 

enlisting  markets  on  behalf  of  human  interests—not  because  those  strategies  are 

morally  superior,  and  not  because  markets  have  special  moral  claims  (they  do  not), 

but  because  such  strategies  are  likely  to  work.  New  Progressivists  believe  that  if 

economic growth is a goal, markets should be enlisted far more often than they now 

are.  

It follows that New Progressivists are alert to the central role of civil society, 

and especially to the importance of social norms, which often drive private behaviour 

and which can change, for better or worse, over time. They are also skeptical, on both 

economic  and  democratic  grounds,  of  command-and-control  regulation  and  of 

aggressive interference with the labour market. They want to supplement markets, not 

 

 

4 

to  displace  them.  They  favour  such  initiatives  as  the  Earned  Income  Tax  Credit 

(EITC)  and  housing  subsidies  for  the  poor,  and  they  are  cautious  about  a  high 

minimum  wage  and  rent  control  legislation.  They  believe  that  environmental 

problems  should  be  handled  through  economic  incentives,  not  through  centralized 

mandates,  which  invite  protectionism  and  interest-group  maneuvering.  Thus,  for 

example, the New Progressivism 

•  attempts to control problems associated with social norms, such as crime, unsafe 

sex,  and  other  risk-taking  behavior,  through  democratic  efforts  at  norm 

management, often involving public-private partnerships; 

•  places the highest possible premium on education and training;  

rejects economic protectionism;  

favors incentives rather than centralized governmental commands;  

•  attempts to ensure flexibility in the labour market if and on the ground that it helps 

low-income workers as well as others;  

•  sees economic growth as a central (though far from exclusive) part of antipoverty 

policy. 

So  much  for  means—what  of  ends?  Those  who  endorse 

the  New 
Progressivism  seek  initially  to  achieve  an  incompletely  theorized  agreement2—an 

agreement  on  various  practices  and  initiatives  capable  of  attracting  support  from  a 

wide  range  of  theoretical  perspectives.  Utilitarians,  Kantians,  those  who  begin  from 

diverse  theological  positions,  and  numerous  others  can  support  the  approach  urged 

here. But to the extent that theoretical depth is required, New Progressivists will insist 

that  markets  should  be  identified  with  neither  justice  nor  liberty.  They  do  not  think 

that markets will inevitably protect individual rights, especially because they believe 

that  the  right  to  be  free  from  discrimination  counts  as  a  right,  one  that  markets  can 

promote.  They  see  markets  as  operating  against  a  background  that  includes 

considerable  injustice,  and  also  limited  liberty.  They  think  that  to  a  large  degree, 

market ordering will merely build on that unacceptable background.  

At the same time, New Progressivists have considerable sympathy for some of 

the rights emphasized by social democrats in Europe and New Dealers in the United 

States:  decent  life  prospects  for  all,  a  social  safety  net,  a  safe  environment,  genuine 

equality of opportunity. But they believe that these rights have often been quite murky 

 

• 

• 

 

5 

and  ill  defined—and  also  that  they  have  been  confused,  too  often,  with  a  kind  of 

freestanding  egalitarianism,  concerned  to  ensure  equal  economic  outcomes  as  such. 

Those who believe in a New Progressivism insist on an acceptable floor for everyone. 

But  they  are  not  much  concerned  with large  disparities  in  wealth,  not  because  these 

are fair, but because the much more important goal is to ensure decent outcomes for 

all,  and  because  allowing  such  disparities  may  well  be  necessary  to  provide 

appropriate incentives.  

To  those  who  believe  in  a  New  Progressivism,  what  is  most  necessary  is  to 

ensure that basic human capabilities do not fall below a certain, reasonably generous 
threshold.3  To  this  New  Progressivists  add  a  distinctive  conception  of  equality,  one 

that forbids second-class citizenship, or lower caste status, for members of any group. 

This anticaste principle makes sex equality a singularly high priority, as a means for 

economic  development  and  an  end  in  itself.  The  rights  embodied  in  the  anticaste 

principle  are  indispensable  to  growth.  They  promote  democracy  as  well.  For  these 

reasons,  the  New  Progressivists  hope  to  offer  a  conception  of  government  that 

simultaneously  promote  democratic  and  economic  goals,  and  that  does  so  without 

compromising  individual  rights,  properly  conceived.  Of  course  these  various  ideas 

can  be  specified  in  ways  that  will  lead  to  intense  conflicts  among  them.  New 

Progressivists attempt a specification that will reduce the conflicts, seeing rights, for 

example,  as  a  precondition  for  democracy  and  growth,  and  seeing  growth  as  an 

(imperfect) ally of rights. 

OF MESS AND MENACE 

There  has  of  course  been  a  great  deal  of  recent  discussion,  both  supportive  and 

critical,  of  what  a  ‘Third  Way’  might  involve.  What  I  am  calling  the  New 

Progressivism  has  an  obvious  relationship  to  the  idea  of  a  Third  Way,  especially 

insofar as those who endorse Third Way thinking tend to be receptive to markets and 

growth  at  the  same  time  that  they  are  committed  to  improving  the  rights  of 

disadvantaged people. I do not intend here to summarize that discussion, or to endorse 

                                                                                                                                            
2 See Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996). 
3  See  Amartya  Sen,  Development  As  Freedom  (1999);  Martha  Nussbaum,  Women  and  Human 
Development (1999); Anthony Giddens, The Third Way and its Critics (2000). 

 

 

 

 

6 

the Third Way programme.4 What I  mean  to do  instead is  to develop  a freestanding 

account of what a New Progressivism might be understood to entail.  

The American law professor Karl Llewellyn is said to have said, ‘Technique 

without morals is a menace; but morals without technique is a mess.’ This is a fitting 

criticism of some of the experiments in social democracy of the last several decades; 

it  is  a  shorthand  description  of  the  failures  of  many  participants  in  Dorner’s 

experiments, failures with parallels in the economic and democratic disasters brought 

about by twentieth-century ‘planners’ of various stripes. But Llewellyn is also said to 

have  said:  ‘Morals  without  technique  is  a  mess;  but  technique  without  morals  is  a 

menace.’  This  is  a  fitting  criticism  of  many  twentieth-century  experiments  in  social 

engineering,  but  it  is  a  criticism  too  of  excessive  reliance  on  free  markets.  The  real 

task,  for  those  interested  in  a  New  Progressivism,  involves  development  of 

approaches and methods that are neither menace nor mess.  

Recent debates, including debates over the Third Way, have drawn attention to 

two  possible  strategies  for  dealing  with  markets:  to  leave  them  alone  or  to  displace 

them. But the dichotomy is much too simple; in fact it is damagingly simple. It is too 

simple,  first,  because  the  idea  of  ‘displacing’  markets  conceals  a  range  of  options, 

from  nationalizing  industries,  to  blocking  certain  deals,  to  limiting  waivers,  to 

providing information. It is too simple, second, because it is possible to complement 

rather  than  to  displace  markets—to  provide  institutions  that do what  markets  do  not 

do, and to help people who are failed by markets, an emphatically human institution. 

As Amartya Sen has written, very much in the spirit of the New Progressivism, ‘it is 

possible to  argue  at  the same time  both (1) for  more  market  institutions, and (2) for 
going more beyond the market.’5  

With respect to methods and strategies, that is what I will be suggesting here. 

Throughout  I  will  paint  with  an  extremely  broad  brush,  discussing  many  issues  that 

could easily be treated in a short book, or even a long one. My hope is that the brisk 

and  sometimes  reckless  treatment  of  many  issues  might  make  up  for  its  otherwise 

unpardonable neglect of the trees, by providing a decent perspective on the forest, a 

                                                 
4 Two prominent discussions are Anthony Giddens, The Third Way (1998), and Giddens, ibid. In my 
view, Giddens offers too large a collection of ideas, a pastiche in fact, and too much of his discussion is 
platitudinous.  Amartya  Sen  and  Jean  Dreze,  India  (1997),  does  not  bill  itself  in  these  terms,  but  it 
seems  to  me  the  best  presentation  of  what  a  New  Progressivism  might  actually  look  like.  Cass  R. 
Sunstein, Free Markets and Social Justice (1997), is also intended to set out ideas in this direction. 
5 Sen and Dreze, ibid. at 28. 

 

 

7 

perspective  that  perhaps  continues  to  be  absent  from  existing  treatments  of  possible 

twenty-first century ‘ways’. 

The plan of the essay is as follows. The second part offers a brief discussion of 

two familiar ‘ways’ and of what is wrong with them. Here globalization is seen to be a 

process  that  intensifies  problems  with  both  markets  and  planning,  in  a  way  that 

jeopardizes  economic  growth  and  also  certain  individual  rights.  The  third  part  deals 

with  social  norms,  especially  in  the  context  of  crime  prevention,  HIV/AIDS,  and 

related  problems.  The  fourth  part  deals  with  employment  policy  and  poverty.    The 

fifth part explores command-and-control regulation and some alternatives, especially 

in the context of environmental protection. The sixth part investigates the importance 

and limits of economic growth, with particular stress on the need to attend to human 

capabilities and sex equality. The seventh part is a brief conclusion. 

Two ‘Ways’—and Globalization 

THE WAY OF MARKETS AND THE WAY OF PLANNING 

If there is a New Progressivism, what is it opposing? There are two candidates. Let us 

understand the first to be a version of the Reagan-Thatcher programme, routed above 

all in the work of Nobel Prize winner Friedrich Hayek. Call this ‘the way of markets’.  

On  this  view,  free  markets  are  indispensable  to  liberty,  rights,  and  economic 

growth.  The  role  of  the  state  is  to  create  the  preconditions  for  well-functioning 

markets,  by  establishing  rights  of  private  property  and  freedom  of  contract,  by 

ensuring  competition  rather  than  monopoly,  and  by  preventing  force  and  fraud. 

Perhaps  the  government  should  also  provide  a  social  safety  net,  though  a  relatively 

weak one (to ensure proper work incentives). But according to those who endorse the 

way of markets, government should not interfere with the labour market through, for 

example, high minimum wage requirements or through special protections for labour 

unions.  And  those  who  endorse  the  way  of  markets  place  the  highest  possible 

premium  on  economic  growth,  on  a  particular,  market-based  conception  of  liberty, 

and on social ordering through market ordering, which they see as essential to growth 

and  liberty  alike.  Of  course  there  is  a  spectrum  of  possible  approaches  here,  from 

those  who  reject  a  social  safety  net  to  those  willing  to  accept  an  ample  set  of 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

protections for those at the bottom. What I mean to emphasize, sometimes captured in 

the  idea  of  ‘neo-liberalism’,  or  ‘liberalization’,  is  the  idea  of  placing  primary 

emphasis on free markets and economic productivity. 

Like the way of markets, the way of planning is actually a spectrum of ‘ways’, 

ranging  from  Soviet-style  centralized  planning  to  those  forms  of  social  democracy 

(not  excluding  America’s)  that  are  comfortable,  in  some  areas,  with  nationalized 

industries,  aggressive  regulation  of  markets,  price  and  wage  controls,  and  most 

generally ‘planning’ of various kinds. As random examples, consider the following: 

• 

• 

laws that make it difficult for employers to discharge employees; 

laws that make it hard for landlords to evict tenants; 

•  environmental  regulation  that  specifies  the  technology  that  must  be  used  by 

industry; 

• 

tariffs; 

•  high minimum wage requirements; 

•  public ownership of industry; 

•  ceilings and floors on prices as a whole. 

Of course it is possible for a nation to adopt narrow or broad plans, or to be a 

planner  in  only  a  few  small  domains.  A  government  that  is  generally  skeptical  of 

planning  might  conclude,  for  example,  that  it  makes  sense  to  have  tariffs  in  some 

areas,  or  that  agriculture  should  be  protected  with  price  supports,  or  that  workers 

should  be  protected  from  discharge,  or  that  technological  requirements  are  properly 

placed on new cars, to reduce levels of air pollution. 

PROBLEMS AND STRESSES 

Let  us  now briefly  explore  some  of  the problems  in  both  of  these  ‘ways’. For  those 

who  seek  the  way  of  markets,  the  initial  difficulty  is  that  markets  should  not  be 

identified with liberty or with rights properly conceived. Markets operate against the 

backdrop  set  by  existing  distributions  of  resources,  opportunities,  and  talents.  When 

an employee is able to attract only a small amount of money for an hour’s work, it is 

surely  wrong  to  say  that  liberty  is  respected  if  we  simply  respect  the  deal.  To  the 

extent that existing distributions are a product of a lack of liberty, market ordering is a 

problem, not the solution. Whether the deal should be disrupted  is another question. 

 

 

 

 

9 

But what markets generate does not come, from the standpoint of liberty, with a stamp 

of approval.  

An equally fundamental problem is that the consequences of market ordering 

may not be so wonderful for many people, who will be left with bad opportunities and 

few resources. It should not be necessary to belabour this point. In any large nation, 

respect for market ordering will predictably produce a situation in which millions of 

people end up with low wages, long hours, and bad working conditions—if they end 

up with work at all. Of course a social safety net can help. But even if it is generous, it 

is not going to do all of what  must  be done. It  will not, for example, protect people 

against  unsafe  working  conditions,  sexual  harassment,  pollution,  or  unfair 

discrimination.  To  the  extent  that  the  category  of  rights  includes  protection  against 

some or all of these injuries, markets will compromise rights. Indeed we have every 

reason to believe that in some circumstances, markets will promote discrimination—

as, for example, when customers or coworkers would prefer someone of a certain race 

or gender.  

At  the  same  time,  democratic  values  are  compromised  by  any  effort  to  treat 

“the  market”  as  sacrosanct.  Put  to  one  side  the  evident  point  that  markets  must  be 

created  by  government,  willing  and  able  to  protect  private  property  and  freedom  of 

contract. A real problem is that a democratic citizenry will often want to supplement 

or  displace  markets,  simply  to  protect  the  interests  of  some,  many,  or  all.  A 

commitment  to  market  ordering  will  sharply  diminish  the  terrain  by  which  people 

make choices about the kind of society in which they will live. 

But planning faces difficulties of its own. One problem is that it is exceedingly 

likely to be vulnerable to pressures from self-interested private groups with stakes in a 

particular outcome. If so, democracy is jeopardized. It is very common, for example, 

to  observe  environmental  regulation  being  turned  into  a  mechanism  for  the 

distribution  of  benefits  to  groups  whose  interests  have  precious  little  to  do  with 
environmental  protection.6  An  even  more  fundamental  problem  has  to  do  with  the 

unintended  bad  consequences  of  the  most  well-motivated  plans.  ‘Planners’  are 

constantly  surprised.  To  take  just  two  examples,  a  law  that  makes  it  hard  for 

employers to discharge employees is likely to make employers reluctant to hire people 

                                                 
6 In the United States, a classic discussion is Bruce Ackerman and William Hassler, Clean Coal/Dirty 
Air (1983). 

 

 

10 

in  the  first  instance;  a  high  minimum  wage  is  likely  to  decrease  employment.    The 

problem is pervasive, and it can lead to unfortunate consequences, especially for the 

disadvantaged.  We can understand the problem a bit better in light of Dorner’s work, 

showing  the  unfortunate  systemic  effects  of  one-shot  interventions.  Economic  and 

social  orders  are  systems,  and  the  difficulty  with  plans  is  that  their  architects  are 

infrequently able to foresee the consequences of their actions. 

Planners frequently refer to the unfairness of markets, and they are often right 

to  do  so.  But  a  reference  to  unfairness  should  not  be  allowed  to  support  laws  that 

actually do no good. In Sen’s words, “The rhetoric of ‘equity’ has often been invoked 

to  justify  governmental  interventions  without  any  scrutinized  political  assessment of 

how these powers will be exercised and what actual effects they will have. In practice, 

these ill-directed regulations have not only interfered often enough with the efficiency 

of economic operations (especially of modern industries), they have also failed fairly 
comprehensively  to  promote  any  kind  of  real  equity  in  distributional  matters.”7  The 

point does not show that all plans are bad. But an overriding problem with the way of 

planning is simply that the consequences of plans are often bad from the perspective 

of well-meaning planners themselves. Plans may well violate rights, as has often been 

seen in Communist nations. But plans are often ineffectual too, and the result can be 

economic  disaster.  A  low  GDP  is  no  ally  of  individual  rights,  especially  if  we 

understand poverty as a rights violation. 

THE ROLE OF GLOBALIZATION 

Thus far I have said nothing about  globalization. (By the  term I  mean  to refer, very 

simply, to the increasing mobility of persons, information, and products from one area 

of  the  globe  to  another.)  What  is  the  effect  of  globalization  on  the  way  of  planning 

and the way of markets?  

The most important point is that with respect to markets and planning, global 

pressures produce a difference not of kind but of degree. We best think of a situation 

of globalization as ‘like ordinary domestic markets—only more so’. The major effect 

of  global  pressures  is  to  intensify  competition,  so  that  stringent  national  regulation 

might  well  leave  companies  within  the  nation  at  a  disadvantage  both  abroad  and  at 

 

 

 

 

11 

home.  The  resulting  disadvantage  might  be  reduced  through  protectionist  measures, 

but these create familiar problems of their own, because they hurt local consumers (by 

increasing prices) and are likely, generally speaking, to harm the national economy.  

In  fact  globalization  increases  the  problems  associated  with  both  of  the  two 

‘ways’. Insofar as markets produce rights violations of certain kinds, and bad results 

for  millions  of  people,  global  pressures  increase  the  difficulty.  (Of  course  such 

markets  also  carry  many  benefits  as  well,  for  poor  people  as  well  as  everyone  else, 

especially  insofar  as  the  consequence  is  to  cut  prices.)  If  workers  within  the  nation 

have  to  compete  with  everyone  in  the  world,  or  in  any  case  with  a  larger  class  of 

people,  those  without  training  and  skills  are  going  to  be  left  further  behind.  At  the 

same  time,  global  pressures  will  inevitably  confound  ill-considered  ‘plans’.  Because 

markets  are  frequently  global,  the  effects  of  plans  will  often  be  very  different  from 

what  was  sought  and  anticipated.  This  is  a  particular  problem  if,  for  example,  an 

effect of stringent regulation of the labor market is to reduce the demand for domestic 

labour, thus hurting workers themselves. 

This  is  hardly  a  claim  that  states  are  incapable  of  governing  in  a  global  era. 

There is a great deal that they can do. Evidence simply does not support the claim that 

the increased mobility of capital has disabled national regulation. But it is a claim that 

the problems with the two ways are simultaneously compounded by the existence of 

global markets. 

RIGHTS AND MONEY 

THE ROLE OF COSTS: THE INEVITABLY CLOSE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN 

Those  who  favour  markets  and  those  who  favour  planning  often  make  a  sharp 

distinction between ‘negative rights’ and ‘positive rights’. The former are said to be 

barriers  to  government  action,  and  to that  extent  costless.  The  second  are  said  to  be 

entitlements  to  government  protection,  and  to  that  extent  costly.  Market  enthusiasts 

argue for the former and against the latter. Planners tend to argue for both.  

                                                                                                                                            
7 Sen and Dreze, n. 4 above, at 186. 

 

 

 

 

12 

From the standpoint of the New Progressivism (as well as from the standpoint 
of the Constitutional Court of South Africa8), both views suffer from a problem that is 

both  conceptual  and  practical:  along  the  relevant  dimension,  there  is  no  difference 

between  negative  and  positive  rights.  Both  consist  of  entitlements  to  government 

action, and to that extent, both are costly. In a poor nation, both sorts of rights are at 

risk.  Compare,  for  example,  the  right  to  free  speech  with  the  right  to  a  minimum 

income. In a state of effective anarchy, or in a state without funds, neither right can 

exist.  Of  course  the  minimum  income  guarantee  will  lack  taxpayer  support.  But  the 

same is true for the right to free speech. Without a judiciary willing to protect people 

from public (as well as private) intrusions on freedom of speech, that freedom cannot 

exist.  Without  a  state  willing  and  able  to  prevent  public  marauders  from  silencing 

opposition, free speech is a chimera. Without public protection against private acts of 

violence against controversial statements, free speech is plainly absent.  

What is true for free speech is true for the whole universe of negative rights.9 

Consider,  for  example,  two  of  the  most  quintessential  liberal  rights:  the  right  to 

private  property  and  the  right  to  freedom  of  contract.  Both  of  these  depend  not 

incidentally but essentially on government protection. Private property does not exist 

in the state of nature. It is a taxpayer-subsidized right, justified on the ground that it 

benefits  individuals  and  society  as  a  whole.  People  can  make  contracts  without  a 

strong state; but unless a legal system, subsidized by taxpayers, stands ready and able 

to ensure that contracts are enforced, what force are mere words likely to have? 

Those who believe in a New Progressivism know that all rights are costly and 

that  a  poor  state  cannot  protect  rights.  One  of  the  reasons  why  they  favour  a  strong 

economy,  and  economic  growth,  is  that  these  are  important  preconditions  for  ample 

rights  protection.  And  in  a  rich  or  poor  state,  it  follows  that  a  central  task  for 

democratic  self-government  is  to  obtain  the  necessary  funds  and  to  ensure  that  they 

are allocated in a way that reflects sensible priority setting. The field of public finance 

is not separable from the field of democratic theory. 

                                                 
8 See Ex parte Chairperson of the Constitutional Assembly: in re Certification of the Constitution of the 
Republic of South Africa, 1996 1996 (4) S.A. 744 (CC) para 77. 
9 For detailed discussion, see Stephen Holmes and Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost of Rights (1998). 

 

 

 

13 

Social  Meaning  and  Social  Norms  (with  Particular  Reference  to  HIV/AIDS, 

Crime, Discrimination, and Environmental Protection) 

Those  who  endorse  the  way  of  markets  have  little  to  say  about  the  relationship 

between  government  and  civil  society.  Civil  society  is  defined  as  equivalent  to 

economic  society.  Thus  market  enthusiasts  tend  to  rely  on  existing  norms  and 

preferences;  this  is  part  of  their  conception  of  laissez  faire.  Those  who  endorse  the 

way of planning also have little to say about civil society, sometimes treating it as a 

domain  that  must  be  enlisted  in  the  interest  of  social  goals.  But  there  is  a  better 

approach,  one  that  promises  to  do  what  governments  often  seek  to  do,  but  at  lower 

cost. Such an approach would emphasize several points: (1) the crucial importance of 

social norms in producing both desirable and undesirable behaviour; (2) the inevitable 

role of government in helping to constitute such norms; (3) the dependence of social 

norms  on  current  information;  (4)  the  often-rapid  change  in  social  norms  over  time; 

(5) the extent to which highly visible, or cognitively ‘available,’ examples and events 

can alter norms and behaviour; and (5) the possible use of government power to move 

norms in desirable directions.  

As  we  will  see,  these  points  help  suggest  such  promising  possibilities  for 

controlling  many  social  problems,  including  crime,  HIV/AIDS,  discrimination,  and 

environmental  protection.  What  I  will  be  emphasizing  here  is  the  significance  of 

social  cascades,  including  norm  cascades,  in  which  social  interactions  can  lead 

behaviour  in  dramatic  directions.  Sometimes  such  cascades  are  induced  by  new 

beliefs; sometimes they are induced by new understandings of the meaning of certain 

actions.  Since  people  take  their  cues  from the  actions  of  others,  and  since  they  care 

about their reputations, certain policies can backfire, and certain others can have large 

and desirable effects. 

PROBLEMS WITH BANS, ECONOMIC AND OTHERWISE 

When  government  seeks  to  discourage  certain  conduct,  what  should  it  do?  Those 

committed to planning generally have a simple answer: Forbid it. Those committed to 

markets  provide  the  same  answer,  though  they  are  reluctant  to  ask  government  to 

discourage  private  behaviour  falling  outside  the  basic  categories  of  force  and  fraud. 

Those  who  believe  in  a  New  Progressivism  think  that  the  shared  answer—‘forbid 

 

 

 

 

14 

it’—is much too simple, and in important ways misleading and even damaging, both 

to  rights  and  to  the  economy.  I  am  speaking  here,  then,  of  a  promising  but  often 

overlooked means for promoting a range of social goals. 

New  Progressivists  do  believe  that  incentives  are  important,  and  for  anyone 

who believes that, it seems natural to think that if conduct is banned, there will be less 

of it. But bans create problems of their own. In some circumstances they can be self-

defeating,  producing  more  of  the  behaviour  that  they  seek  to  reduce.  The  reason  is 

that  behaviour  is  often  driven  by  social  norms,  and  hence  by  the  signal  that  the 

behaviour carries; a ban can amplify the signal and increase the conduct. Suppose, for 

example,  that  people  are  engaging  in  certain  harmful  conduct  precisely  because  the 

conduct is a way of defying authority and offering certain signals to relevant people. 

You  might  smoke,  for  example,  precisely  because  smoking  is,  in  some  places,  a 

dissident act; so too with a decision to engage in unsafe sex; so too for a decision to 

commit a crime. In short, actions have meanings, and the social meaning of action is 

an  important  determinant  of  what  people  will  do  and  when  they  will  do  it.    (In  the 

United  States,  some  increases  in  risky  sex  have  come  from  deliberate  efforts  at 

defying efforts to convince people to use condoms.) 

Many people will engage in conduct that they do not otherwise enjoy or value, 

because  of  the  social  meaning  of  engaging  in  it;  many  people  will  fail  to  engage  in 

activity  that  they  would  enjoy  or  value,  for  exactly  the  same  reason.  If  the  social 

meaning  of  harm-avoiding  activity  is  cowardice  or  capitulation,  people  are  likely  to 

refuse  harm-avoiding  activity.  If  the  social  meaning  of  harm-producing  activity  is 

boldness  and  independence,  people  are  more  likely  to  impose  harms.  In  these 

circumstances  any governmental  effort to ‘forbid’ certain  conduct  might be futile or 

even counterproductive. If what is driving behaviour is its social meaning, the effect 

of  a  ban  could  be  to  increase  it,  by  increasing  the  strength  of  the  signal  that  is  the 

motivation  after  all.  Compare  the  finding  that  when  people  are  paid  to  engage  in 

certain  desirable  activity  (cleaning  up,  for  example,  or  arriving  on  time  to  pick  up 

children  from  school),  they  will  sometimes  actually  engage  in  that  behaviour  less 

rather  than  more,  because  the  payment  reduces  the  effect  of  the  norm,  which  would 

otherwise have the effect of the payment. 

DOING WHAT OTHERS DO 

 

 

 

15 

Those  who  seek  a  New  Progressivism  are  especially  interested  in  enlisting  an 

understanding  of  social  norms  and  social  meanings  in  the  service  of  improved 

policies,  involving  both  rights  and  growth.  They  emphasize  that  in  many  domains, 

people  frequently  think  and  do  what  they  think  and  do  because  of  what  they  think 

(relevant)  others  think  and do.  Thus,  for  example,  employees  are  more  likely  to  file 
suit if members of the same workgroup have also done so10; teenage girls who see that 
other  teenagers  are  having  babies  are  more  likely  to  become  pregnant  themselves11; 
littering  and  non-littering  behavior  appears  to  be  contagious12;  the  same  is  true  of 
violent crime13; those who know other people who are on welfare are more likely to 
go  on  welfare  themselves14;  the  behaviour  of  proximate  others  affects  the  decision 
whether  to  recycle15;  a  good  way  to  increase  the  incidence  of  tax  compliance  is  to 
inform  people  of  high  levels  of  voluntary  tax  compliance16;  and  students  are  less 

likely to engage in binge drinking if they think that most of their fellow students do 

not engage in binge drinking, so much so that disclosure of this fact is one of the few 

successful methods of reducing binge drinking on university campuses in the United 
States.17  

Social  influences  affect  behaviour  via  two  different  mechanisms.  The  first  is 

informational.  If  many  other  people  support  a  particular  candidate,  or  refuse  to  use 

drugs,  or  carry  guns,  observers,  and  particularly  observers  within  a  common  group, 

are  given  a  signal  about  what  it  makes  sense  to  do.  The  second  mechanism  is 

reputational, as group  members impose sanctions on perceived deviants, and would-

                                                 
10  See  Harold  H.  Gardner,  Nathan  L.  Kleinman,  and Richard  J.  Butler,  ‘Workers’  Compensation  and 
Family and Medical Leave Act Claim Contagion’, (2000) 20 Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 89, 101-
10. 
11 See, e.g., George A. Akerlof, Janet L. Yellen and Michael L. Katz, ‘An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock 
Childbearing in the United States’, (1996) 111 Quarterly Journal of Economics 277. 
12 See R. Cialdini et al., ‘A Focus Theory of Normative Conduct: Recycling the Concept of Norms to 
Reduce Littering in Public Places’, (1990) 58 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 1015. 
13 See Washington Post (December 1999).   [Exact date? Query author] 
14  See  Marianne  Bertrand, Erzo F.P.  Luttmer  and  Sendhil Millainathan, Network Effects  and  Welfare 
Cultures (unpublished manuscript, April 9, 1998). 
15 See Ardith Spence, Wants for Waste (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1999). 
16  See  Stephen  Coleman,  The  Minnesota  Income  Tax  Compliance  Experiment  State  Tax  Results 
(Minnesota Department of Revenue, April 1996). 
17 See H. Wesley Perkins, ‘College Student Misperceptions of Alcohol and Other Drug Norms Among 
Peers’,  in  Designing  Alcohol  and  Other  Drug  Prevention  Programs  in  Higher  Education  (US 
Department  of  Education  ed.,  1997)  177-206;  Timur  Kuran  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  ‘Availability 
Cascades and Risk Regulation’, (1999) 51 Stanford Law Review 683, 767. A good outline of contagion 
effects can be found in Gardner, Kleinman and Butler, n. 9 above, at 91-4. 

 

 

 

16 

be  deviants  anticipate  the  sanctions  in  advance.18  Even  when  people  do  not  believe 

that what other people  do provides information about what actually should be done, 

they may think that the actions of others provide information about what other people 

think  should  be  done.  People  care  about  their  reputations,  and  hence  they  have  an 

incentive  to  do  what  (they  think)  other  group  members  think  they  should  do. 

Reputational considerations may, for example, lead people to obey or not to obey the 

law, urge a certain view in group discussions, drive while drunk, help others, or talk 

about political issues in a certain way.  

The  central  question  is  how  an  understanding  of  these  points  might  lead 

policies  in  better  directions.  What  is  especially  promising  is  the  possibility  of 

achieving a ‘tipping point’, in which large numbers of people end up moving in novel 
directions.19 People typically have different ‘thresholds’ for choosing to believe or do 

something new or different. As those with low thresholds come to a certain belief or 

action, people with somewhat higher thresholds join them, possibly to a point where a 
critical  mass  is  reached,  making  groups,  possibly  even  nations  ‘tip’.20  The  result  of 

this  process  can  be  to  produce  snowball  or  cascade  effects,  as  small  or  even  large 

groups  of  people  end  up  believing  something—even  if  that  something  is  false—

simply  because  other  people  seem  to  believe  that  it  is  true.  Real  world  phenomena 
also  seem  to  have  a  great  deal  to  do  with  cascade  effects.21  Consider,  for  example, 

smoking,  participating  in  protests,  striking,  recycling,  using  birth  control,  rioting, 
choosing  what  to  put  on  television,22  even  leaving  bad  dinner  parties.23  We  can 

understand certain people, in the private and public sectors, as ‘norm entrepreneurs’, 

seeking  to  give  certain  signals  to  many  people,  and  in  the  process  helping  to  shift 

norms in a desirable direction. 

With respect to policy tools, of special note is the availability heuristic: people 

tend to think that an event is more likely if an incident of its occurrence can readily be 

                                                 
18  See  George  Akerlof,  ‘A  Theory  of  Social  Custom,  of  which  Unemployment  May  Be  One 
Consequence’, in George Akerlof, An Economic Theorist’s Book of Tales (1984) 69.    
19 See Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (2000), for a popular overview. 
20 See Mark Granovetter, ‘Threshold Models of Collective Behavior’, (1978) 83 American Journal of 
Sociology 1420; for a recent popular treatment, see ibid. at 5-22. 
21  See  Sushil  Bikhchandani  et  al.,  ‘A  Theory  of  Fads,  Fashion,  Custom,  and  Cultural  Change  as 
Informational  Cascades’,  (1992)  100  Journal  of  Political  Economy  992;  Kuran  and  Sunstein,  n.  16 
above, at 715-35. 
22 See Kennedy, supra note.  [Query author] 
23  Several  of  these  examples  are  discussed  in  Kuran  and  Sunstein,  n.  16  above,  at  725-35,  and  in 
Granovetter, n. 19 above, at 1422-24, 

 

 

17 

brought to  mind. It is for this reason that a single, highly publicized  event can have 

important behavioual consequences, as when disclosure that a famous athlete or actor 

is HIV-positive can make thousands or even millions of people change their behavior. 

The  single  incident  makes  the  risk  seem  both  higher  and  more  salient.  It  can  even 

change the meaning of action. ‘Availability entrepreneurs’ can draw public attention 

to individual persons and cases, with the self-conscious goal of producing ‘availability 

cascades’, with which perceptions, by millions of people, can simultaneously shift. In 

the United States, this has happened with fear of abandoned hazardous waste dumps 

and nuclear power, as well as HIV/AIDS; Thailand used the strategy successfully in 
the later context.24 

There is a closely related phenomenon: group polarization. It has been shown 

that any group of like-minded people, after deliberating with one another, tends to end 

up believing a more extreme version of what they thought before they spoke together. 

Consider  some  examples  of  the  basic  phenomenon,  known  as  group  polarization, 
which  has  been  found  in  over  a  dozen  nations.25    (a)  A  group  of  moderately 
profeminist  women  will  become  more  strongly  profeminist  after  discussion.26  (b) 

After discussion, citizens of France become more critical of the United States and its 
intentions with respect to economic aid.27 (c) After discussion, whites predisposed to 

show  racial  prejudice  offer  more  negative  responses  to  the  question  whether  white 
racism is responsible for conditions faced by African-Americans in American cities.28 

(d)  After  discussion,  whites  predisposed  not  to  show  racial  prejudice  offer  more 
positive responses to the same question.29  

As statistical regularities, it should follow, for example, that those moderately 

critical  of  an  ongoing  war  effort  will,  after  discussion,  sharply  oppose  the  war;  that 

those  who  believe  that  global  warming  is  a  serious  problem  are  likely,  after 

                                                 
24 See Kuran and Sunstein, n. 16 above. 
25 See Cass R. Sunstein, ‘Deliberative Trouble? Why Groups Go To Extremes’, 110 Yale Law Journal 
171 (2000).  These include  the United  States, Canada,  New  Zealand, Germany,  and  France. See, e.g., 
Johannes  Zuber  et  al.,  ‘Choice  Shift  and  Group  Polarization’,  (1992)  62  Journal  of  Personality  and 
Social Psychology 50 (Germany); Dominic Abrams et al., ‘Knowing What To Think By Knowing Who 
You  Are’,  (1990)  29  British  Journal  of  Social  Psychology  97,  112  New  Zealand).    Of  course  it  is 
possible that some cultures would show a greater or lesser tendency toward polarization; this would be 
an extremely interesting area for empirical study. 
26 See D.G. Myers, ‘Discussion-Induced Attitude Polarization’, (1975) 28 Human Relations 699.  
27 Brown, supra note, at 224.  [Query author] 
28  D.G.  Myers  and  G.D.  Bishop,  ‘The  Enhancement  of  Dominant  Attitudes  in  Group  Discussion’, 
(1976) 20 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 286. 
29 See ibid.  

 

 

18 

discussion,  to  hold  that  belief  with  considerable  confidence;  that  people  tending  to 

believe in the inferiority of a certain racial group will become more entrenched in this 

belief as a result of discussion. For present purposes, group polarization is important 

because  it  shows  how  groups  tend  to  move.  If  some  members  of  a  group  can  be 

convinced to shift their position, the group’s middle will shift as well, and quite large 

changes can be anticipated. 

All  this  is  quite  abstract.  The  central  question  remains:  How  might 

government,  seeking  to  promote  its  goals  at  low  cost,  induce  tipping,  or  social 

cascades?  

EDUCATION AND INFORMATION 

Suppose that people are engaging in activity that involves harm to self or to others; for 

simplicity,  assume  that  the  activity  is  not  itself  criminal.  From  the  standpoint  of  the 

New Progressivism, hoping not to intrude on rights and to respect democratic ideals, 

the first prescription is simple: Inform people. With respect to cigarette smoking and 

unsafe sex, for example, a great deal of risky behaviour comes simply from a lack of 

information. Evidence shows that by itself, information, if it can be made salient and 

vivid, produces substantial changes in behaviour. In Thailand, a revelation that 44 per 

cent  of  sex  workers  in  Chiang  Mai  were  infected  with  HIV  appears  to  have 

contributed to a substantial increase in the use of condoms. Growth in condom use in 

the United States in the 1980s was driven largely by information. Public information 

campaigns,  use  of  the  mass  media,  and  face-to-face  education  and  training 
programmes are all able to help.30 

This should hardly be surprising. But there is a somewhat more subtle point. It 

is possible to produce information-induced norm cascades, in which social norms, and 

social meanings, change dramatically as a result of changes in beliefs. In the United 

States, this has happened with large-scale shifts in judgments about cigarette smoking 

and,  in  the  early  1990s,  with  large-scale  shifts  in  judgments  about  both  sexual 

                                                 
30  See  World  Bank,  Efficient  and  Effective  Strategies  for  Preventing  HIV/HIV/AIDS,  available  at 
www.worldbank.org/HIV/AIDS-econ/confront/confrontfull/chapter3/chap3.html. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

19 

harassment and risky sex. One of the causes and consequences of these shifts has been 

a  change  in  the  relevant  social  meaning.  Consider  smoking:  Whereas  smokers  were 

once  thought  to  be  doing  something  entirely  normal,  so  that  objecting  nonsmokers 

were prissy intermeddlers, now smokers are thought to be doing something aggressive 

and possibly injurious, so that they are expected to apologize and to ask permission. 

The same has happened in many domains for sexual harassment and risky sex. What 

once  seemed  normal  and  even  bold  now  seems  abnormal  and  objectionable.  A  key 

question is whether dissemination of more information about harm-producing activity 

can produce large-scale changes in behavior. Often it seems to do precisely that. 

COSTS AND NORMS 

Of course information is unlikely to do enough. People who engage in risky behaviour 

sometimes  know  that  their  behaviour  is  risky.  People  who  fail  to  recycle,  or  who 

otherwise  create  environmental  harm,  often  know  what  they  are  doing.  People  who 

engage  in  discrimination  often  mistake  no  facts.  New  Progressivists  seek,  in  such 

circumstances,  to  produce  initiatives  that  will  increase  the  benefits  or  decrease  the 

(pecuniary or non-pecuniary) costs of desirable behaviour, and decrease the benefits 

or increase the (pecuniary or non-pecuniary) costs of undesirable behaviour. Efforts to 

change norms might play a role in these efforts. 

In the context of risk-creating behaviour, it is often easy to think of methods in 

this vein. People might, for example, be required to wear seatbelts, or to use helmets 

when  riding  motorcycles.  Such  programmes 

impose  sanctions  on  violators. 

Sometimes subsidies are better than sanctions. In the context of the HIV/AIDS crisis, 

condom-marketing  programmes  have  often  been  demonstrably  successful.  Such 

programmes involve public subsidization of condoms, and also make condoms easily 

available  by  selling  them  at  a  wide  range  of  places.  Part  of  the  goal  of  such 
programmes is to ‘show condom use as normal, healthy, and even fun’.31 Especially 

when  targeted  at  high-risk  areas  and  poor  households,  such  programmes  have  been 

exceedingly  beneficial,  producing  significant  increases in  condom  sales  and use—in 

Thailand, for example, a 90 per cent level of condom use in commercial sex.  

Some  aggressive  action  would  involve  efforts  to  alter  the  social  meaning  of 

risk-producing  activity,  partly  through  creative  private-public  partnerships.  In  many 

 

 

 

20 

places in the world, use of a condom is an accusation or a confession. But in others, 

the failure to use a condom reflects a kind of irresponsibility, a willingness to risk the 

life of another person. The most promising policies make condom use appear routine 

and  responsible,  and  hardly  an  act  of  cowardice,  or  a  violation  of  the  goals  of  the 

underlying activity. 

There  is  a  particularly  important  point  here:  Norms  are  most  easily  changed 

when  the  relevant  population  is  young.  With  respect  to  HIV/AIDS,  environmental 

harm, and crime, many members of the target group are in the process of developing 

their  own  norms.  To  the  extent  that  government  can  work  with  that  population, 

helping  to  create  norms  that  produce  benefit  rather  than  harm,  there  is  much  to  be 

gained. For HIV/AIDS in particular, an absolutely central goal in this regard should 

be to ensure equality on the basis of gender with respect to sexual relations—an idea 

that  calls  for  prohibitions,  through  law  and  norms,  on  sexual  coercion  of  all  kinds, 

principally  via  rape,  but  through  other  forms  of  force  as  well.  ‘No’  should  be 

understood to mean ‘no’; ‘only with a condom’ should be understood to mean exactly 

that.  In  fact  a  democracy  is  especially  well  situated  to  make  progress  here,  because 

under  good  conditions,  there  is  no  sharp  separation  between  the  citizenry  and  the 

government. 

CRIME: ORDER MAINTENANCE AND CONTAGION 

Crimes  are  violations  of  people’s  rights.  But  why  do  people  commit  crimes?  No 

simple answer would make sense. Undoubtedly poverty and desperation are much of 

the  answer,  But  part  of  the  answer  also  lies  in  people’s  perceptions  of  what  other 

people do. With respect to crime, people often do not know what, exactly, they should 

do,  and  what  they  do  depends  crucially  on  what  they  see  other  people  doing. 

Criminality, and law-abiding behavior, appear to be contagious.  

If  most  people  think  that  many  people  are  engaging  in  crime,  crime  will 

increase. If most people think that few people are criminals, criminal activity will be 

less  likely.  The  bad  news  is  that  all  societies  are  vulnerable  to  ‘crime  cascades’,  as 

people take their cues from others. The good news is that this fact can be enlisted in 

the service  of crime prevention. In both the United States and England, efforts have 

                                                                                                                                            
31 Ibid. at 3.   [Query author] 

 

 

 

 

21 

been  made,  with  considerable  success,  to  use  order  maintenance  and  community 

policing in the interest of ‘legality cascades’. In various contexts, an understanding of 

group polarization can help explain the underlying social dynamics. 

In the 1990s, for example, New York saw a dramatic decrease in crime—not 

merely  in  murder  (40  per  cent),  but  also  in  burglary  (over  25  per  cent)  and  robbery 

(over  30  per  cent).  A  significant  contributing  factor  stems  from  the  ‘fixing  broken 

windows’  approach  to  crime  prevention.  The  basic  idea  is  that  both  law-abiding 

citizens  and  potential  law-breakers  learn  a  great  deal  from  the  presence  of  order  or 

disorder; people who obey the law are less likely to use the streets in the presence of 

disorder,  and  prospective  criminals  are  more  likely  to  engage  in  criminal  activity, 

taking  disorder  as  a  signal  about  what  is  possible.  But  if  minor  problems—such  as 

begging,  graffiti,  prostitution,  loitering,  littering,  and  broken  windows  are  sharply 

reduced—the signals will be very different, and more serious crimes will decline too. 

On  this  view,  efforts  to  stop  or  reverse  a  crime  epidemic  at  the  very  start,  through 

seemingly small changes in context, can have large beneficial consequences.  

This is the core of the ‘order maintenance’ approach to crime. In 1993, New 

York started to attempt to maintain social order and to give new signals to prospective 

criminals—by  focusing  on  seemingly  small  criminal  actions,  such  as  aggressive 

begging,  public  drunkenness,  prostitution,  and  vandalism.  In  the  view  of  some 

observers,  the  lesson  of  New  York’s  successful  attack  on  crime  is  that  a  crime 

epidemic  can  be  reversed  by  altering  relatively  small  details  of  the  immediate 

environment. Whether or not this experience can be replicated in other nations in this 

precise  form,  the  general  lesson  remains.  Prospective  criminals,  and  prospective 

victims,  act  on  the  basis  of  their  perceptions  of  what  other  people  are  going  to  do. 

When  people  think  that  crime  is  increasing,  cascade  effects  are  possible,  as 

prospective  victims  refuse  to  use  common  areas,  which  become  dominated  by 

criminals, and people unsure whether to be criminals, taking their signals from others, 

often choose the socially undesirable course. Happily, the opposite can happen when 

people  are  given  signals  that  crime  is  decreasing.  Policy initiatives  that  alter  signals 

on this count can make a great deal of difference. 

 

 

 

 

 

22 

NO PANACEAS, BUT CLUES 

There  are  no  panaceas  in  the  ideas  outlined  here.  The  most  basic  suggestion  is  that 

individuals act in accordance with prevailing norms, and hence it is possible to induce 

large behavioural shifts. Social cascades are common, and they are often produced by 

the  availability  heuristic,  acting  in  combination  with  social  influences  and  group 

polarization.  With  respect  to  harm-producing  conduct,  these  phenomena  hold  out  a 

great  deal  of  hope.  The  best  approach  is  to  be  simultaneously  experimental  and 

optimistic.  Initiatives  should  be  monitored,  and  if  one  initiative  fails,  another  might 

succeed—an  evident  conclusion  of  the  most  successful  participants  in  Dorner’s 

experiments.  

Employment and Poverty: Supplementing, Not Displacing, Markets 

In this section I turn from social norms to issues of deprivation and poverty. I do so 

principally by comparing three ways of responding to deprivation in the employment 

market, deprivation that usually produces poverty, through joblessness or low wages. 

These  ways  are  associated  respectively  with  markets,  planning,  and  the  New 

Progressivism. My general suggestion is that a New Progressivist government should 

generally  refuse  to  block  exchanges  between  contracting  parties.  It  should  respond 

instead  by  providing  economic  help  directly  to  those  who  need  help.  These  ‘market 

supplementing’  approaches  are  to  be  preferred  to  ‘market  displacing’  approaches 

characteristic  of  the  way  of  planning.    Market  supplementing  approaches  do  not 

intrude on liberty or rights; they are less likely to reduce economic growth; they are 

also more likely to be successful. 

Those who favour the way of markets tend to respond to poverty either with 

nothing  or  with  a  social  safety  net,  and  not  a  very  generous  one  at  that.  For  many 

people, these weak responses amount to a rights violation. Those who favour the way 

of  planning  respond  with  high  minimum  wages,  aggressive  regulation  of  the  labour 

market and the housing market, and a generous social safety net. Those who endorse 

the  New  Progressivism  reject  both  approaches.  They  place  the  highest  premium  on 

three strategies: (1) education and training; (2) taxpayer-supported wage and housing 

subsidies;  and  (3)  incentives  to  companies  to  increase  the  likelihood  that  they  will 

 

 

 

 

 

23 

locate in poor areas and hire people who would otherwise lack work (‘empowerment 

zones’ and ‘enterprise zones’). Above all, they believe that no citizen should be poor 

if she is willing and able to work, that everyone should be able to work, and that in 

the  absence  of  special  circumstances  (disability,  obligations  to  others),  almost 

everyone  should  be  willing  to  work.  This  is  the  sense  in  which  New  Progressivists 

endorse the Third Way idea that there should be ‘no rights without responsibilities’. 

BLOCKED EXCHANGES AS MESS 

Well-motivated planners often try to protect people by ‘blocking exchanges’, through, 

for example, minimal rights that employees, consumers, and tenants must enjoy, and 

may not waive, even through voluntary agreements. In the market, and particularly in 

the labour market, a common justification for this form of regulation is redistribution, 

in  particular  redistribution  to  those  who  need  help.  Strategies  of  this  kind  are  often 

thought to protect basic rights. 

National  legislatures  often  impose  controls  on  the  market  to  prevent  what  it 

sees as exploitation or unfair dealing by employers, who seem to have a competitive 

advantage  over  workers,  especially  poor  workers.    Those  who  favour  a  New 

Progressivism  sympathize  with  the  goals  here,  but  they  believe  that  this  approach 

suffers  from  many  of  the  problems  faced  by  Dorner’s  planners.  New  Progressivists 

thus have a presumption against this approach, because they do not believe that it is, 

in  general,  a  good  way  to  help  people  who  need  help.  The  presumption  is  certainly 

rebuttable; sometimes blocked exchanges can do some good. But New Progressivists 

generally  seek  to  help  workers  through  other  means—through,  for  example,  earned 

income  tax  credits,  income  supplements,  subsidized  housing,  and  education  and 

training. 

To be sure, many agreements between employers and employees seem and are 

harsh,  and  the  claim  for  redistribution  is  often  a  powerful  one  as  a  matter  of  basic 

principle.  Workers  often  enter  into  unjust  deals,  simply  because  their  options  are  so 

few.  In  fact  market  wages  and  prices  depend  on  a  wide  range  of  factors  that  are 

morally  irrelevant:  historical  injustice;  supply  and  demand  curves  at  any  particular 

point; variations in family structure and opportunities for education and employment; 

existing tastes; and perhaps even differences in initial endowments, including talents, 

 

 

 

 

24 

intelligence, or physical strength. If the regulation could be made effective and does 

not produce high ancillary costs (an important qualification), government should not 

always take these factors as ‘natural’, or let them be turned into social disadvantages. 

The inspiration for minimum wage legislation, for example, is easy to identify. So too, 

rent  control  legislation  prevents  tenants  from  being  subject  to  unanticipated  price 

increases  and  perhaps  thrown  into  significantly  inferior  housing;  and  implied 

warranties  of  habitability  protect  tenants  from  living  in  disgraceful  and  indeed 

dangerous apartments. 

In  all  these  cases,  however,  regulation  may  well  be  a  poor  mechanism  for 

redistributing  resources,  precisely  because  it  is  often  self-defeating.  The  problem  is 

that  if  everything  else  is  held  constant,  the  market  will  frequently  adjust  to  the 

imposition  of  regulation  in  a  way  that  will  harm  many  people,  including  the  least 

well-off.    This  is  not  a  claim  that  markets  have  any  moral  status;  it  is  a  claim  that 

blocking exchanges is often a doomed way of doing what well-motivated planners are 

seeking to do, that is, to help poor people. 

Hence,  for  example,  it  is  a  mistake—we  might  even  call  it  the  defining 

mistake  of  planners—to  assume  that  regulation  will  directly  transfer  resources  or 

create only after-the-fact winners and losers (an idea  exemplified by the assumption 

that  the  only  effect  of  the  minimum  wage  is  to  raise  wages  for  those  currently 

working, or that the only effect of protecting tenants against eviction is to allow poor 

tenants to retain housing).  In ordinary circumstances, an important consequence of a 

high  minimum  wage  is  to  increase  unemployment  by  raising  the  price  of  marginal 

labour. Those at the bottom of the ladder—the most vulnerable members of society—

are  the  victims.  In  a  rich  nation  with  a  growing  economy  and  a  low  unemployment 

rate, a high minimum wage law might not do much harm, and might well do enough 

good to be justified on balance. But in a country that is not rich, and that has a high 

unemployment  rate,  there  is  reason  to  be  doubtful  of  high  minimum  wage 

requirements, simply because they impair economic development, and further do not 

redistribute  resources  from  employers  to  poor  workers  (which  would  be  good),  but 

end up hurting the poorest people of all, who are less likely to be able to obtain jobs. 

In fact—and this is a separate problem with blocking exchanges as a method 

of  redistribution—a  minimum  wage  is  not  directly  targeted  at  poor  people  at  all.  In 

many  nations,  those  who  benefit  from  the  minimum  wage  have  other  sources  of 

 

 

25 

income.  In  the  United  States,  for  example,  an  increase  in  the  minimum  wage  goes 

largely  to  middle-income  (39.5  per  cent)  and  upper-income  (34.7  per  cent)  citizens, 

and only about 25 per cent goes  to  the poor (13.1 per cent)  and near-poor (12.7 per 
cent).32  Of  course  minimum  wage  workers  are  usually  far  from  wealthy.  But  the 

problem with regulations blocking exchanges is that they are not specifically targeted 

at the poor. They help those who do not need help, or who do not have the strongest 

claim to help, and thus waste resources that might be better used elsewhere. 

In the same vein, rent control legislation and implied warranties of habitability 

create  incentives  for  producers  (landlords)  to  leave  the  housing  market,  and 

disincentives  for  people  to  enter  that  market.  This  has  perverse  redistributive 

consequences  and  especially  harsh  results  for  the  poor,  who  may  be  left  without 

housing  at  all.  It  should  be  obvious  that  the  beneficiaries  of  rent  control  legislation 

need  not  be  poor  and  often  are  not  poor.  In  the  United  States,  it  should  not  be 

surprising to find that Cambridge, Massachusetts has experienced a dramatic growth 

in new housing since rent control was eliminated by state referendum. 

I have said that blocking exchanges is not always a bad idea. Minimum wage 

legislation  does,  after  all,  raise  the  wages  of  the  working  poor,  and  in  some 

circumstances—especially  but  not  only  those  of  sustained  economic  growth—the 

disemployment effects will be small or nonexistent. But there can be little doubt that 

interference with the labour market will produce losers as well as winners. Efforts to 
redistribute resources through regulation can therefore have serious perverse results.33 

The  point  bears  on  regulation  of  the  labour  market,  the  housing  market,  and  the 

market  for  ordinary  goods  and  services.  It  counsels  against  anything  that  looks  like 

‘price fixing’ as a redistributive strategy. 

                                                 
32  See  Daniel  Shaviro,  ‘The  Minimum  Wage,  the  Earned  Income  Tax  Credit,  and  Optimal  Subsidy 
Policy’, (1997) 64 University of Chicago Law Review 405, 435. 
33  Two  qualifications  are  necessary  here.    First,  the  redistributive  regulation,  though  in  some  ways 
perverse, might  be  part of a  system  of  redistribution that is effective overall.   A  minimum wage  law 
might be justified as a means of protecting the working poor if it is accompanied by a welfare system to 
take care of those who cannot work at all.  For this reason, plausible arguments can be made for the 
minimum  wage.  The  only  point  is  that  if  it  is  too  costly  to  employers,  substantial  disemployment 
effects are inevitable.  

The second qualification is that some laws that seem to be justified on redistributive grounds 
are best understood as a response to inadequate information. Occupational safety and health legislation 
does not transfer resources from employers to employees; but it may be justified as a response to the 
fact  that  workers  lack  information  about  workplace  risks.  In  the  face  of  inadequate  information,  a 
regulatory  response  may  well  make  sense.  But  an  analysis  based  on  inadequate  information  will  be 
very different from one based on redistribution. If the problem is inadequate information, the first step 
should be to try to inform people. 

 

 

26 

ALTERNATIVES 

Thus far I have been discussing what the New Progressivism  opposes.  What does  it 

support  instead?  The  answer  is  not  reliance  on  markets  alone.  New  Progressivists 

firmly believe that simple and even effective redistribution, such as cash grants to the 

poor  from  taxpayer  funds,  are  justified  in  principle.  They  believe  in  a  social  safety 

net;  in  this  way  they  accept  the  South  African  approach,  which  understands  the 

category of rights to include gross deprivation of basic needs. But they do not believe 

that  planners  offer  promising  responses  to  poverty,  unemployment,  and  general 

deprivation.  Instead  New  Progressivists  emphasize  approaches  that  will  give  people 

an  ability  to  help  themselves,  through  education,  training,  and  job  opportunities, 

fuelled by economic incentives in the form (for example) of tax credits to employers 

and employees alike. They seek to supplement rather than to displace markets. 

In  case  there  was  any  doubt,  a  recent  study  of  South  Africa,  based  on  1996 
data,  shows  the  enormous  importance  of  education  to  employment  prospects.34  The 

study  shows  that  high  ratios  of  teachers  to  students  dramatically  increase  the 

likelihood of employment—with a statistically significant effect for males, and a very 

large effect for females. The authors conclude that the apartheid ‘system continues to 

profoundly influence the life chances of many Black Africans, through its long lasting 

effects on the country’s education system. Many Black Africans currently in the labor 

force attended schools with inadequately trained teachers, insufficient textbooks, and 

pupil-teacher ratios above 80 children per class.’ The result of all this is to decrease 

both years in school and employment prospects. Better education and training is the 

most direct and effective way of helping people to obtain jobs and decent wages. 

For  many  people,  of  course,  other  steps  are  required.  A  central  New 

Progressivist approach is to develop systems to supplement low wages. A key here is 

to  generate  a  strategy  that  will  neither  (a)  discourage  employers  from  hiring  people 

nor  (b)  discourage  prospective  workers  from  seeking  employment.  Many  countries 

have  experimented  with  some  variation  on  the  Earned  Income  Tax  Credit  (EITC).  

Under this  approach, working people (the programme  may  or  may not  be limited  to 

 

 

 

 

27 

people with children) who earn low wages obtain  a  tax  credit from  the government, 

sufficient to raise their total compensation to a decent level. The tax credit is phased 

out  once  workers  receive  money  above  a  certain  level.  In  the  United  States,  for 

example, someone who earns an income of about $10,000 will receive about $3800 at 

tax time; a mother and father who earn $25,000 will receive about $1200 at tax time. 

In  the  United  States  alone,  the  EITC  has  been  a  terrific  success,  lifting  millions  of 

people  from  poverty.  In  1996  alone,  the  effect  of  the  EITC  was  to  take  4.6  million 
people, including 2.4 million children, out of poverty.35 

Compared to planning-type initiatives, there are three large advantages to the 

EITC approach. The first is that unlike the  minimum wage, it does not make labour 

more  costly  for  employers,  and  thus  does  not  decrease  employers’  desire  to  hire 

people. The second is that it increases people’s incentives to work, by making work 

more remunerative. The third is that unlike the minimum wage, the EITC is genuinely 

and  specifically  targeted  at  people  who  are  poor.  In  the  United  States,  for  example, 
nearly three-quarters of those who benefit from the EITC are poor or near-poor.36 The 

EITC is the model of a New Progressivism antipoverty programme. 

Creative  policymakers  could  easily  build  on  this  model—and  use  it  as  an 

alternative to well-motivated but crude plans. Planners interested in protecting tenants 

might, for example, impose ceilings on rent increases. Those interested in protecting 

those dependent on certain important commodities might impose price ceilings. If the 

government is interested in ensuring that tenants cannot be evicted for nonpayment of 

rent,  it  might  impose  large  procedural  hurdles  to  eviction.  If  decent  housing  is 

unavailable,  government  might  build  housing  on  its  own.  These  strategies  are  all 

associated  with  planning,  and  they  might  do  some  good.  But  New  Progressivists 

would  look  for  alternatives.  They  might  seek,  for  example,  to  provide  housing 

vouchers  to  poor  people,  or  to  provide  food  stamps  to  those  who  are  unable  to  buy 

enough to eat.  

More  generally,  New  Progressivists  would  urge  government  to  build 

‘empowerment  zones’  or  ‘enterprise  zones’  in  poor  communities,  by  giving 

                                                                                                                                            
34  Anne  Case  and  Motohiro  Yogo,  Does  School  Quality  Matter?  Returns  to  Education  and 
Characteristics  of  Schools  in  South  Africa  [1999  draft,  available  on  the  Social  Science  Research 
Network (SSRN)]. 
35  Benjamin  Aldrich-Moodie,  ‘The  Earned  Income  Tax  Credit’,  Issue  Brief  No.  1.,  The  Century 
Foundation (September 1999). 
36 Shaviro, n. 31 above, at 435. 

 

 

28 

businesses a tax credit, or direct subsidies, to the extent that they are willing to locate 

in  areas  that  need  help,  and  to  employ  people  who  need  jobs.  These  are  market-

oriented strategies that do not make a fetish of market ordering. They deploy markets 

in  the  interest  of  human  goals.  Learning  from  the  failures  and  half-successes  of 

planning, those who use such strategies attempt to be like the successful participants 

in Dorner’s experiments, whose interventions are alert to the potentially harmful side-

effects of intrusions into systems. 

Command and Control Regulation: A Presumption Against 

In controlling pollution and other social harms, a number of states, including some of 

the  most  proudly  capitalist,  have  engaged  in  a  modest  form  of  ‘planning’,  through 

command-and-control  regulation.  Such  regulation  involves  centralized  regulatory 

requirements imposed on dozens, hundreds, thousands, or even millions of producers. 

As  examples,  consider  air  pollution  control  requirements,  imposed  on  new  cars  and 

trucks; ‘best available technology’ (BAT) requirements, imposed on polluting firms; 

and  specified  levels  of  mandatory  pollution  reductions,  imposed  on  companies  of 

various  kinds.  Similar  approaches  can  be  found  in  the  area  of  occupational  safety, 

where national authorities sometimes specify the safety technologies and approaches 

that must be used by all or most firms. 

It  is  important  to  acknowledge  that  in  many  states,  command-and-control 

regulation has accomplished significant good. Planning of this form has hardly been a 

complete  failure.  In  the  United  States,  it  has  helped  produce  dramatic  reductions  in 

levels  of  air  and  water  pollution.  Reliance  on  markets  alone  would  have  been  far 

worse. In this domain, the way of planning is far better than the way of markets. But 

for  several  reasons,  the  New  Progressivism  rejects  the  basic  approach.  They  are 

concerned 

that  command-and-control  approaches  will  compromise  economic 

development and also undermine democracy. 

The  first  problem  is  that  it  is  usually  unnecessarily  expensive,  even  wasteful 

for  government  to  prescribe  the  means  for  achieving  social  objectives.  At  least  as  a 

general rule, it is especially inefficient for government to dictate technology. One of 

the many problems with BAT strategies, for example, is that they ignore the enormous 

differences  among  plants  and  industries  and  among  geographical  areas.  It  is  not 

 

 

 

 

29 

sensible to impose the same technology on industries in diverse areas—regardless of 

whether they are polluted or clean, populated or empty, or expensive or cheap to clean 

up.  BAT  strategies  also  require  all  new  industries  to  adopt  costly  technology,  and 

allow more lenient standards to be imposed on existing plants and industries. Through 

this  route  BAT  strategies  actually  penalize  new  products,  thus  discouraging 

investment  and  perpetuating  old,  dirty  technology.  The  result  is  inefficiency  in 

investment  strategies,  in  innovation,  and  even  in  environmental  protection.    Such 

strategies also fail to encourage new pollution control technology and indeed serve to 

discourage it by requiring its adoption for no financial gain. In general, governmental 

specification  of  the  ‘means’  of  achieving  desired  ends  is  a  good  way  of  producing 

unnecessarily high costs. Instead of permitting industry and consumers to choose the 

‘means’—and  thus  to  impose  a  form  of  market  discipline  on  that  question—

government  often  selects  the  means  in  advance.  The  governmentally-prescribed 

means are often the most inefficient. 

More fundamentally, command-and-control approaches are severely deficient 

from  the  standpoint  of  democracy.  The  focus  on  the  question  of  ‘means’  tends  to 

increase  the  power  of  well-organized  private  groups,  by  allowing  them  to  press 

environmental and regulatory law in the service of their own parochial ends. The BAT 

approach, for example, ensures that citizens and representatives will be focusing their 

attention  not  on  what  levels  of  reduction  are  appropriate,  but  instead  on  the  largely 

incidental  and  nearly  impenetrable  question of what  technologies  are  now  available. 

Because  of  its  sheer  complexity,  this  issue  is  not  easily  subject  to  democratic 

resolution. Moreover, the issue is not the relevant one for democratic politics, which 

is the appropriate degree and nature of environmental protection—an issue to which 

the BAT question is only incidental.  

The approach favoured by the New Progressivism is much simpler: (1) begin 

by informing people about risks, including environmental risks, and (2) where this is 

inadequate,  impose  a tax  on  harmful  behaviour,  and  let  market  forces  determine  the 

response  to  the  increased  cost.  Thus  governments  might  adopt  a  simple,  two-step 

reform  policy  in  the  area  of  social  risks  and  social  harms.  First,  those  who  impose 

harm must pay for it—by purchasing permission to do so, perhaps through a licensing 

procedure. Second, those who obtain the resulting permission should be able to trade 

their  ‘licenses’  with  other  people.  In  the  pollution  context,  this  would  mean  that 

 

 

30 

people who reduce their pollution below a specified level could trade their ‘pollution 

rights’ for cash. In one stroke, such a system would create market-based disincentives 

to pollute and market-based incentives for pollution control. Such a system would also 

reward  rather  than  punish  technological  innovation  in  pollution  control,  and  do  so 

with the aid of private markets. An idea of this kind might be made part and parcel of 

a system of ‘green taxes’. With such a system, nations might impose taxes on people 

who  impose  harms  on  others—users  of  dirty  automobiles,  farmers  who  employ 

pesticides, coal-fired power plants, gasoline that produces air pollution, products that 

contribute to destruction of the ozone layer or the greenhouse effect.  

Economic  incentives  could  be  applied  in  other  areas  as  well.  Workers' 

compensation plans, for example, operate as effective guarantees of workplace safety. 

According  to  a  careful  study,  ‘[i]f  the  safety  incentives  of  workers'  compensation 

were removed, fatality rates in the United States economy would increase by almost 

30  percent.  Over  1200  more  workers  would  die  from  job  injuries  every  year  in  the 
absence of the safety incentives provided by workers' compensation.’37 This contrasts 

with  a  mere  2-4  per  cent  reduction  in  injuries  from  the  Occupational  Safety  and 

Health Act (OSHA), an amount that links up well with the fact that annual workers' 

compensation  premiums  are  more  than  1000  times  as  large  as  total  annual  OSHA 

penalties. The tax system could be used to provide better incentives to employers who 

furnish  dangerous  workplaces.  The  consumer  product  safety  commission  might 

experiment with a system in which producers of harm-producing products must pay a 

fee  into the federal  treasury. Ultimately, we  might hope for a coordinated system of 

risk regulation, one that imposed specified fees for harm-producing activities. 

For  democracy,  such  an  approach  would  have  significant  consequences,  and 

these  consequences  would  be  extremely  beneficial.  The  large  question—how  much 

environmental  protection  at  what  cost—does  not  easily  permit  legislators  to  favor  a 

well-organized,  narrow  group,  such  as  the  agricultural  lobby,  or  the  coal  lobby. 

Special favours cannot readily be provided through a system of economic incentives. 

The very generality of the question will work against narrow favouritism. 

The international movement toward economic incentives, a central part of the 

New  Progressivism,  is  preliminary  but  real.  Thus  far,  it  has  occurred  mostly  in  the 

environmental  area.  An  important  series  of  administrative  initiatives  have  brought 

 

 

31 

about ‘emissions trading’, especially under the American Clean Air Act.38 Under the 

Environmental  Protection  Agency’s  policy,  a  firm  that  reduces  its  emissions  below 

legal  requirements  may  obtain  ‘credits’  that  can  be  used  against  higher  emissions 

elsewhere. Overall, the programme has produced savings of between $525 million and 
$12  billion.39  By  any  measure,  this  is  an  enormous  gain.  On  balance,  moreover,  the 

environmental  consequences  have  been  beneficial.  Offsets  must,  by  definition, 

produce  environmental  gains.  The  preliminary  evidence  shows  favourable  effects 

from  bubbles  as  well.  There  may  be  modest  beneficial  effects  from  banking  and 

modest  adverse  effects  from  netting.  The  overall  environmental  effect  is  therefore 

good, cost entirely to one side. 

As part of the process for eliminating lead from gasoline—a decision that was, 

not incidentally, strongly supported by a cost-benefit study—the EPA also permitted 

emissions  trading.  Under  this  policy,  a  refinery  that  produced  gasoline  with  lower 

than  required  lead  levels  could  earn  credits.  These  could  be  traded  with  other 

refineries or banked for future use. Until the termination of the programme in 1987, 

when  the  phase-down  of  lead  ended,  emissions  credits  for  lead  were  widely  traded. 

EPA concluded that there had been cost savings of about 20 per cent over alternative 

systems, marking total savings in the hundreds of million of dollars. There have been 
similar efforts with water pollution and ozone depletion.40  

Perhaps the most dramatic programme of economic incentives can be found in 

the  1990  amendments  to  the  Clean  Air  Act.  The  Act  now  explicitly  creates  an 

emissions  trading  system  for  the  control  of  acid  deposition.  In  these  amendments, 

Congress  has  made  an  explicit  decision  about  aggregate  emission  levels  for  a 

pollutant.  Whether  the  particular  decision  is  the  correct  one  may  be  disputed.  But 

surely  there  are  large  democratic  benefits  from  ensuring  that  public  attention  is 

focused on that  issue. There are palpable  economic benefits as well. The system for 

controlling  acid  deposition  is  billions  of  dollars  less  expensive  than  the  command-

and-control alternatives. 

                                                                                                                                            
37 W. Kip Viscusi, Reforming Products Liability, (1991) 178. 
38See  Environment  Protection  Agency,  ‘Emissions  Trading  Policy  Statement:  General  Principles  for 
Creation, Banking, and Use of Emission Reduction Credits’, (1986) 51 Federal Regulations 43,814. 
39 See Hahn & Hester, ‘Marketable Permits: Lessons for Theory and Practice’, (1989) 16 Ecology Law 
Quarterly 361, 374 table 2.  [Query author – names or initials?] 
40On  ozone depletion,  see  53 Federal  Regulations 30,566  (August 11,  1988);  on  water  pollution,  see 
Hahn & Stavns, ‘Incentive-Based Environmental Regulation: A New Era From An Old Idea’, (1991) 
18 Ecology Law Quarterly 1, 18-19. [Query author – names or initials?] 

 

 

32 

The idea can be adapted to many domains. Consider, for example, the African 

Elephant  Conservation  Act,  which  created  a  two-prong  strategy  to  combat  species 

loss.  These  included  cooperative  conservation  projects  and  strict  import  controls  for 

countries with endangered elephant populations. The United States would not import 

from any such country; but once a nation was able to stabilize its elephant population 

and to receive a new listing, it would be permitted to engage in the trade of ivory. In a 

way this policy might seem worse than a flat ban on ivory trade. But in practice, it has 

worked  far  better,  because  it  creates  an  incentive  to  have  sizeable  herds.  In  many 

cases, elephants were ‘owned’ and protected by the relevant communities, increasing 

efforts to quash poaching in the knowledge that they would be economically better off 

if they were able to be listed as having stabilized their elephant population. The Act 

has been extremely successful, and served as the model for the subsequent Rhinoceros 

and Tiger Act and the Asian Elephant Act. Nations interested in preserving their own 

environmental goods, including endangered species, might well build on this idea. 

Economic Growth, Capabilities, and Sex Equality 

GROWTH AND ITS LIMITS 

Thus far I have dealt with New Progressivist means—stressing the need to attend to 

both incentives and norms, and to avoid the crudeness associated with many plans. It 

is now time to turn to the question of ends. That question cannot be answered without 

saying  something  about  the  relationship  between  economic  growth,  social  welfare, 

and individual rights. 

For the last decades, many people have evaluated national well-being in terms 

of economic growth alone. Indeed, this approach has been characteristic of those who 

emphasize  the  way  of  markets;  and  much  of  the  time,  it  has  been  adopted  by  those 

who  attempt  the  way  of  planning  as  well.  On  this  view,  a  nation’s  performance  is 

assessed by asking about Gross Domestic Product, and by seeing its movement over 

time.  

Certainly GDP is a useful figure, for it bears a relationship to important social 

goals.  If we think of income as an all-purpose means—as something that people want 

regardless  of  what  else  they  want—we  might  well  attend  to  GDP.  Though  its 

 

 

 

 

 

33 

importance is merely instrumental, growth does matter for a wide range of important 

goals. Thus a recent study of anti-poverty measures in the United States, by someone 

well-disposed  to  government  programmes  and  unenthusiastic  about  the  way  of 

markets,  announces  as  Lesson  1,  ‘A  strong  macroeconomy  matters  more  than 
anything else.’41 Well-protected property rights and freedom of contract, protected by 
state  institutions,  are  quite  central  to  economic  growth.42  They  are  at  least  as 

important in poor countries as in rich ones. 

There are, however, a number of problems with relying on GDP as a measure 

of well-being. 

The most obvious problem involves distributional considerations. If income is 

unequally distributed, a high GDP may disguise the fact that many people are living 

bad or even desperate lives. For example, the United States has the highest per capita 

real  GDP  in  the  world.  But  it  also  has  a  higher  rate  of  children  living  in  poverty—

about  one  in  five—than  does  any  other  wealthy  country  in  the  world.    The  rate  of 

children living in poverty is double that of the industrialized nations taken as a whole 

and four times that of Western Europe. Nearly half of all black children in the United 

States live in poverty.  While white Americans, if taken separately, would rank first 

on  the  United  Nations  Development  Programme’s  Human  Development  Index, 

African-Americans, if taken separately, would rank somewhere in the thirties. These 

crucial economic facts are undisclosed by GDP. And if deprivation is seen as a rights 

violation, economic growth can conceal substantial rights violations. 

GDP  sometimes  seems  to  be  a  general  placeholder  for  a  number  of  diverse 

indicators  of  social  and  economic  well-being.  But  in  fact,  it  may  not  be  closely 

correlated with some important indicators. Consider two major social goals: reduction 

of  poverty  and  reduction  of  unemployment.  Of  course  GDP  growth  can  be  an 

important  factor  in  counteracting  both  unemployment  and  poverty.  But  it  is  also 

possible  for  GDP  increases  to  be  accompanied  by  increases  in  unemployment  and 

hence  poverty  (which  is  closely  correlated  with  unemployment);  indeed,  this 

phenomenon  has  often  occurred.  Or  consider  the  likelihood  of  subjection  to  violent 

crime.  Physical  security  is  surely  an  important  ingredient  in  well-being,  but  it  is  at 

best  indirectly  reflected  in  GDP.  Consider  also  the  fact  that  there  is  no  inevitable 

                                                 
41  Rebecca  Black,  ‘Fighting  Poverty:  Lessons  from  Recent  US  History’,  (2000)  14  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives 3, 6. 

 

 

34 

connection between  GDP  and  life  expectancy. Some  countries  have  a  relatively  low 

GDP but long life expectancy and low rates of infant mortality.  Many countries have 

a high GDP but do poorly in promoting longevity. Education is an important part of a 

good  life,  whether  or  not  educated  people  accumulate  wealth;  but  the  association 

between education and GDP, while real, is extremely crude. 

GDP also fails to account for goods and services that are free, including some 

that are closely connected with economic well-being.  For example, unpaid domestic 

labour  is  not  a  part  of  GDP.  Many  environmental  amenities,  such  as  clean  air  and 

water,  are  not  reflected  in  GDP.  The  GDP  figure  thus  fails  adequately  to  measure 

either the benefits of a healthy environment or the costs of its degradation. There are 

other gaps in what GDP measures. It does not, for example, reflect changes in leisure 

time; but it is clear that any increase in leisure is a gain even in economic terms, since 

leisure is something for which people are willing to pay, sometimes a great deal. Most 

generally, a serious problem with GDP is that the figure excludes all social costs and 

benefits that do not have prices. 

The most general point is that GDP does not adequately capture what a good 

society  is  concerned  to  ensure.  Responding  to  these  points,  many  people  have 

attempted  to  come  up  with  other  measures  of  national  well-being.  Of  these  the 

UNDP’s  effort  is  the  best  known.  The  UNDP  uses  an  index  of  well-being  based  on 

per capita income, educational attainment, and longevity. In 1999, South Africa was 

ranked 101 on the list, below China, Turkey, Georgia, and Albania.  Some of the key 

numbers include  a life expectancy at birth of 54.7 years, an adult literacy rate of 84 

per cent, and real GDP per capita of $7,380. The most striking number here is the low 

life  expectancy  number—below,  for  example,  that  of  Bangladesh,  Nepal,  India,  and 

Pakistan.  

Of  course  any  ‘index’  is  bound  to  have  a  degree  of  arbitrariness.  What  is 

important is that a nation with a low GDP can also give its citizens long lives and a 

good  education—and  that  a  nation  with  a  high  GDP  can  give  its  citizens  a  poor 

education and relatively low life expectancies. (On the latter point, the United States 

is an unfortunate case, with an extremely high per capita income but one of the lowest 

life expectancies among comparable countries.) The theoretical roots of these efforts 

to go beyond GDP lie in the ‘capabilities approach’, which attempts to assess ‘what 

                                                                                                                                            
42 See Mancur Olson, Power and Prosperity (1999). 

 

 

35 

people are actually able to do and to be’.43 (We can view the capabilities approach as 

an effort, within both economics and philosophy, to give some concrete detail to the 

aspects of human rights and ‘basic needs’.) 

The central idea, rooted in a notion of human dignity, is that a nation should 

ensure  not  ‘satisfaction  of  preferences’,  and  not  a  certain  level  of  resources,  but 

instead  an  ability  to  choose  what  kind  of  life  to  have.  Of  course  preferences  and 

beliefs may well adapt to existing deprivation—a common phenomenon, and one that 

creates  serious  problems  for  the  way  of  markets  insofar  as  that  way  makes 

‘preferences’ determinative of social policy. Nor should it be contentious to urge that 

certain capabilities are necessary to a decent human life. These include the ability to 

live  a  decently  long  life,  to  have  good  health,  to  participate  in  political  choices  that 
affect one’s life, to be educated, to hold property.44 When people lack one or more of 

these abilities, they suffer from ‘capability failure’, and this is the problem to which 

government  should  respond.  The  minimal  responsibility  of  a  New  Progressivist 

government  is  to  ensure  that  all  citizens  are  able  to  come  above  a  certain  threshold. 

The  less  minimal  obligation  is  to  ensure  that  all  citizens  have  more  than  minimal 

capabilities on all of these dimensions.  

This  general  idea  cannot  without  arbitrariness  be  turned  into  a  formula  or 

index. But insofar as the Human Development Index, and related efforts, go beyond 

GDP  to  provide  a  simple,  salient,  easily  understood  figure  by  which  to  facilitate 

international comparisons and changes over time, they are a good place to start. They 

also  provide  a  great  deal  of  help  with  priority-setting.  In  the United  States,  Finland, 

Botswana  and  South  Africa,  for  example,  it  is  clear  that  a  large  premium  should  be 

placed  on  improving  longevity;  the  citizens  of  these  nations  can  expect  relatively 

short lives, undoubtedly in part  as a result of high levels of crime  and low levels of 

health care. By contrast, Sweden, New Zealand, Cuba and Georgia should concentrate 

on  increasing  economic  growth;  all  of  these  nations  provide  decent  education,  and 

relatively long lives, but keep their citizens relatively poor.   

The Anticaste Principle—and the Centrality of Sex Equality 

                                                 
43 See Nussbaum, n. 3 above, at 5. 
44 See ibid. at 78-80. 

 

 

 

 

36 

CASTE AND ANTICASTE 

The  capabilities  approach  gives  a  sense  of  the  New  Progressivist  account  of  liberty; 

but  it  says  little  about  equality.  For  New  Progressivists,  I  have  suggested  it  is 

important  to  ensure  that  everyone  has  decent  life  prospects,  and  also  that  everyone 

comes over a ‘capability threshold’. But a separate and equally central equality goal is 

the  attack  on  any  situation  in  which  some  people,  defined  in  terms  of  a  morally 

irrelevant  characteristic,  are  treated  as  second-class  citizens,  or  turned into  members 

of  a  lower  caste.  Thus  an  anticaste  principle,  undergirding  a  constitutional  equality 

norm, plays a large role in New Progressivist thinking.  

The  anticaste  principle  is  not  a  thoroughly  egalitarian  goal.  It  is  compatible 

with  large  disparities  in  wealth  and  resources.  But  it  insists  that  morally  irrelevant 

characteristics, such as race, religion, and gender, should not be turned into a basis for 

second-class  citizenship.  Thus  New  Progressivists  see  one  of  the  most  serious 

inequality problems of the twentieth century in the pervasive practice of seizing on a 

characteristic  lacking  moral  relevance,  and  using  it  as  the  basis  for  the  systematic 

subordination  of  members  of  certain  social  groups.  This  conception  of  equality  is 

opposed  to  several  others,  including  the  ‘formal  equality’  principle,  which  does  not 

focus  attention  on  systematic  subordination,  and  indeed  which  sees  efforts  to 

counteract  such  subordination  as  a  form  of  discrimination.  Commitment  to  the 

anticaste  principle  hardly  exhausts  the  domain  of  rights.  But  it  is  an  important 

component of a rights-respecting society. 

SEX EQUALITY AS A CENTRAL GOAL, AS A MEANS AND AN END 

For  developing  and  wealthy  countries  alike,  an  end  to  sexual  hierarchy  is  an 

especially  high  priority—as  both  a  means  and  an  end.  With  respect  to  many 

problems—HIV/AIDS,  crime,  economic  growth  and  overpopulation—there  are  few 

higher priorities. Indeed any generalized attack on poverty must be combined with an 

attack on sexual hierarchy. The two are closely intermingled problems. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

37 

Note  first  that  sex  equality is  an  important means to  human  development,  as 

Amartya  Sen  and  others  have  shown,  with  their  particular  emphasis  on  ‘women’s 
agency’.45  A  nation  in  which  girls  and  women  have  a  chance  to  do  and  to  be  what 

they want to do and to be is much likelier to develop and to develop well.  A nation 

with sexual hierarchy is far more likely to suffer economically and in other ways. In 

fact  a  system  of  equality  on  the  basis  of  sex  is  likely  to  redress  many  problems  not 

normally thought to be  associated with it, such as overpopulation and the  individual 

and  social  drains  that  come  from  unwanted  children.  When  women  have  a  range  of 

opportunities, and when their choices are not a product of deprivation, these problems 

are  sharply  diminished.  If  women  are  able  to  decide  whether  to  have  children, 

unwanted children are less likely, and children who are unwanted are far more likely 

to  suffer  and  to  make  society  suffer  in  response,  sometimes  through  criminal 

behaviour.  If  women  have  agency,  many  crimes  will  be  reduced  as  a  result, 

emphatically  including  sex  crimes.  If  women  have  agency,  the  economy  will  do 

better, simply because there will be more people willing and able to do good work. If 

women  have  agency,  there  will  be  an  immediate  and  substantial  reduction  in  the 

AIDS  crisis,  simply  because  women  will  be  able  to  engage  in  sexual  relations  only 

when  they  want,  and  on  the  terms  that  they  choose.  This  is  a  potentially  enormous 

benefit for men and women alike, and for adults and children alike as well. 

This idea has many implications. It means that education and training for girls 

are  crucial.  It  also  means  that  by  both  law  and  norms,  girls  and  women  should  be 

allowed to decide when and whether to become mothers—which means, among other 

things, that sexual relations should always be a choice, not a requirement. Here there 

is  an  evident  link  to  the  earlier  discussion  of  norms  and  norm  cascades,  and  a 

particular link to the problems of crime and HIV/AIDS. In fact a social policy directed 

against  sexual  subordination  in  multiple  spheres  is  highly  likely  to  combat  both 

problems.  

Conclusion 

I  have  attempted  in  this  essay  to  clarify  the  relationships  among  rights,  democracy, 

and economic growth, endorsing in the process a New Progressivism. Of course it is 

                                                 
45 See Sen and Dreze, n. 4 above. 

 

 

 

 

38 

possible to conceive of rights, and of democracy, in a way that leads to great tension 

with economic growth. But we can also understand democracy in deliberative terms, 

in a way that reduces the tension with both rights and growth. We can also understand 

rights  in  a  way  that  makes  economic  growth  their  alley  rather  than  their  adversary. 

Rights  in  general  depend  on  a  certain  degree  of  economy  development,  simply 

because rights cost money. And if rights include freedom from desperate conditions, 

economic growth is extremely important.  

But  it  is  not  sufficient.  Markets  must  be  supplemented  by  additional  efforts, 

supported  by  a  democratic  society.  Too  much  of  the  time,  markets  do  little  to  help 

people  who  face  circumstances  of  deprivation.  From  the  standpoint  of  freedom  and 

justice, they are nothing to celebrate. From the standpoint of economics, this was the 

great lesson of the first half of the twentieth century. We have seen that markets are 

emphatically human products, not natural but conventional, created by law and to be 

evaluated in terms of their consequences. The question is what they do to and for the 

people who are subject to them. 

At the same time, economic planning, in its many diverse forms, is often futile 

and  counterproductive,  partly  because  of  the  difficulty  of  foreseeing  the  systemic 

effects of one-shot interventions. In its various guises, planning often invites interest 

group  manoeuvering,  thus  damaging  democracy,  and  produces  unintended  harmful 

consequences,  notwithstanding  the  good  intentions  of  many  planners.  This  has  been 

the great lesson of the second half of the twentieth century. 

In  these  circumstances,  any  New  Progressivism,  to  be  worthy  of  use,  should 

not be understood as a compromise measure, or as steering ‘between’ two poles. It is 

insistently  and  unapologetically  committed  to  a  certain  understanding  of  the  goals 

associated  with social  democracy  in  Europe  and  the  New  Deal  in  the  United  States. 

These do not include egalitarianism, understood as equal or roughly equal economic 

outcomes. But they do include decent life prospects for all, a social safety net in the 

form of  adequate floors, political  equality, and an anticaste principle, in the form of 

opposition to second-class citizenship for members of any social group. Attempting to 

understand  social  democratic  goals  in  a  coherent  way,  those  who  believe  in  a  New 

Progressivism insist on a self-conscious effort to promote the fundamental capabilities 

of  all  citizens,  by  ensuring  that  everyone  falls  above  a  certain  generous  threshold. 

Those who endorse a New Progressivism therefore reject the idea that markets should 

 

 

39 

be identified with liberty at the same time that they seek to go beyond the sometimes 

sloppy  and  diffuse  set  of  goals  associated  with  the  way  of  planning.  Those  who 

endorse a New Progressivism also put the highest premium on the achievement of an 

end to sexual hierarchy. 

With  respect  to  means,  New  Progressivists  seek  a  government  that  acts  as 

catalyst;  the  basic  goal  is  to  create  incentives  that  will  move  behaviour  in  desirable 

directions.  New  Progressivists  see  much  planning  as  analogous  to  the  hapless 

participants  in  Dietrich  Dorner’s  experiments—as  ill-conceived  interventions  into 

systems  that confound the goals of the  interveners. To avoid the problem  of ‘mess’, 

New  Progressivism  programmes  are  based  on  a  presumption  against  blocked 

exchanges  and  command-and-control  regulation.  There  is  an  effort  to  complement 

rather than to displace markets. Antipoverty programmes take the form of incentives 

to  work,  designed  to  ensure  that  everyone  who  works  is  able  to  live  decently,  that 

everyone has a chance to work, and that those who choose not to work have a good 

reason for not doing so. Regulatory programmes are based on a presumption in favour 

of informing people and providing economic incentives for desirable conduct.  

Finally, New Progressivists insist on the importance of civil society and above 

all of the norms that often drive behaviour. Alert to the possibility of social cascades, 

those who seek a New Progressivism insist on the provision of information, and also 

on seemingly  small  steps  that  can,  under  favorable  conditions,  have  large  effects on 

behaviour.  

There is no policy blueprint here. Of courlicy on a more secure sense of gose 

no country is exactly like any other. No one can design a set of policy initiatives that 

will work well, or at all, in every nation on the globe. But the problems with the way 

of markets and the way of planning are pervasive. In many nations, an alternative that 

attempts  to  promote  human  capabilities,  in  a  way  that  is  alert  to  the  nature  of 

incentives and the role of social norms, promises to draw on both of the great lessons 

of  the  twentieth  century,  and  to  build  povernment’s  appropriate  ends,  and  of  the 

means that are most likely to promote those ends.  

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Professor Cass Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 

csunstei@uchicago.edu 

 

 

41 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An 
Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law 
of Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative 
Study (August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An 
Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in 
Imperial Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else 
Does) (April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and 
Firm‐Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese 
Main Bank System (August 1993) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication 
(September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 
William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of 
Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime 
Consumption (January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) 
Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty 
Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise 
(April 1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 
1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 
J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: 
Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) 

 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 

36. 
37. 

 

42 

Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good 
Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost‐Benefit State (May 1996) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the 
Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right‐to‐Carry Concealed 
Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health‐Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of 
Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 
William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from 
California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption 
of Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of 
Laissez‐Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with 
Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  
William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation 
Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The 
Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law 
(March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners 
Better Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and 
Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police 
Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Second‐Order Decisions (June 1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on 
Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards 
(July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self‐Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of 
Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 
1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” 
(January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular 
Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal 
Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 
Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 

53.  

 

38. 

39. 
40. 

41. 

42. 
43. 

44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 
62. 
63. 

64. 
65. 

66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 

70. 
71. 

72. 

 

43 

John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and 
Right‐to‐Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement 
(April 1999)  
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A 
Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) 
William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection 
(May 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? 
(June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long‐Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of 
Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 
1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than 
Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 

Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to 

Law and Economics (September 1999) 

Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 

Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost‐Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 

Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The 

Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 

87. 

Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics 

(November 1999) 

88. 

Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost‐Benefit Analysis When Preferences 

Are Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire 
(November 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative 
Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in 
Contracts (January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 
2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity 
Shift (February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special 
Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti‐Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised 
May 2002)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 
2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  
Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November 
2000) 
Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 

 

73. 

74. 

75. 
76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 

81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

97. 
98. 
99. 

100. 
101. 
102. 

103. 
104. 
105. 

106. 

 

44 

Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System 
(November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations:  A 
Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 
William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) 
Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious Liability, 
Class Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An Economic 
Approach (December 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 
Richard  Hynes  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  The  Law  and  Economics  of  Consumer  Finance  (February 
2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) (March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost‐Benefit Analysis:  A Positive Political Theory 
Perspective (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital Age (April 
2001) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the Conceptual 
Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) 
Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for 
 
Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)  
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 
2001) 
Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for Centralized 
Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent 
Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry:  Creating Cooperation through 
Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons: Parking and Stopping on the Commons 
(August 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property 
Exemption Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete 
Contracts Perspective (September 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) 
Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board 
Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha “Solution” 
(February 2002) 
Edna Ullmann‐Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) 
Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. 
Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) 

 

 

107. 

108. 

109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 

113. 

114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 

118. 
119. 

120. 

121. 

122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 

126. 
127. 
128.   
129. 

130. 

131.   

132. 
133. 

134. 

135. 
136. 

137. 

138. 
139. 

140. 

141. 
142. 

 

45 

Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute 
Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal Studies 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 
2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success or Failure 
(March 2002) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The 
Antitrust Bulletin) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture 
February 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) 
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal 
Regulation?  Deeper and Wider Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002; revised 
March 2003) 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference 
Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) 
Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government 
as Insurer? (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on 
Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) 
Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and 
the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and 
Contract Law (September 2002) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on 
the File‐Swapping Networks (September 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Does the X‐Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) 
Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) 
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) 
Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic 
Analysis (November 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for the 
Regulation of Public Health (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxation and Risk‐Taking with Multiple Tax Rates (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications 
Act of 1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 
David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short‐Term Assets 
(January 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 
Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa 
Utilities and Verizon (January 2003) 

 

143. 

144. 

145. 
146. 

147. 

148. 

149. 
150. 

151. 
152. 

153. 

154. 
155. 

156. 
157. 
158. 

159. 

160. 
161 

162. 

163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 

170. 

171. 
172. 
173. 
174. 

175. 
176. 

177. 

178. 

 

46 

William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An 
Economic Perspective (February 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) 
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 
2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life‐Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) 
Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) 
David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs 
(September 2003) 
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was 
the Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor 
between 1985 and 2000? (September 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage 
(September 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content 
(September 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal 
Courts of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)  
Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable 
Leisure Time (October 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003) 
David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) 
David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright Law 
(April 2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of 
Statistical Lives (February 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A Critique of the 
Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceutical 
Patents: Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004) 
Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004) 
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of 
Labor within and between Law Firms (April 2004) 
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of 
Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry (April 2004) 
James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the Market for 
Underwriting Business (July 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004) 

 

179. 

180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 

186. 

187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 

191.  
192. 
193. 
194. 

195. 

196. 

197. 

198. 

199. 

200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 
204. 

205. 
206. 
207. 

208. 

209. 

210. 
211. 
212. 
213. 

214. 

215. 

216. 

 

47 

Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004) 
Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, Company Stock, 
Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets 
(August 2004, revised October 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross‐Cultural Risk 
Perceptions (August 2004) 
M. Todd Henderson and James C. Spindler, Corporate Herroin: A Defense of Perks (August 
2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Cyber Security: Of Heterogenity and Autarky (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Unbundling Scope‐of‐Permission Goods: When Should We Invest in 
Reducing Entry Barriers? (September 2004) 
Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing through Law (September 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of the Use of Citations in the Law (2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and the Environment (October 2004) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Cordell Hull, the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act, and the WTO (October 
2004) 
Richard A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Contract Interpretation (November 2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, A Social Networks Theory of Privacy (December 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Minimalism at War (December 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman, How the Law Responds to Self‐Help (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, The Decline of the International Court of Justice (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, Is the International Court of Justice Biased? (December 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, Public vs. Private Enforcement of International Economic Law: Of Standing and 
Remedy (February 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Serial Entrepreneurs and Small Business 
Bankruptcies (March 2005) 
Eric A. Posner, There Are No Penalty Default Rules in Contract Law (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright and the DMCA: Market Locks and Technological Contracts 
(March 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? The 
Relevance of Life‐Life Tradeoffs (March 2005) 
Alan O. Sykes, Trade Remedy Laws (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Rewinding Sony: The Evolving Product, Phoning Home, and the Duty of 
Ongoing Design (March 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Irreversible and Catastrophic (April 2005)  
James C. Spindler, IPO Liability and Entrepreneurial Response (May 2005) 
Douglas Lichtman, Substitutes for the Doctrine of Equivalents: A Response to Meurer and 
Nard (May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, A New Progressivism (May 2005) 

 

 

217. 
218. 

219. 

220.  

221. 

222. 
223. 
224. 

225. 
226. 
227. 
228. 

229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 
233. 
234. 
235. 

236. 

237. 
238. 

239. 

240. 
241. 

242. 
243. 
244. 

245. 
 

 

