University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2005

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Boundedly Rational Borrowing: A Consumer's
Guide
Cass R. Sunstein

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Boundedly Rational Borrowing: A Consumer's Guide" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working
Paper No. 253, 2005).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 253 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
Boundedly Rational Borrowing: A Consumer’s Guide 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
July 2005 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=772186 

 

 

 

Draft 7/28/05 
Forthcoming University of Chicago Law Review 
 
 

Boundedly Rational Borrowing: A Consumer’s Guide 

 

 

 
 

Cass R. Sunstein* 
 
Abstract 
 

these 

Excessive  borrowing,  no  less  than  insufficient  savings,  might  be  a  product  of 
bounded  rationality.  Identifiable  psychological  mechanisms  are  likely  to  contribute  to 
excessive  borrowing; 
include  myopia,  procrastination,  optimism  bias, 
“miswanting,” and what might be called cumulative cost neglect. Suppose that excessive 
borrowing is a significant problem for some or many; if so, how might the law respond? 
The first option involves weak paternalism , through debiasing and other strategies that 
leave  people  free  to  choose  as  they  wish.  Another  option  is  strong  paternalism,  which 
forecloses  choice.  Because  of  private  heterogeneity  and  the  risk  of  government  error, 
regulators  should  have  a  firm  presumption  against  strong  paternalism,  and  hence  the 
initial  line  of  defense  against  excessive  borrowing  consists  of  information  campaigns, 
debiasing, and default rules. On imaginable empirical findings, however, there may be a 
plausible  argument  for  strong  paternalism  in  the  form  of  restrictions  on  various 
practices,  perhaps  including  “teaser  rates”  and  late  fees.  The  two  larger  themes, 
applicable  in  many  contexts,  involve  the  importance  of  an  ex  post  perspective  on  the 
consequences  of  consumer  choices  and  the  virtues  and  limits  of  weak  forms  of 
paternalism, including debiasing and libertarian paternalism. 

I. Three Kinds of People 

The  world  contains  three  kinds  of  people:  those  who  borrow  the  right  amount, 

those who borrow too much, and those who borrow too little.  

The evaluation of whether borrowing is optimal might be made ex ante or ex post. 

Economists and economically oriented lawyers prefer the ex ante perspective. From that 

perspective,  people  might  borrow  too  little  if  they  lack  adequate  information  about  the 

high benefits or low costs of borrowing in a particular instance. Or they might borrow too 

little if some kind of emotion—unjustified fear of debt, for example—disables them from 

borrowing  money  in  circumstances  in  which  they  would  do  so  if  not  thus  disabled. 
                                                 
*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor,  Law  School  and  Department  of  Political  Science, 
University  of  Chicago.  For  comments  on  an  earlier  draft,  I  am  grateful  to  Eric  Posner,  Richard  Posner, 
Richard Thaler, Adrian Vermeule, and participants in a conference on consumer behavior at the University 
of Chicago Law School. 

Excessive  borrowing  could  have  a  similar  ex  ante  explanation.  Borrowers  might  be 

insufficiently informed of the costs of credit, believing that those costs are far lower than 

they actually are. Alternatively, borrowers might suffer from a cognitive or motivational 

problem,  such  as  impulsiveness,  that  leads  them  to  borrow,  and  perhaps  to  face  high 

interest rates, when fully rational people would not do so.  

At least as plausibly, the question of optimal borrowing should be investigated ex 

post, with close reference to the actual effects of borrowing behavior on people’s lives. If 

we are concerned about human welfare, there is much to be said in favor of the ex post 

perspective. Sometimes there is a gap between what people want and what people like; if 
so,  the  wanting-asking  gap  might  be  large  enough  to  justify  governmental  concern.1  A 

central question is the effects of consumer choices, including borrowing, on consumers. 

We  might  find  that  insufficient  or  excessive  borrowing  ensures  that  people’s  lives  go 

significantly less well than they otherwise would.  

Suppose, for example,  that  people’s consumption  choices  lead  them  to  purchase 

products  that  do  not  much  improve  their  well-being,  but  that  the  resulting  debt  much 

impairs their well-being—by, for example, making current earnings go to debt repayment 

rather  than  food  and  medical  care.  Or  perhaps  consumer  behavior  leads  to  a  battle  for 

greater relative position, one that amounts to a kind of arms race in which people try to 
keep  pace  with  one  another.2  That  arms  race,  involving  competition  over  “positional 

goods,” almost certainly plays a role in recent increases in consumer debt. If borrowing 

means that people’s welfare is significantly reduced, then there is a real problem, one that 

might justify some kind of legal intervention.  

The  risk  of  excessive  borrowing  is  paralleled  by  the  risk  of  insufficient 

borrowing.  Perhaps  people’s  lives  would  go  better  if  they  were  willing  to  incur  debt  at 

various stages. Perhaps many young people, and some older ones too, are unduly fearful 

of debt, and hence refuse to borrow money when it is very much in their interest to do so. 

It is fully imaginable that the problem of excessive borrowing is equaled or exceeded by 

the problem of insufficient borrowing. 

                                                 
1 See Colin Camerer, this issue. 
2 See Robert H. Frank, Luxury Fever (1999). 

2 

I  do  not  seek  in  this  essay  to  reach  any  final  conclusions  about  the  sources  and 

magnitude of boundedly rational borrowing or about the appropriate legal response. My 

narrower goal is to provide a kind of regulator’s guide, or a conceptual map—a general 

outline  of  the  reasons  that  boundedly  rational  borrowing  might  occur  and  the  possible 

legal  remedies.  My  hope  is  that  the  discussion  will  be  applicable  to  a  wide  range  of 

situations in which bounded rationality is a potential problem; hence much of the analysis 

could  be  applied  to  such  behavior  as  smoking,  drinking,  eating,  exercising,  saving, 

vacationing,  and  working.  Evaluation  of  the  relevant  mechanisms  and  remedies  would 

require detailed empirical investigation, which I do not venture here. There are two larger 

themes. The first, already suggested, involves the importance of evaluating the effects of 

consumer  behavior  ex  post  rather  than  ex  ante—of  investigating  the  consequences  of 

consumer choices for the lives of consumers. Too often, the ex ante perspective has ruled 

that evaluation off-limits. The second involves the uses and limits of weak paternalism. It 

is possible to imagine approaches to boundedly rational behavior that preserve freedom 

of choice while also steering people in directions that will promote their own well-being. 

As  a  presumption,  regulators  should  favor  weak  rather  than  strong  paternalism,  simply 

because the preservation of choice is an important safeguard against government error. 

 

II. Mechanisms 

My  focus  here  will  be  on  excessive  borrowing.  A  key  question  is  why  people 

might  be  excessive  rather  than  optimal  borrowers.  The  most  obvious  reason,  suggested 

above,  involves  a  lack  of  information:  Borrowers  might  not  be  adequately  informed  of 

the  costs  and  benefits  of  borrowing.  They  might  not  read  the  fine  print;  they  might 

believe  that  short-term  “teaser  rates”  are  actually  long-term,  or  at  least  neglect  the  fact 

that such rates will have only a small beneficial effect on their finances. To suggest this 

possibility, it is not necessary to observe that human beings are boundedly rational. But 
now  assume  that  we  are  dealing  with  homo  sapiens,  not  homo  economicus.3  Five 

problems are likely to contribute to excessive borrowing.  

 
 

 

                                                 
3 An excellent discussion, from which I have learned a great deal, is Oren Bar-Gill, Seduction by Plastic,  
98 Nw. L. Rev. 1373 (2004). 

3 

1.  Cumulative  cost  neglect.  Even  if  boundedly  rational,  consumers  might  well 

hesitate before borrowing $20,000 at a high rate of interest. But if a long series of 

much smaller purchases has that same effect, the cost might well be less visible. A 

distinctive form of bounded rationally stems from neglect of the aggregate effect 

of large numbers of relatively small borrowing choices. Call this cumulative cost 
neglect.4  When  borrowing  is  excessive,  the  reason  often  lies  in  that  form  of 

neglect. Addictive behavior is the most serious problem here, but cumulative cost 

neglect can be a problem even without addiction. 

2.  Procrastination and inertia. For many borrowers, it is not difficult to avoid high 

interest rates and late charges. Timely payments will eliminate the problem. But 

some borrowers procrastinate, ensuring that some bills are paid late. As a result, 

significant  charges  can  accumulate.  It  is  apparently  difficult  for  some  people  to 

overcome  the  costs  of  inertia  even  when  transaction  costs  are  minuscule;  I 
speculate  that  the  strikingly  high  economic  level  of  late  fees5  are,  in  nontrivial 

part, a result of procrastination. 

3.  Unrealistic  optimism.  Some  borrowers  suffer  from  excessive  optimism,6 

believing  that  they  will  be  able  to  repay  a  debt  when  this  is  unlikely. 

Unrealistically  optimistic  borrowers  will  make  welfare-reducing  consumption 

choices, simply because they will fail to appreciate the problems associated with 

their  borrowing.  Most  young  smokers  falsely  believe  that  they  will  not  be 
smoking in a few years.7 So too, many borrowers, I suggest, falsely believe that 

they will not have a serious debt problem as a result of their behavior. Unrealistic 

optimism affects consumers at the time when they are making large expenditures. 

It also interacts with cumulative cost neglect. 

                                                 
4  See  Paul  Slovic,  What  Does  It  Mean  to  Know  a  Cumulative  Risk?  Adolescents’  Perceptions  of  Short-
Term and Long-Term Consequences of Smoking, 13 J Behav. Decision Making 259 (2000); Paul Slovic,  
Do Adolescent Smokers Know the Risks, 47 Duke LJ 1133 (1998). 
5 See Thomas Brown, this issue. 
6 See David Armor & Shelley E. Taylor, When Predictions Fail: The Dilemma of Unrealistic Optimism, in 
Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment 334 (Thomas Gilovich et al. eds. 2002). 
7 See Slovic, supra note. 

4 

4.  Myopia  and  self-control  problems.  Some  borrowers  are  myopic,  emphasizing 
the short-term at the expense of the future.8 Myopic borrowing might be seen as a 

taste  for  current  well-being  over  future  well-being,  in  a  way  that  raises  no 

concerns  about  bounded  rationality;  but  if  a  day’s  welfare  produces  long-term 

distress,  bounded  rationality  is  probably  involved.  Myopia  contributes  to  self-

control problems, by which consumers make decisions that undermine their well-

being  over time. In  this  way, excessive borrowing belongs not only in the same 

general  family  with  insufficient  savings,  but  also  with  insufficient  exercise, 
obesity, poor diet, and excessive smoking and drinking.9  

5.  Miswanting and relative position. Most generally, some consumers suffer from 

a problem of “miswanting”;10 they want (and buy) things that do not promote their 

welfare, and they do not want things that would promote their welfare. When this 

is  so,  then  the  idea  of  consumer  sovereignty  loses  some  of  its  underlying 

justification; people’s decisions do not actually make their lives go better.11 Some 

borrowing  behavior  is  undoubtedly  a  product  of  miswanting.  A  related  problem 

arises  when  borrowing  is  a  product  of  competition  to  achieve  better  relative 

position  with  respect  to  goods—a  competition  from  which  consumers  do  not 
benefit  as  a  whole.12  When  individual  consumers  are  participating  in  a 

competition for better relative position, they are acting rationally, and they are not 

miswanting: If relative position matters—and it does—then people should try to 

maintain it. But to the extent that easy borrowing accelerates that competition, it 

is likely to produce a great deal of harm. 

 

                                                 
8 See George Loewenstein and Drazen Prelec, Anomalies in Intertemporal Choice, in  Choices, Values, and 
Frames  592-93 (Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky eds. 2000). 
9  Some  problems  generally  assessed  under the  rubric of myopia  and  self-control problems  might  well  be 
better  handled  under  the  framework  presented  in  George  Loewenstein,  this  volume;  in  particular, 
Loewenstein’s  emphasis  on  the  role  of  emotions  and  temptation  has  obvious  applications  to  borrowing 
behavior as well as to the more familiar contexts of overeating, drinking, and smoking.  
10.On “miswanting,” see Daniel T. Gilbert & Timothy D. Wilson, Miswanting, in FEELING AND THINKING: 
THE ROLE OF AFFECT IN SOCIAL COGNITION 178, 179 (Joseph P. Forgas ed., 2000). See generally Timothy 
D.  Wilson  &  Daniel  T.  Gilbert,  Affective  Forecasting,  in  35  ADVANCES  IN  EXPERIMENTAL  SOCIAL 
PSYCHOLOGY 345 (Mark P. Zanna ed., 2003) (analyzing people’s inability to predict their own feelings). 
11.. Daniel Kahneman et al., Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility, 112 Q.J. ECON. 375, 
379–88 (1997) (distinguishing betwee “experienced utility” and “decisional utility”). 
12 See Frank, supra note.  

5 

We  do  not  know  whether  for  society  as  a  whole,  borrowing  is  more  properly 

described as insufficient or as excessive. Even for particular people, it is difficult to know 

whether a particular level of borrowing is optimal. And for behavior that unambiguously 

qualifies as excessive, it is hard to uncover the role of each of these variables. At least in 

theory,  however,  these  forms  of  bounded  rationality  are  likely  to  produce  significant 

problems for some consumers. Optimistic observers might well contend that borrowing is 

generally  rational,  and  perhaps  they  are  right.  But  the  fact  that  the  average  American 
household has an average credit card debt of $6500 is at least suggestive,13 and no one 
doubts that credit card debt is closely associated with bankruptcy filings by consumers.14 

More  generally,  a  great  deal  of  evidence  about  the  credit  card  market  throws  the 
optimistic view into some doubt.15  

It is certainly plausible to distinguish between excessive and optimal borrowing. It 

is  even  plausible  to  suggest  that  market  pressures  will  lead  companies  to  appeal  to  the 
human tendency, grounded in the factors just outlined, to borrow excessively.16 Suppose, 

purely  for  purposes  of  argument,  that  excessive  borrowing  occurs  at  a  significant  rate, 

and that it causes individual and social harm. What is the appropriate solution? Is there 

anything that law might do to help? 

 

III. Weak Paternalism 

 
Let  us  begin  by  distinguishing  between  strong  and  weak  paternalism.  As  I 

understand it here, strong paternalism forecloses choice, typically on the ground that all 

or  most  people  will  choose  unwisely.  Mandatory  seat  belt  laws  and  bans  on  the  use  of 

cocaine and heroin can be understood as strongly paternalistic (though third-party effects 

are relevant as well). In the context of excessive borrowing, an appreciation of bounded 

rationality  might  well  spur  proposals  for  strong  paternalism,  on  the  theory  that  people 
will  make  choices  that  undermine  their  own  well-being.17  If  borrowing  is  likely  to  be 

                                                 
13 See Bar-Gill, supra note, at 1384. 
14 Id. at 1385-86. 
15 See Bar-Gill, supra note. 
16 Id. 
17 Id. 

6 

boundedly  rational,  some  such  proposals  might  seem  to  make  a  great  deal  of  sense  on 
certain empirical assumptions.18 

 

A. Against Strong Paternalism 

 
In  general,  there  are  three  problems  with  such  proposals.  The  first  involves 

individual heterogeneity. Even if many borrowers suffer from bounded rationality, others 

do  not;  and  it  is  unfortunate  if  government  is  punishing  the  latter  group  to  help  the 

former. Indeed, any governmental help for those who are boundedly rational may remove 

a desirable incentive to learn over time.  

In  addition,  what  seems  to  be  bounded  rationality  may  simply  involve 

idiosyncratic tastes. If some people are eating a great deal of ice cream, and gaining a lot 

of weight as a result, this may be because they greatly enjoy ice cream. No problem of 

bounded rationality need be involved. If some people are refusing to exercise, it may be 

because they really dislike exercise and because the health gains from exercise, even over 

a lifetime, do not justify the costs. Some apparently excessive borrowers may know that 

they will be able to pay back their loans as a result of growing income in future years; for 

them, it is worthwhile to pay high interest rates now in return for the option to consume a 

great  deal  immediately.  Perhaps  they  are  borrowing  in  order  to  provide  good 

opportunities  for  their  young  children;  perhaps  they  will  be  in  a  better  position  to 

eliminate  their  debt  when  their  children  are  older.  Perhaps  they  are  borrowing  in  the 

reasonable expectation that their earnings will increase in the future, when they will have 

less time to enjoy themselves. 

The second problem involves the risk of government error. No less than ordinary 

people,  government  officials  are  subject  to  various  forms  of  bounded  rationality, 
including myopia, cumulative cost neglect, and unrealistic optimism.19 Worse still, public 

officials  are  subject  to  parochial  pressures,  including  interest-group  power,  that  can 

greatly distort their judgments. A government that indulges in strong paternalism might 

make erroneous decisions as a result of its own blunders and the efforts of groups with a 

strong state in the outcome. In the domain of borrowing behavior, it is easy to imagine 

                                                 
18 Id. 
19 See the discussion of “behavioral bureaucrats” in Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein & Richard Thaler, A 
Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics, 50 STAN. L. REV. 1471 (1998). 

7 

apparently public-interested restrictions that are actually an effort to promote the interests 

of  well-organized  private  groups.  It  is  even  plausible  to  suggest  that  an  appreciation  of 

behavioral issues raises more, rather than fewer, concerns about the risk of government 

error, simply because officials are human beings too. 

The third problem has to do with the corrective potential of individual choice. If 

government  allows  people  to  opt  out  of  its  preferred  arrangement,  it  will  create  an 

immediate safeguard. That safeguard can protect against governmental error and work to 

protect  against  “one-size-fits-all”  solutions.  It  also  ensures  that  if  circumstances  change 

over  time,  and  if  markets  and  individual  initiative  create  novel  opportunities  and 

arrangements, people can take advantage of them. In the context of borrowing, markets 
are rapidly changing,20 and strong paternalism might be responding to a problem that is 

diminishing.  One  of  the  advantages  of  weak  paternalism  is  that  it  may  be  technology-

forcing, in the sense that it can spur innovations that respond to individual needs in ways 

that  government  may  be  unable  to  imagine.  Because  strong  paternalism  forbids  private 

choice, it may freeze a solution that, at best, works for most rather than all, and that might 

cease to work for most as time passes. 

 

 
For  all  of  these  reasons,  there  should  be  a  firm  presumption  against  strong 

B. Paternalism with Liberty 

paternalism.  And  in  fact  a  great  deal  of  recent  attention  has  been  focused  on  forms  of 

paternalism that steer boundedly rational people in directions that will promote their own 

well-being. Three ideas have received particular attention.  

1. Asymmetrical paternalism. Camerer and his coauthors have argued in favor of 

“asymmetrical  paternalism,”  in  the  form  of  interventions  that  promise  to  deliver 

significant  benefits  to  those  who  do  suffer  from  bounded  rationality,  without  imposing 
significant  costs  on  those  who  do  not  so  suffer.21  A  core  example  is  a  “cooling  off” 

period.  A  waiting  period  for  certain  decisions  can  protect  people  facing  self-control 

problems  without  much  harming  people  who  do  not  face  those  problems.  If  people  are 

asked  to  wait  for  a  certain  period  before  buying  encyclopedias,  getting  married,  or 

                                                 
20 See Brown, supra note. 
21  Colin  Camerer,  et  al,  Regulation  for  Conservatives:  Behavioral  Economics  and  the  Case  for 
“Asymmetric Paternalism,” 151 U Pa L Rev 1211 (2003). 

8 

becoming divorced, many may be helped while few will be hurt, and those who are hurt 

are  unlikely  to  be  hurt  much.  So  too  with  information  disclosure,  which  should  protect 

those  who  suffer  from  certain  cognitive  biases  without  injuring  consumers  who  do  not 

need  any  such  information.  The  central  goal  of  asymmetrical  paternalism  is  to  develop 

modest initiatives that serve to correct individual errors without adversely affecting those 

who do not err. 

2. Libertarian paternalism. It is also possible to imagine “libertarian paternalism,” 

in  the  form  of  approaches  that  steer  people  in  welfare-promoting  directions  while  also 
allowing them to do as they wish.22 An approach is both libertarian and paternalistic if it 

retains freedom of choice while also leading people to make decisions that will improve 

their  well-being.  Defining  examples  are  private  and  public  default  rules,  based  on  a 

sensible view about the proper course of action; consider automatic enrollment plans for 
savings, which lead to dramatic increases in savings rates.23 Or consider the Save More 

Tomorrow (SMarT) plan, by which some employers have provided their employees with 

a novel option: Allocate a portion of future wage increases to savings. Employees who 

choose this plan are free to opt out at any time. A large number of employees have agreed 

to try the plan, and only a few have opted out. The result has been significant increases in 
savings rates.24 

There  is  a  large  overlap  between  asymmetrical  paternalism  and  libertarian 

paternalism.  The  reason  is  that  interventions  that  are  choice-preserving  (and  hence 

libertarian) are generally asymmetrical, because they are not likely to impose significant 

costs on people who do not suffer from bounded rationality. But the two concepts are not 

the  same.  It  is  possible  to  imagine  a  form  of  paternalism  that  is  libertarian  but  not 

asymmetrical—as,  for  example,  in  a  default  rule  that  does  not  help  people  who  are 

boundedly rational, but that leads to an outcome that would protect some segment of the 

population.  (A  default  rule  in  which  0%  of  wages  go  to  savings  certainly  qualifies  as 

                                                 
22 See Cass R. Sunstein and Richard A. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalism Is Not An Oxymoron, 70 U Chi L 
Rev 1159 (2003). 
23 
See James J. Choi, et al, Defined Contribution Pensions: Plan Rules, Participant Choices, and the 
Path  of  Least  Resistance,  in  James  M.  Poterba,  ed, 16  Tax  Policy  and  the  Economy  67,  70  (MIT  2002); 
Brigitte  C.  Madrian  and  Dennis  F.  Shea,  The  Power  of  Suggestion:  Inertia  in  401(k)  Participation  and 
Savings Behavior, 116 Q J Econ 1149, 1149–50 (2001). 
24 
to Increase Employee Saving, 112 J Polit Econ S164 (2004). 

See Richard H. Thaler and Shlomo Benartzi, Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics 

9 

libertarian,  and  it  steers  employees  in  a  particular  direction,  but  it  cannot  qualify  as  a 

form  of  asymmetrical  paternalism.)  We  could  also  imagine  a  form  of  asymmetrical 

paternalism that denies choice and hence does not count as libertarian; consider a ban on 

certain purchases that are almost never made by people who do not suffer from bounded 

rationality.  

3. Debiasing through law. Under a third approach, weak paternalists might seek 
to  “debias  people  through  law,”25  by  taking  advantage  of  empirical  work  on  strategies 
operating  to  “debias”  people  from  the  effects  of  bounded  rationality.26  Consider  an 

approach  that  attempts  to  respond  to  unrealistic  optimism  on  the  part  of  consumers  by 
harnessing the availability heuristic.27 With such strategies, excessive optimism is met by 

vivid narratives of possible harm, in a way that is meant to give people a more realistic 
appreciation  of  the  risks  at  stake.28  Debiasing  strategies  are  the  weakest  form  of  weak 

paternalism;  the  relevant  steering  operates  directly  on  bounded  rationality  and  allows 

people  to  act  as  they  see  fit.  When  debiasing  strategies  are  used,  consumers  and  others 

remain entirely free to choose.  

4. Objections to weak paternalism. It is tempting to object to weak paternalism on 

the  ground  that  even  if  it  is  weak,  paternalism  involves  a  form  of  governmental 

manipulation  of  consumers,  in  a  way  that  might  violate  their  autonomy  and  produce 
welfare  losses  as  well.29  Slippery  slope  problems  might  also  seem  especially  severe  in 

this domain. Suppose that government believes itself entitled to debias and that officials 

and  relevant  groups  know  exactly  how  to  accomplish  that  task.  If  so,  regulators  might 

well  be  tempted  to  engage  in  a  form  of  “mind  control,”  steering  both  preferences  and 

choices in their preferred directions. As the history of government propaganda suggests, 

there can be no assurance that any debiasing will be exercised benignly. And if regulators 

                                                 
25 See Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing Through Law,  J. Legal Stud. (forthcoming 2006). 
26 Baruch Fischhoff, Debiasing, in JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES 422 (Daniel 
Kahneman et al. eds., 1982); Lawrence Sanna, Norbert Schwarz & Shavaun L. Stocker, When Debiasing 
Backfires: Accessible Content and Accessibility Experiences in Debiasing Hindsight, 28 J. EXPERIMENTAL 
PSYCHOL.:  LEARNING,  MEMORY,  &  COGNITION  497 (2002);  and Neil  D. Weinstein & William  M.  Klein, 
Resistance  of  Personal  Risk  Perceptions  to  Debiasing  Interventions,  in  HEURISTICS  AND  BIASES:  THE 
PSYCHOLOGY OF INTUITIVE JUDGMENT 313 (Thomas Gilovich et al. eds., 2002). 
27 See Jolls and Sunstein, supra note. 
28 FRANK A. SLOAN, DONALD H. TAYLOR & V. KERRY SMITH, THE SMOKING PUZZLE:  INFORMATION, RISK 
PERCEPTION, AND CHOICE 122-23, 127, 161, 180-81 (2003).  
29 See Edward Glaeser, this issue. 

10 

and their allies know about the power of default rules, perhaps they will default people 

into  options  that  serve  parochial  interests  rather  than  the  interests  of  those  who  are 

supposed to be benefited. It is easy to imagine, for example, that groups with a financial 

interest in increased savings might favor approaches that increase savings, whatever the 

welfare effects on workers. It is also possible to imagine interest-group maneuvering that 

would protect certain kinds of lenders at the expense of others. 

The  simplest  response  to  this  objection  is  that  some  forms  of  weak  paternalism 

are unavoidable. In many cases, weak paternalism, in the form of government steering, is 
inevitable,  and  it  is  utterly  pointless  to  ask  whether  such  steering  is  desirable.30  For 

example,  any  legal  system  must  rely  on  default  rules;  “every  policy  must  have  a  no-

action default, and defaults impose physical, cognitive, and . . . emotional costs on those 
who must change their status.”31 Default rules specify, among other things, what happens 

when  parties  have  not  agreed  on  the  time  of  performance,  or  when  employers  and 

employees  have  not  specified  whether  employment  is  at  will  or  for  cause,  or  whether 

employees are entitled to vacation time and to be free from discrimination on the basis of 

age. In the world of borrowing, no less than in the world of employment, default terms 

are  pervasive;  they  identify  the  background  for  bargaining  by  saying  who  must  obtain 

what sort of agreement from whom. This background inevitably affects preferences and 

choices.  This  is  the  sense  in  which  government  steering,  and  in  that  sense  weak 

paternalism, is unavoidable. 

Those  who  object  to  weak  paternalism  sometimes  speak  if  government  can  be 

absent—as if the default terms that set the background come from nature or from the sky. 

This is a major confusion. To be sure, it is possible that the default terms that now apply 

in any particular context are generally best, in the sense that they promote the interests of 

the parties on net. But that view must be defended, not asserted. The central point is that 

whether  or  the  default  terms  are  desirable,  they  help  to  shape  preferences  and  choices, 

and in that sense reflect a form of weak paternalism. 

                                                 
30 See Sunstein and Thaler, supra note. 
31 Johnson and Goldstein, supra note, at 1339. Two qualifications are necessary here. First, it is possible to 
follow an approach of “coerced choosing,” by which no default rule is in place and people are forced to 
select a rule or policy. In many cases, however, coerced choosing is not feasible, and in many others it is 
not  desirable.  Second,  the  ellipses  eliminate  the  words  “in  the  case  of  [organ]  donation,”  where  the 
emotional costs may be especially high; but emotional costs often attach to changes in default rules. 

11 

Perhaps  the  committed  antipaternalist  could  acknowledge  this  point  and  argue, 

more  cautiously,  that  there  should  be  a  strong  presumption  against  weak  paternalism 

except  to  the  extent  that  it  is  inevitable.  And  it  is  true  that  many  forms  of  weak 

paternalism  are  far  from  inevitable.  Regulators  may  or  may  not  choose  information 

campaigns, cooling off periods, and debiasing strategies. Should there be a presumption 

against  those  admittedly  optional  approaches?  This  question  is  hard  to  answer  in  the 

abstract.  Suppose  we  believe  that  most  of  the  time,  boundedly  rational  behavior  is  not 

likely to be terribly damaging and that market forces, together with social influences and 

private learning, will provide a corrective. Suppose we believe that regulators are highly 

likely  to  confused  or  self-serving,  and  that  their  apparent  efforts  to  correct  bounded 

rationality will usually do more harm than good, even if the efforts at correction involve 

weak paternalism. If so, a presumption against weak paternalism would be justified.  

Nothing said here rules that presumption out of bounds. On imaginable empirical 

assumptions, it makes a great deal of sense. A recognition of bounded rationality does not 

by  itself  justify  any  particular  form  of  governmental  response;  cognitive  error  on  the 

private end might be marched or even exceeded by cognitive (and other) failure by public 

institutions.  Perhaps  this  is  so  of  boundedly  rational  borrowing;  recall  that  I  have  not 

attempted to show that the problem of excessive borrowing is serious enough to justify a 

governmental response of any kind. But it is also plausible to think that in many contexts, 

bounded rationality causes significant harm, that the market does not provide an adequate 

corrective, and that modest regulatory interventions can make people much better off. Let 

us shift, then, from more general questions to some concrete possibilities.  

III. Responses to Boundedly Rational Borrowing 

 
Those inclined to weak paternalism might consider three approaches to excessive 

A. 

Information 

The first response would be purely informational—the kind of approach taken by 

the  Truth  in  Lending  Act.  Here  the  goal  would  be  to  ensure  that  borrowers  know  what 

they  are  doing.  If  important  facts  seem  hidden,  buried  in  fine  print,  or  unintelligible, 

regulators  might  take  corrective  steps.  The  most  obvious  example  is  to  require  clear 

 

 

borrowing.  

12 

disclosure of interest rates. Suppose market and regulatory pressures now work well, so 

that consumers generally know about rates and so that competition is actively working to 
lower rates.32 If so, perhaps it is time to consider informational approaches for late fees, a 

significant  source  of  revenue  and  perhaps  a  product  of  bounded  rationality  for  many 

consumers. Whatever the target of disclosure, the advantage of this approach is that it is 

unlikely to impose any real costs on those who seek to borrow, while at the same time 

producing real benefits to those who might borrow excessively.  

There  are,  however,  serious  problems  with  informational  approaches.  Most 

fundamentally,  they  do  not  adequately  come  to  terms  with  bounded  rationality.  If 

borrowers are both myopic and excessively optimistic, there is a serious risk that purely 
informational  responses  will  do  little  or  nothing.33  If  consumers  are  suffering  from 

cumulative cost neglect, then most disclosure strategies will not work—unless, perhaps, 

they explicitly focus people on cumulative costs, in which case disclosure is sliding into a 

form of debiasing. The general lesson is that the strategy of “provide more information,” 

favored  on  standard  economic  grounds,  should  be  helpful  when  people  merely  lack 

knowledge; but as a response to biases and self-control problems, it is most likely to be 

inadequate.  

In  fact  the  problem  is  worse  still.  When  government  attempts  to  “provide  more 

information,” it has to engage in some kind of framing. Because of bounded rationality, 

some frames will have more of an impact than others. For those who suffer from serious 

forms of bounded rationality, steps like those in the Truth in Lending Act may well do 

little  good.  Of  course  the  key  questions  here  are  empirical  ones;  it  would  be  extremely 

valuable to have a sense of the effects of the Truth in Lending Act. It is possible that the 

effects are small. Whether or not they are small, they might be sufficient. Perhaps more 

self-conscious efforts to inform consumers would have desirable effects. But unless the 

problem really is a simple lack of information, there is little reason for much confidence 

on that count. 

 
 

                                                 
32 See Brown, supra note. 
33 See Bar-Gill, supra note. 

13 

 
A second possibility would involve debiasing. Here government would be highly 

B. 

Debiasing 

alert  to  the  psychological  mechanisms  that  create  a  risk  of  excessive  borrowing,  and  it 

would  take  steps  specifically  designed  to  counteract  those  risks.  Consider  the  parallel 
domain of smoking behavior, where a great deal of work has been devoted to debiasing.34 

Of  course  the  argument  for  debiasing  is  far  stronger  for  smoking;  borrowing  is  most 

unlikely to kill people. But for those who borrow excessively, the underlying mechanisms 
are  not  unrelated  to  those  that  account  for  excessive  smoking.35  Optimism  bias, 

cumulative  cost  neglect,  and  myopia  play  a  role  in  both  settings.  It  might  therefore  be 

productive to use the “smoking model” far more generally, drawing on that model in any 

effort to develop debiasing strategies to combat the risk of excessive borrowing.  

An obvious approach would enlist salience and availability in the debiasing effort. 

It  is  well-established  that  in  thinking  about  risks,  people  rely  on  certain  heuristics,  or 
rules of thumb, which serve to simplify their inquiry.36 Heuristics typically work through 

a  process  of  “attribute  substitution,”  in  which  people  answer  a  hard  question  by 
substituting  an  easier  one.37  When  people  use  the  availability  heuristic,  they  assess  the 
magnitude of risks by asking whether examples can readily come to mind.38 If people can 

easily think of such examples, they are far more likely to be affected than if they cannot.  

For  example,  “a  class  whose  instances  are  easily  retrieved  will  appear  more  numerous 
than a class of equal frequency whose instances are less retrievable.”39  

This is a point about how familiarity can affect the availability of instances. A risk 

that is familiar, like those associated with guns, will be seen as more serious than a risk 
that is less familiar, like those associated with sun-bathing.40 But salience is important as 

                                                 
34  See  Frank  A.  Sloan,  Donald  H.  Taylor,  &  V.  Kerry  Smith,  The  Smoking  Puzzle:    Information,  Risk 
Perception, and Choice 122-23, 127, 161 (2003). 
35  An  obvious  exception  is  that  smoking  can  be  physically  addictive;    for  most  excessive  borrowers,  the 
idea of addiction is only a metaphor. 
36  See  Daniel  Kahneman,  Paul  Slovic,  &  Amos  Tversky,  Judgment  Under  Uncertainty:  Heuristics  and 
Biases (1982). 
37  See  Daniel  Kahneman  &  Shane  Frederick,  Representativeness  Revisited:  Attribute  Substitution  in 
Intuitive  Judgment  49,  53  in  Heuristics  and  Biases:  The  Psychology  of  Intuitive  Judgment,  Thomas 
Gilovich, Dale Griffin, & Daniel Kahneman, eds. (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2002). 
38  See  Amos  Tversky  &  Daniel  Kahneman,  Judgment  Under    Uncertainty:  Heuristics  and  Biases,  in 
Judgement under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases 3, 11-14 (Daniel Kahneman et al. eds 1982). 
39 Id. at 11. 
40 See Steven Levitt,  Freakonomics 150-52 (2005). 

14 

well. “For example, the impact of seeing a house burning on the subjective probability of 

such  accidents  is  probably  greater  than  the  impact  of  reading  about  a  fire  in  the  local 
paper.”41 Salience is highly related to vividness. A vivid example often does much more 
than statistical information is ensuring that people attend to potential risks.42  

How might these points be used in a debiasing campaign to counteract excessive 

borrowing?  We  could  imagine  three  possibilities.  First,  and  best  of  all,  credit  card 

companies might attempt on their own to debias the most vulnerable borrowers, without 

any kind of governmental mandate. Either self-interested or public-interested companies 

might take steps in this direction. Such campaigns might involve vivid accounts, by real 

people,  of  problems  created  by  excessive  borrowing.  To  be  especially  effective,  the 

accounts  should  involve  brief,  memorable  narratives  of  typical  behavior  that  has  led 

people to serious harm. Second, government might engage in public education campaigns 

that  are  specifically  designed  to  alert  people  to  the  risks.  Such  public  education 
campaigns  are  likely  to  work  best  if  they  actually  engage  people’s  emotions.43  A  third 

and  least  possibility  would  involve  a  disclosure  mandate  imposed  on  credit  card 

companies themselves. Such companies might be required to provide vivid warnings of 

the  risks  of  excessive  borrowing,  perhaps  accompanied  by  narratives  of  real  lives  that 

have been adversely affected by it. This is the least plausible solution, because the risks 

associated  with  borrowing  have  not  been  shown  to  be  sufficiently  large  to  justify  a 

compulsory warning program on this kind.  

 

Would  either  of  the  first  two  steps  be  worthwhile?  The  question  cannot  be 

answered in an empirical vacuum. Everything depends on the magnitude of the problem 

and  the  effects  of  debiasing  strategies  in  reducing  it.  All  that  can  be  said  is  that  on  the 

basis  of  what  is  now  known,  such  strategies  might  well  do  some  good  and  are  most 

unlikely to produce significant harm. 

 

Default Rules 
 
Libertarian paternalists are especially interested in the use of default rules to move 

C. 

behavior in welfare-promoting directions; the creative use of default rules is central to the 

                                                 
41 Id. 
42 See Lee Ross and Richard Nisbett, Human Inference 43-53 (1980). 
43 See Loewenstein,  this issue. 

15 

project of libertarian paternalism.44 Such rules can have exceptionally powerful effects on 
choices,  behavior,  and  outcomes.45  I  have  already  referred  to  the  effects  of  automatic 

enrollment plans in increasing savings in the work place. Consider a few other examples. 

 

a.  For  insurance,  a  natural  experiment  demonstrated  the  potential  stickiness  of 
default  rules.46  Pennsylvania  offered  a  default  program  for  drivers  containing  a 

full right to sue and a relatively high premium; purchasers could elect to switch to 

a new plan by “selling” the more ample right to sue and paying a lower premium. 

By  contrast,  New  Jersey  created  a  system  in  which  the  default  plan  included  a 

relatively  low  premium  and  no  right  to  sue;  purchasers  were  allowed  to  deviate 

from the default program and to purchase the right to sue by choosing a program 

with that right and also a higher premium. In both cases, the default rule tended to 

stick. A strong majority accepted the default rule in both states, with only about 

20 percent of New Jersey drivers acquiring the full right to sue, and 75 percent of 
Pennsylvanians retaining that right.47 There is no reason to think that there was a 

systematic difference between the preferences of citizens of the two states. 

b.  In the United States, those who want their organs to be available for others must 

affirmatively  say  so,  usually  through  an  explicit  notation  on  their  drivers’ 

licenses.  But  in  many  other  nations—Austria,  Belgium,  Denmark,  Finland, 

France, Italy, Luxembourg, Norway, Singapore, Slovenia, and Spain—people are 

presumed to consent to allow their organs to be used, after death, for the benefit 

of  others;  they  are  permitted  to  overcome  the  presumption,  usually  through  an 
explicit notation to that effect on their drivers’ licenses.48 Johnson and Goldstein 

find that with respect to organ donation, people lack stable preferences and their 
decisions  are  very  much  influenced  by  the  default  rule.49  Similarly,  a  controlled 

online  experiment  showed  a  substantial  effect  from  the  default  rule:  The  opt-in 

system created a 42 percent consent rate, about half of the 82 percent rate for an 

                                                 
44 See Sunstein and Thaler, supra note. 
45 See Ian Ayres, this issue. 
46 
Judgment 294–95; Johnson, et al, Framing, Probability Distortions, Insurance Decisions, in id at 238. 
See Johnson, et al, Framing, Probability Distortions, Insurance Decisions, supra note, at 238. 
47 
See http://www.presumedconsent.org/solutions.htm. 
48 
See Eric Johnson and Daniel Goldstein, Do Defaults Save Lives?, 302 Science  1338 (2004). 
49 

See Camerer, Prospect Theory in the Wild, in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive 

16 

opt-out  system.50  The  real-world  evidence  is  even  more  dramatic.  Presumed 

consent nations show consent rates ranging from a low of 85.9 percent (Sweden) 
to a high of 100 percent (Austria), with a median of 99 percent.51 The default also 

produces  a  significant,  though  less  dramatic,  increase  in  actual  donations, 
meaning that many lives are saved as a result of the presumed consent system.52  

c.  A substantial effect from the legal default rule was found in an experimental study 

of law student reactions to different state law provisions governing vacation time 
from firms.53 The study involved two conditions. In the first, state law guaranteed 

two  weeks  of  vacation  time,  and  law  students  were  asked  to  state  their  median 

willingness  to  pay  (in  reduced  salary)  for  two  extra  weeks  of  vacation.  In  the 

second  condition,  state  law  provided  a  mandatory,  non-waivable  two-week 

vacation  guarantee,  but  it  also  provided  employees  (including  associates  at  law 

firms)  with  the  right  to  two  additional  weeks  of  vacation,  a  right  that  could  be 

“knowingly and voluntarily waived.” Students were asked how  much employers 

would have to pay them to give up their right to the two extra weeks. All by itself, 

the switch in the default rule more than doubled the students’ responses, raising 

the median amount from $6000 to $13,000. 

There are several possible explanations of the effects of default rules in these and 
other  cases.  Inertia  undoubtedly  plays  a  role.54  Action  is  necessary  to  change  a  default 

rule, and inertia therefore favors such rules. The default rule also conveys information by 
virtue of its status as such.55 Perhaps the state, or an employer, has chosen a default rule 

for a reason, and if so, people should stick with it unless they have a reason of their own 
to depart. Finally, the default rule may create an endowment effect,56 leading people to 

favor the existing allocation of entitlements; for that reason the rule will tend to stick. 

Id. 
Id. 
Id. Johnson and Goldstein estimate that switching to an opt-out system increases organs actually 

                                                 
50 
51 
52 
used by 16 percent, holding everything else constant. 
53   See Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule, 77 NYU L Rev 106, 113-14 (2002). 
54  Brigitte  C.  Madrian  and Dennis F. Shea, The  Power  of Suggestion: Inertia  in  401(k)  Participation and 
Savings Behavior, 116 Q J Econ 1149, 1149-50 (2001). 
55 Id. at 1160-61.  
 
56 See, e.g., Russell Korobkin, The Endowment Effect and Legal Analysis, 97 NW L Rev 1227 (2003). 

17 

How  might  these  ideas  be  enlisted  to  reduce  the  risk  of  excessive  borrowing? 

Here is  a simple inspiration  for  seriously investigating that question: Many people who 

are  purchasing  goods  and  services  with  credit  cards  would  do  much  better  if  they  used 

debit cards instead. With debit cards, they would avoid high interest rates and late fees. 

For many consumers, the use of credit cards is a product of habit and inertia, rather than 

of any kind of reflective choice against the use of debit cards. Significant charges result 

from  simple  procrastination.  On  this  view,  a  narrow  question  is  how  to  ensure  optimal 

decisions,  in  terms  of  individual  welfare,  in  the  choice  between  credit  cards  and  debit 

cards. Fortunately, there is evidence that many consumers are shifting from credit cards 
to  debit  cards,57  perhaps  in  order  to  avoid  the  effects  of  their  own  bounded  rationality. 

But  it  is  reasonable  to  think  that  the  shifts  have  been  occurring  more  rarely  than  they 

should if consumer welfare is our goal. 

Suppose that many people who are using credit cars would do better to use debit 

cards instead. If so, it would be valuable to make debit cards a kind of default option, to 

be  used  unless  borrowers  specifically  decide  otherwise.  Credit  card  companies  might 

take, or be encouraged to take, steps in this direction on their own. They might say, for 

example, 

that  unless  consumers  specifically  say  otherwise,  payments  will  be 

automatically  deducted  every  month  from  a  specified  checking  account.  The  “opt  out” 

might  done  at  the  time  of  initial  application  for  the  card;  perhaps  better,  it  might  be 

required  on  an  annual,  biannual,  or  monthly  basis.  Alternatively,  regulators  might 

encourage  or  require  credit  card  companies  to  make  automatic  deduction  an  option  for 

new  credit  card  owners,  saying  that  at  the  time  of  initial  acquisition  of  the  card, 

consumers  must  be  given  the  opportunity  to  use  automatic  deduction,  with  a  salient 

notation to this effect. Somewhat more aggressively, regulators might require companies 

to make automatic deduction the default option, subject to override either at the point of 

purchase or on an annual, biannual, or even monthly basis.  

Here  is  another  possibility.  We  have  seen  that  with  the  Save  More  Tomorrow 
plan, workers can be encouraged to produce significant increases in savings rates.58 It is 

                                                 
57 See Brown, supra note. 
58  See Richard H. Thaler and Shlomo Benartzi, supra note. 

18 

easy  to  imagine  a  parallel  plan,  Borrow  Less  Tomorrow  (BLT).59  Private  institutions 

could  assist  consumers  who  have  borrowed  excessively  by  helping  them  to  pay  down 

their debt, perhaps by encouraging them to enter into agreements to ensure that the level 

of  debt  would  be  lower  each  month  than  it  was  before.  Credit  card  companies  could 

themselves  help  certain  customers  in  this  way—not  by  mandating  participation,  but  by 

encouraging  people  to  participate  if  they  choose.  Perhaps  governments  could  consider 

incentives to lead the private sector to provide this kind of assistance. In fact a BLT plan 

might be combined with the idea of automatic enrollment, ensuring that for expenditures 

above a specified limit, payments would come out of existing checking accounts, rather 

than being used to increase debt. 

Whether  any  kind  of  weak  paternalism  makes  sense  in  this  context  cannot  be 

decided in the abstract. It is necessary to know the magnitude of the problem of excessive 

borrowing  and  the  likely  effectiveness  of  any  weakly  paternalistic  response.  My  own 

tentative  judgment  is  that  an  information  campaign,  encouraging  the  use  of  automatic 

payment from existing accounts, would probably do some good and little harm. 

 

 

IV. Strong Paternalism 

 
If  boundedly  rational  borrowing  is  pervasive,  and  if  consumer  choices  are 

frequently  impairing  consumers’  welfare,  it  is  possible  that  more  intrusive  government 

responses  are  desirable.  Suppose  that  myopia,  procrastination,  cumulative  cost  neglect, 

and  excessive  optimism  are  leading  many  people  to  borrow  money  on  behalf  of 

purchases  that  produce  little  short-term  gain  but  significant  long-term  harm.  If  so, 

prohibitions on voluntary agreements might be justified, at least if the aggregate benefits 

exceed  the  aggregate  costs.  When  such  agreements  can  be  shown  to  injure  the  very 

people  who  enter  into  them,  the  firm  presumption  against  strong  paternalism  might  be 

overcome;  and  bounded  rationality  is  often  the  source  of  the  relevant  injury.  In  the 

context  of  the  credit  card  market,  there  is  an  important  supplemental  point.  The  very 

structure of that market appears to lead many companies to appeal to bounded rationality, 
rather  than  to  attempt  to  counteract  it.60  As  with  state  lotteries,  where  advertising 

                                                 
59 I am grateful to Matthew Rabin for the acronym. 
60 Bar-Gill, supra note. 

19 

campaigns  appeal  to  unrealistic  optimism  and  probability  neglect,  so  too,  plausibly,  for 

borrowing: Some companies encourage people to obtain cards with the hope that many of 

them will procrastinate and pay significant late fees and interest charges. 

We could imagine a continuum of responses. The most modest would single out 

particular features of agreements that are peculiarly likely to reflect bounded rationality, 

and to operate to harm consumers ex post. A possible candidate is the “teaser rate,” by 

which consumers are given an opportunity to use credit cards at a low rate—sometimes a 

zero interest rate—until the expiration of the introductory period. The teaser rate operates 

to tempt consumers to begin to use credit cards, apparently with insufficient awareness of 

the  effects,  over  time,  on  their  welfare.  Many  consumers  who  are  excited  about  teaser 

rates  do  not  sufficiently  appreciate  the  small  size  of  the  actual  gain.  As  Oren  Bar-Gill 

explains, “The teaser strategy works. Despite the fact that most borrowing is done at the 
high post-promotion rates, consumers appear to be extremely sensitive to teaser rates.”61  

Suppose  that  teaser  rates  can  be  shown  to  lead  boundedly  rational  people  to 

become credit card holders, in a way that produces aggregate harm. If so, the argument 

for  banning  such  rates  is  not  entirely  implausible.  Unfortunately,  a  ban  would  impose 

costs on many borrowers, above all those who rationally opt for the  teaser rates (either 

because they will switch cards after the expiration of the relevant period or because they 

are net gainers from the package they receive). Indeed, a ban on teaser rates would be not 

only strongly paternalistic but also asymmetrical in an important and unattractive sense: 

It  would  harm  the  sophisticated  consumers  who  take  advantage  of  them.  Here  as 

elsewhere,  weak  paternalism  should  be  the  first  line  of  defense.  But  if  a  ban  on  teaser 

rates would protect people against excessive borrowing while also imposing modest costs 

on  those  who  benefit  from  them,  it  might  be  worth  considering.  I  do  not,  however, 

believe that the argument for such a ban has yet been made out. 

A far more aggressive approach would be to enact usury laws. Such laws are price 

controls,  and  most  of  the  time,  the  argument  against  price  controls  is  devastatingly 

powerful:  They  create  scarcity  and  typically  harm  the  very  people  they  are  designed  to 

help, by depriving them of access to a good that they want. In this context, an obvious 

danger  with  price  controls  is  that  they  will  make  it  impossible  for  (rational)  people  to 

                                                 
61 Id at 1393. 

20 

obtain loans—perhaps injuring those people who most need those loans, and who are in 

the worst position to obtain needed resources through other routes. But the argument for 
usury  laws  is  strengthened  by  identifiable  features  of  the  credit  card  market.62  It  is 

exceptionally  easy  to  obtain  a  credit  card.  Companies  make  much  of  their  money  from 

high  interest  rates  and  late  charges.  As  Bar-Gill  has  explained,  market  pressures  give 
companies a strong incentive to take advantage of bounded rationality.63 In the abstract, 

usury laws would appear to be a well-designed response. A ban on interest rates above a 

certain  level  would  counteract  the  tendency  to  exploit  bounded  rationality  by 

restructuring the system of pricing in the direction of annual fees—precisely the structure 

that would plausibly emerge if myopia, cumulative cost neglect, and unrealistic optimism 

were not involved.  

On the other hand, usury restrictions would impose serious costs. It is possible to 

imagine that many fully rational people benefit from a situation in which annual rates are 

low and in which interest rates are high. This is obviously so if they do not maintain debt 

and  hence  pay  no  interest.  Such  people  use  credit  cards  essentially  as  debit  cards;  they 

lose  nothing  by  the  current  arrangement  and  benefit  from  the  existence  of  a  kind  of 

subsidy by card users who pay significant debt and large late fees. To be sure, there is a 

serious problem with this system, because it involves a perverse system of redistribution, 

from  relatively  wealthy  people  who  pay  on  time  to  less  wealthy  people  who  maintain 

debt. But it is also the case that some people, some of the time, are better off with low 

annual  fees  and  high  interest  than  with  higher  fees  and  lower  interest—at  least  if  they 

have a reasonable expectation of growing income over time.  

One question is the size of this population, and the extent to which its members 

are  behaving  rationally  rather  than  in  a  way  that  is  distorted  by  cognitive  and 

motivational  problems.  This  is  an  empirical  question  that  cannot  be  resolved  by 

abstractions. But it is reasonable to speculate that if usury laws provided a reallocation of 

consumer  costs  toward  higher  annual  fees,  the  principal  beneficiaries  would  be  people 

who suffer from bounded rationality and hence from high consumer debt. But there is a 

strong  response  to  the  argument  for  usury  laws:  Recent  evidence  suggests  that  there  is 

                                                 
62 Id. 
63 See Bar-Gill, supra note, at 1422-23. 

21 

intense  competition  over  interest  rates  in  the  credit  card  market.64  Because  such 

competition has been occurring, a governmental response does not appear to be necessary 

or even desirable. 

Another  form  of  strong  paternalism  would  target  the  particular  payment 

provisions that most harm those with bounded rationality, such as late fees. It is plausible 

to think that such fees are incurred precisely by those who most suffer from the problems 

catalogued here, including procrastination, myopia, and excessive optimism. If this is so, 

it might be worthwhile to consider restrictions on the magnitude of late fees, at least if the 

consequence of such restrictions would be to shift from fee payments to higher upfront 

charges. Such a shift would have the desirable effect of ensuring that payment practices 

would not target those suffering most severely from bounded rationality. 

 

Conclusion 

 
Many  people  borrow  excessively,  whether  excessiveness  is  measured  ex  ante  or 

ex  post.  I  have  emphasized  here  the  importance  of  the  ex  post  perspective,  simply 

because  the  most  serious  problems  arise  when  borrowing  behavior  produces  serious 

economic  distress.  A  number  of  psychological  mechanisms  are  likely  to  contribute  to 

excessive  borrowing,  including  procrastination,  myopia,  cumulative  cost  neglect, 

unrealistic optimism, and miswanting. These mechanisms help to illuminate many areas 

in which bounded rationality leads people to decisions that impair their welfare. Hence an 

analysis of boundedly rational borrowing should apply to other contexts in which more 

serious problems result from bounded rationality. 

In  exploring  legal  responses  to  problems  of  this  sort,  we  should  distinguish 

between  weak  and  strong  paternalism.  Here  as  elsewhere,  regulators  ought  to  adopt  a 

firm  presumption  in  favor  of  weak  paternalism  and  freedom  of  choice.  Unfortunately, 

informational  approaches  are  unlikely  to  provide  a  great  deal  of  help,  simply  because 

they  do  not  respond  to  bounded  rationality.  Debiasing  is  far  more  promising;  if 

government  enlists  salience  and  availability  in  the  interest  of  reducing  excessive 

borrowing,  it  is  unlikely  to  impose  significant  costs  and  it  might  produce  real  gains.  It 

seems  clear  that  many  people  who  use  credit  cards  would  do  better  to  use  debit  cards 

                                                 
64 See Brown, supra note. 

22 

instead. One possibility is that private and public institutions should alter existing default 

rules so as to move closer to the preferred state of affairs.  

Strong  paternalism—in  the  form  of  restrictions  on  particular  practices  or  more 

general  usury  laws—is  usually  to  be  avoided,  partly  because  it  is  likely  to  introduce 

inefficiencies, and partly because it is likely to hurt many of the people that it is intended 

to  help.  Notwithstanding  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  credit  card  market,  I  do  not  believe 

that  existing  evidence  provides  adequate  grounds  for  strong  paternalism.  Here,  as 

elsewhere, it is best to begin, and probably to end, with weak paternalism of the kind that 

I have outlined here. 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Professor Cass Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 

csunstei@uchicago.edu 

23 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An 
Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of 
Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study 
(August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An 
Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial 
Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) 
(April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and 
Firm‐Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main 
Bank System (August 1993) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication 
(September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 
William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of 
Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption 
(January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) 
Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty 
Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 
1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 

24 

37. 

38. 

39. 
40. 

41. 

42. 
43. 

44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 

66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 

70. 

53.  

J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: 
Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good 
Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost‐Benefit State (May 1996) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership 
of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right‐to‐Carry Concealed 
Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health‐Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially 
Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 
William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from 
California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of 
Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of 
Laissez‐Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes 
on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  
William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation 
Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The 
Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law 
(March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better 
Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and 
Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police 
Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Second‐Order Decisions (June 1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm 
Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self‐Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of 
Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” 
(January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular 
Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 

25 

71. 

72. 
73. 

74. 

75. 
76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 
81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 
95. 

96. 

97. 
98. 
99. 

100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 

Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal 
Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 
Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right‐to‐
Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A 
Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) 
William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? 
(June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long‐Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of 
Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? 
Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 

Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law 

and Economics (September 1999) 

Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 

Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost‐Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 

Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case 

of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 

87. 

Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics 

(November 1999) 

88. 

Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost‐Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are 

Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 
1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative 
Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts 
(January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift 
(February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to 
Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti‐Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised May 
2002)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  

26 

105. 

106. 
107. 

108. 

109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 

113. 

114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 
118. 
119. 

120. 
121. 

122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 

126. 
127. 
128.   
129. 

130. 

131.   

132. 
133. 

134. 

135. 
136. 

137. 

138. 
139. 

140. 

Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November 
2000) 
Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System 
(November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations:  A 
Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 
William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) 
Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious Liability, Class 
Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An Economic Approach 
(December 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 
Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer Finance (February 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) (March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost‐Benefit Analysis:  A Positive Political Theory 
Perspective (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital Age (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the Conceptual 
Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) 
Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal 
Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)  
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 
2001) 
Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for Centralized 
Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent 
Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry:  Creating Cooperation through 
Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Allocation  of  the  Commons:  Parking  and  Stopping  on  the  Commons 
(August 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption 
Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts 
Perspective (September 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) 
Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections 
and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha “Solution” (February 
2002) 

 

 

27 

141. 
142. 

143. 

144. 

145. 
146. 

147. 

148. 

149. 
150. 

151. 
152. 

153. 

154. 
155. 

156. 
157. 
158. 

159. 

160. 
161 

162. 

163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 

170. 

171. 
172. 
173. 
174. 

175. 

Edna Ullmann‐Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) 
Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. 
Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) 
Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute 
Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal Studies 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, 
forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success or Failure (March 
2002) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The 
Antitrust Bulletin) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture 
February 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) 
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation?  
Deeper and Wider Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002; revised 
March 2003) 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference 
Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) 
Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as 
Insurer? (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on 
Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) 
Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the 
Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract 
Law (September 2002) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the 
File‐Swapping Networks (September 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Does the X‐Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) 
Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) 
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) 
Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis 
(November 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for the Regulation of 
Public Health (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxation and Risk‐Taking with Multiple Tax Rates (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act of 
1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 

28 

176. 

177. 

178. 

179. 

180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 

187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191.  
192. 
193. 
194. 

195. 

196. 

197. 

198. 

199. 

200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 
204. 

205. 
206. 
207. 

208. 

209. 

210. 
211. 
212. 

David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short‐Term Assets 
(January 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 
Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities 
and Verizon (January 2003) 
William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An 
Economic Perspective (February 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) 
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life‐Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) 
Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) 
David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September 
2003) 
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the 
Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 
and 2000? (September 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage 
(September 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September 
2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts 
of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)  
Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure 
Time (October 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003) 
David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) 
David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright Law (April 
2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of 
Statistical Lives (February 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A Critique of the 
Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceutical Patents: 
Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004) 
Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004) 

29 

213. 

214. 

215. 

216. 
217. 
218. 

219. 

220.  

221. 
222. 
223. 
224. 

225. 
226. 
227. 
228. 
229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 
233. 
234. 
235. 

236. 

237. 
238. 

239. 

240. 
241. 

242. 
243. 
244. 

245. 
246.  
247. 

248. 
249. 
250. 

Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Labor 
within and between Law Firms (April 2004) 
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of 
Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry (April 2004) 
James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the Market for 
Underwriting Business (July 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004) 
Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, Company Stock, 
Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets 
(August 2004, revised October 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross‐Cultural Risk 
Perceptions (August 2004) 
M. Todd Henderson and James C. Spindler, Corporate Heroin: A Defense of Perks (August 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Cyber Security: Of Heterogeneity and Autarky (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Unbundling Scope‐of‐Permission Goods: When Should We Invest in Reducing 
Entry Barriers? (September 2004) 
Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing through Law (September 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of the Use of Citations in the Law (2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and the Environment (October 2004) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Cordell Hull, the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act, and the WTO (October 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Contract Interpretation (November 2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, A Social Networks Theory of Privacy (December 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Minimalism at War (December 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman, How the Law Responds to Self‐Help (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, The Decline of the International Court of Justice (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, Is the International Court of Justice Biased? (December 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, Public vs. Private Enforcement of International Economic Law: Of Standing and 
Remedy (February 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Serial Entrepreneurs and Small Business Bankruptcies 
(March 2005) 
Eric A. Posner, There Are No Penalty Default Rules in Contract Law (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright and the DMCA: Market Locks and Technological Contracts (March 
2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? The Relevance of 
Life‐Life Tradeoffs (March 2005) 
Alan O. Sykes, Trade Remedy Laws (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Rewinding Sony: The Evolving Product, Phoning Home, and the Duty of 
Ongoing Design (March 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Irreversible and Catastrophic (April 2005)  
James C. Spindler, IPO Liability and Entrepreneurial Response (May 2005) 
Douglas Lichtman, Substitutes for the Doctrine of Equivalents: A Response to Meurer and Nard 
(May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, A New Progressivism (May 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird, Property, Natural Monopoly, and the Uneasy Legacy of INS v. AP (May 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Private Debt and the Missing Lever of Corporate Governance 
(May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Administrative Law Goes to War (May 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Chevron Step Zero (May 2005) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Exclusionary Amenities in Residential Communities (July 2005) 

30 

Joseph Bankman and David A. Weisbach, The Superiority of an Ideal Consumption Tax over an 
Ideal Income Tax (July 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Arden Rowell, On Discounting Regulatory Benefits: Risk, Money, and 
Ingergenerational Equity (July 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Boundedly Rational Borrowing: A Consumer’s Guide (July 2005) 

251. 

252. 

253. 
 

 

31 

