University of Chicago Law School ersity
Cass R. Sunstein
Cass R. Sunstein *
Some judges are less ambitious than others they have minimalist tendencies. Minimalists are unambitious along two dimensions. First, they seek to rule narrowly rather than broadly. In a single case, they do not wish to resolve other, related problems that might have relevant differences. They are willing to live with the costs and burdens of uncertainty, which they tend to prefer to the risks of premature resolution of difficult issues. Second, minimalists seek to rule shallowly rather than deeply, in the sense that they favor arguments that do not take a stand on the foundational debates in law and politics. They prefer incompletely theorized agreements, by which diverse people, from their different perspectives, can unite behind modest rather than immodest theorizing. They believe that such agreements recognize the difficulty of resolving foundational debates, and that they also allow people, including judges, to show one another a large measure of mutual respect.
In prominent cases, some judges favor minimalism, and others do not. Justice O'Connor, for example, has often shown a preference for case-bycase judgments that leave the most difficult questions for another day.3 Justice Scalia, by contrast, is no minimalist.4 He endorses an ambitious theory of constitutionalism-"originalism"-and he often uses that theory to decide cases.5 Much of the time, he prefers to rule broadly rather than narrowly, because of his preference for rule-bound judgments that give clear guidance for the future. Of course minimalism and maximalism should be seen as relative rather than absolute. Justice O'Connor is a minimalist, much of the time, but she does not always follow a minimalist path, and even when she does, she does not say that her rulings are limited to people with the same initials as the parties to the particular litigation.
Justice Scalia has maximalist tendencies, but he does not try, in a single equal protection case, to resolve all imaginable equal protection cases.
I am extremely grateful to Neil Siegel for his generous and careful analysis of my claims about minimalism and the Supreme Court.6 Siegel offers three objections to those claims.7 First, he contends that minimalism has not been precisely defined, and that the presence of diverse and inconsistent definitions makes it difficult to test the claim that any particular court, or any particular decision, is minimalist in character. Second, Siegel claims that the most usable definition of minimalism is palpably inconsistent with Court's behavior during the 2003 term (and probably more generally). Third, he contends that minimalism, suitably defined, is unattractive, among other things because it violates the Supreme Court's roles as guide and as guardian. These are instructive objections. But the disagreement between Siegel and me is smaller (more minimal!) than it appears, and I hope that a few clarifying remarks will help to illuminate both the nature and the uses of the minimalist project.
What is minimalism? Let us begin with three distinctions. First, procedural minimalism entails an effort to limit the scope and ambition of judicial rulings procedural minimalism should be distinguished from what I call minimalism's substance, which entails an identifiable set of substantive commitments (to, for example, fair procedures and the rule of law).' Second, procedural minimalism as a general category should be distinguished from to issue narrow rulings that do not mandate ultimate outcomes but that force decisions by politically accountable actors.9 The Court might, for example, refuse to resolve a hard constitutional problem and rule more narrowly that Congress must authorize an intrusion on constitutionally sensitive interests.'0 Third, denials of certiorari and justiciability doctrines, by which the Court refuses to reach the merits, should be distinguished from narrow and incompletely theorized judgments, by which the Court resolves the merits
but without much foreclosing the future." When the Court denies certiorari, or holds that a decision is unreviewable, it is adopting a form of procedural minimalism, but that form is importantly different from narrow and incompletely theorized judgments. I hope that I made these distinctions adequately in earlier writings, but very possibly not Siegel is certainly correct to insist on their importance.
Siegel's principal concern, and mine as well, is procedural minimalism in the form of narrow and incompletely theorized rulings. Quoting from a 2004 op-ed of mine, Siegel suggests that procedural minimalism requires Hence he offers a testable hypothesis, to the effect that a decision is minimalist if it involves an "intentional choice by a majority of the Justices ... to decide a case on the narrowest and shallowest grounds reasonably open to them, even though broader and deeper rationale(s) were reasonably availSiegel should certainly be commended for offering a testable hypothesis, as I did not. He is right to say that there is a great deal of room for empirical work on the Supreme Court's uses of minimalism. But I never meant to suggest that members of the Court pursue minimalism with the intensity and rigor suggested by Siegel's hypothesis. To be sure, it is possible to imagine a set of judges, or perhaps even a court, taking the trouble to identify the possible rationales for certain decisions and consistently selecting the narrowest and less ambitious of these. But no real-world court is likely to act in this way and for reasons that Siegel identifies, such a court would be nothing to celebrate, if only because it would give so little guidance for the future. A court of this kind would turn minimalism into a kind of dogma or theology. It would not use minimalism on the intensely pragmatic grounds that sometimes support
When I suggest that the current Supreme Court (often) favors procedural minimalism, then, I mean to say only that in the most difficult and controversial domains, the Court tends to choose relatively narrow and unambitious grounds." The Court has not accepted a large-scale theory of constitutional interpretation it proceeds by building cautiously on precedent, in the fashion of common law courts. Unfortunately, my claim-that minimalists prefer relatively narrow and unambitious
grounds-is not entirely easy to test empirically. To test that claim, it would be necessary to identify a large number of cases, to specify the possible grounds for decision, and to see how often the Court selected narrower grounds in the face of competing possibilities. It would also be necessary to specify what counts as minimalism along all relevant dimensions, and to decide how to count a decision in which minimalism along one dimension (say, avoiding the merits) produces maximalism along another dimension (say, through a wide ruling on standing). A great deal of coding would be necessary by people with internal understanding of the relevant cases. Notwithstanding the difficulties, there is a great deal of room for empirical testing of minimalism. In the absence of empirical work, I can suggest only that in many of the most prominent cases in recent years, the Court has rejected both width and depth. Siegel himself offers a number of examples.
As I have said, Siegel understands minimalism in absolute rather than relative terms, as involving an intentional decision "to decide a case on the narrowest and shallowest grounds reasonably open to" the Court. He explores a number of decisions from the October 2003 term to see whether the Court was minimalist in that sense. He finds that if this is the right account of minimalism, the Court has not consistently followed it.
Consider a few examples. In Blakely v. Washington," the Court did refuse to decide the validity of the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, but that should be unsurprising what matters is that the Court could have ruled on the Sixth Amendment question in a way that was more narrowly limited to the facts. In Commission,'9 the Court left many issues undecided and generally avoided width, but it did not rule on the narrowest possible grounds, especially in its expansive understanding of "corruption" in politics.2 Siegel agrees that the Court
Davey2' Lane,22 though more in the latter case than in the former.2 But he does not find minimalism in two of the Court's most eagerly awaited deci-
Padilla.5 He acknowledges that Newdow, refusing to resolve the constitutionality of the Pledge of Allegiance, was in a sense minimalist,26 but he thinks that Padilla, involving a merits-avoiding procedural ground, announced a broad (procedural) rule with large implications for other issues.27 In a series of instructive discussions, Siegel convincingly shows that, in a number of cases in the 2003 term, the Court did not rule in the narrowest imaginable way. But is that big news? Let us identify a continuum of possible outcomes, from a denial of certiorari, to a refusal to reach the merits, to a fact-bound decision that goes barely beyond the immediate parties, to a decision that states an identifiable if narrow rule with an identifiable if shallow rationale, to a decision that offers an identifiable but broad rule, and so on, culminating in a truly maximalist (if also unfathomable) decision that resolves all questions for all time by reference to the most fundamental of principles. Focusing on the 2003 term, Siegel makes a special target of my 2004 op-ed, which, to be sure, does not analyze minimalism in much detail. But the essential claims in that little op-ed may nonetheless hold. In Newdow, the Court did refuse to assess the Pledge of Allegiance on the merits. In Padilla, the Court did refuse to rule on the merits of an exceptionally controversial issue of presidential authority the same is true of the Cheney case. In cases involving sexually explicit material29 and enemy combatants, the Court did say more than was strictly speaking "necessary," but it also showed a tendency toward both narrowness and shallowness insofar as it deliberately refused to resolve some of the key questions raised by the litigants.3' Siegel's most interesting point, it seems to me, is that a decision that is minimalist along one dimension may be wide or deep on another. If a court invokes a procedural ground to avoid the merits, that very ground might be ambitiously reasoned or apply to a wide range of problems not before the Court. Siegel is right to emphasize this possibility. He is also right to identify many ways during the 2003 term in which the Court failed to choose the narrowest possible rationale for its decision. But I wonder if that is the appropriate test of the minimalist hypothesis. Notwithstanding a regrettably loose phrase in an op-ed ("as narrowly as possible"), those who find strong minimalist tendencies in the Supreme Court are inclined to think that Siegel may have mounted an attack, illuminating to be sure, on a strawman.
sex equality, the war on terrorism, and even federalism.6 In its own small way, minimalism can be heroic too.
