Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics Part of the Law Commons Recommended Citation Cass R. Sunstein, "Irreversible and Catastrophic" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 242, 2005). 
JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 242          This paper can be downloaded without charge at the John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working  
Paper Series: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html   and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection:  
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=705323   Irreversible and Catastrophic  
Cass R. Sunstein  
T H E   L A W   S C H O O L   T H E   U N I V E R S I T Y   O F   C H I C A G O   
April 2005  Preliminary draft 3/24/05 All rights reserved 
As many treaties and statutes emphasize, some risks are distinctive in the sense that they are potentially irreversible or catastrophic; for such risks, it is sensible to take extra precautions. When a harm is irreversible, and when regulators lack information about its magnitude and likelihood, they should purchase an “option” to prevent the harm at a later date—the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle. This principle brings standard option theory to bear on environmental law and risk regulation. And when catastrophic outcomes are possible, it makes sense to take special precautions against the worst-case scenarios—the Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle. This principle is based on three foundations: an emphasis on people’s occasional failure to appreciate the expected value of truly catastrophic losses; a recognition that political actors may engage in unjustifiable delay when the costs of precautions would be incurred immediately and when the benefits would not be enjoyed until the distant future; and an understanding of the distinction between risk and uncertainty. The normative arguments are illustrated throughout with reference to the problem of global warming; other applications include injunctions in environmental cases, genetic modification of food, protection of endangered species, and terrorism. 
Many losses are irreversible. Once a species is gone, it is gone forever. Transgenic crops can impose irreversible costs as a result of increasing pest resistance.1 Because some greenhouse gases stay in the atmosphere for centuries, the problem of global warming may be irreversible, at least for all practical purposes. Global warming could be catastrophic as well, potentially endangering many millions of people.2 * Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science. I am extremely grateful to Robert Goodin, Robert Hahn, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, Adrian Vermeule, and David Weisbach, and participants in a workshop at Columbia Law School for valuable comments; special thanks to Vermeule and Weisbach for many helpful discussions. 
1 See Justus Wesseler, Resistance Economics of Transgenic Crops under Uncertainty: A Real Options Approach, in Battling Resistance to Antibiotics and Pesticides 214 (Rmanan Lazminarayan ed. 2003); to the same general effect, see Benoit Morel et al., Pesticide Resistance to Bt Corn: Real Option and Rational Option Approaches to Decisionmaking, in id. at 184. 
2 See Richard Posner, Catastrophe: Risk and Response 43-58 (2004). 
Irreversible or catastrophic risks pose distinctive problems for regulators; they require significant adjustments in the standard forms of cost-benefit analysis.3 In any case specialists in risk perception have long emphasized the fact that under some circumstances, people are especially averse to risks that are irreversible, potentially catastrophic, or both.4 
The Precautionary Principle, used in many international documents,5 is often said to have a special place in the context of irreversibility and catastrophe.6 Consider a few examples:    
The closing Ministerial Declaration from the United Nations Economic Conference for Europe in 1990 asserts, “In order to achieve sustainable development, policies must be based on the Precautionary Principle. . . . Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures to prevent environmental degradation.”7 The 1992 Rio Declaration states, “Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.”8 The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change states: “Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing [regulatory] measures, taking into account that policies and measures to deal with climate change should be cost-effective so as to ensure global benefits at the lowest possible cost.”9 
The Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” conference says that if “the ‘worst case scenario’ for a certain activity is serious enough then even a small amount of doubt as to the safety of that activity is sufficient to stop it taking place.”10 
In American law, similar ideas are at work. A special precautionary principle underlies the analysis of preliminary injunctions in cases involving a risk of irreparable environmental harm.11 San Francisco has adopted its own precautionary principle, with an emphasis on seriousness and irreversibility: “Where threats of serious or irreversible damage to people or nature exist, lack of full scientific certainty about cause and effect shall not be viewed as sufficient reason for the City to postpone cost effective measures to prevent the degradation of the environment or protect the health of its citizens.”12 At the national level, the National Environmental Policy Act requires agencies to discuss “any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which would be involved in the proposed action should it be implemented.”13 Courts have been careful to insist that environmental impact statements should be prepared at a time that permits consideration of environmental effects before irretrievable commitments have been made.14 A number of federal statutes, especially in the environmental context, specifically refer to irreversible losses and make their prevention a high priority.15 
For a long period, both courts and the executive branch also required agencies to engage in “worst-case analysis,” focusing on potential catastrophes.16 That requirement has been eliminated by the Council on Environmental Quality,17 but agencies continue to be directed to explore “impacts which have catastrophic consequences, even if their probability of occurrence is low.”18 Under the Clean Air Act, the Environmental Protection Agency is asked to build an “adequate margin of safety” into health-based national ambient air quality standards.19 This explicitly precautionary requirement is not limited to irreversible or catastrophic harms, but it might well be understood as an effort to ensure against them. 
The central notions here—irreversibility and catastrophe—play a critical role in many domains, and they lie at the heart of countless discussions of how to deal with risks to safety, health, and the environment. The problem is that both notions are exceedingly ambiguous, and it is by no means clear how regulators should understand them. The central purpose of this Article is unpack the ambiguities and to identify the proper role of both concepts in law and policy. I shall show that standard option theory, emphasizing the importance of irreversibility, 20 has important implications for environmental law, and indeed that some statutes and doctrines show an implicit appreciation of this point. I shall also show that regulators should sometimes attempt to eliminate worst-case scenarios, even or perhaps especially if they cannot assign a probability to its occurrence. When no such probability can be assigned, the best approach is to assess what is gained, and what is lost, by eliminating the most catastrophic outcomes—a point that helps discipline the inquiry into many risk-related problems, including global warming, terrorism, and injunctions in environmental cases. 
These general points lead to two refined versions of the Precautionary Principle. The first involves irreversibility: When regulators lack information about the likelihood and magnitude of a risk, it makes sense to spend extra resources to buy an “option” to protect against irreversible harm until future knowledge emerges. The value of the option is that of delaying the decision until better information is available. An emphasis on options and irreversibility leads to a distinctive principle, which I shall call the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle. 
The second principle involves catastrophe: When risks have extremely bad worstcase scenarios, it makes sense to pay special attention to those risks, even if they are unlikely to come to fruition and even if existing information does not enable regulators to make a reliable judgment about the probability that they will occur. An emphasis on the 19 42 USC 7409 (b)(1). An “ample margin of safety” is mentioned in connection with hazardous air pollutants lacking a safe thresholds, see 42 USC 7412 (d)(4). 
20 See Arrow and Fisher, supra note, for an early treatment. need to attend to potentially catastrophic risks also yields a distinctive principle, which I shall call the Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle. 
At first glance, these two principles seem to justify aggressive action to combat many environmental risks, including those posed by global warming, threats to endangered species, and genetic modification of food. Perhaps societies should invest substantial resources in the reduction of greenhouse gases, first to prevent what might turn out to be an irreversible loss, and second to stop the worst-case scenarios.21 Outside of the environmental domain, the two principles bear on appropriate steps to prevent terrorist attacks, epidemics, asteroid collisions, earthquakes, and more. An emphasis on the two principles also has the advantage of suggesting the possibility of a rapprochement between the risk judgments of experts and the risk judgments of ordinary people.22 As risk analysts have long emphasized, ordinary people sometimes pay a great deal of attention to whether risks are irreversible or potentially catastrophic.23 If the refined precautionary principles can be defended, then ordinary intuitions turn out to be plausible, and experts should accept them. Indeed the two principles might be combined, in certain cases, into an Irreversible and Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle,24 which provides the strongest basis for aggressive regulation of greenhouse gases. 
At the same time, I shall show that both principles are subject to important qualifications. The unifying claim is that the refined precautionary principles should be implemented with wide rather than narrow viewscreens. They must be attentive to the full range of consequences, not simply to a subset. A focus on irreversibility, and on catastrophic harm, threatens to violate this principle through a kind of selective perception. More particularly, the idea of irreversibility is exceedingly ambiguous; because time is linear, every step is in a literal sense irreversible. In the technical 21 See R. Posner, supra note, at 162, 184-86, 197, and in particular emphasizing “the practically irreversible effect of greenhouse-gas emissions on the atmospheric concentration of those gases. . . . Making shallower cuts now can be thought of as purchasing an option to enable global warming to be stopped or slowed at some future at a lower cost.” Id. at 162. 

23 See id. These psychometric studies coexist, however, with evidence that people dismiss many lowprobability risks of catastrophe, as discussed below. A simple example is that people do not pay much attention to the risk of asteroid collisions, even though there is a good argument that they should do so. See Posner, supra note, at 24-29. 
24 An early treatment of relevant points is Talbot Page, A Generic View of Toxic Chemicals and Similar Risks, 7 Ecology L.Q. 207 (1978). literature, the problem of ambiguity is solved through a particular definition of irreversibility.25 But under that definition, irreversibilities are usually on all sides of environmental problems. If significant steps are taken to reduce greenhouse gases, those very steps will inflict irreversible losses, environmental or economic—making it necessary to explore their likelihood and magnitude in order to decide what to do. An Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle is both coherent and sensible, but it calls for precautions against the irreversible harms associated with environmental protection, as well as against the irreversible harms associated with environmental neglect. 
In addition, it can be costly, and even environmentally harmful, to avoid worstcase scenarios. If those scenarios are exceedingly unlikely, then there are clear limits on how much regulators should do to eliminate them. If it would cost a great deal to avoid those scenarios, or if doing so would subject people to high probabilities of very bad-case scenarios, then avoiding the worst-case may not be sensible. It is both necessary and possible, in short, to explore what is gained and what is lost by eliminating worst-case scenarios. As we shall see, an understanding of the uses and limits of the refined versions of the Precautionary Principle, focusing on irreversibility and catastrophe, casts new light on the foundations of environmental law, and indeed on all aspects of law that deal with the reduction of serious risks to safety and health.26 
This Article comes in four parts. Part I briefly explores the conventional Precautionary Principle, with an emphasis on the fact that precautionary steps often produce risks of their own. Part II discusses the question of irreversibility. The key point here is that because environmental harms are often irreversible, it is appropriate to spend resources to maintain flexibility for the future; the theory of real options has important implications for the theory and practice of environmental law, and indeed for regulation in general. An understanding of the problem of irreversibility also helps to explain continuing debates over the issuance of preliminary injunctions in environmental cases. Armed with that understanding, we can discipline the analysis of injunctions in such cases. 
Part III turns to the risk of catastrophic harm. A particular focus is the difference between risk, where probabilities can be assigned to various outcomes, and uncertainty, where no such probabilities can be assigned. With respect to catastrophe, risk aversion is perfectly sensible, but it is hard to defend the idea that regulators should generally seek to eliminate the worst-case scenario, whatever the environmental and other costs of doing so. Part III also offers some experimental evidence that people do not focus on the worstcase scenario under circumstances of either risk or uncertainty. The most important point here is that a form of cost-benefit balancing, perhaps with distributional weights, can inform the decision whether to eliminate the most catastrophic outcomes. Part IV offers some brief remarks on the question whether experts and ordinary people display “rival rationalities,” and on the relationship of irreversibility and catastrophe to that question. 
In the face of risks of environmental harm, it has become common to invoke the Precautionary Principle, an increasingly influential idea for environmental protection.27 My principal concerns here are irreversibility and catastrophe, but in order to understand those problems, it is necessary to explore the Precautionary Principle more generally. 
Unfortunately, there are twenty or more definitions of that principle, and they are not compatible with one another.28 The most cautious and weak versions suggest, quite sensibly, that a lack of decisive evidence of harm should not be a ground for refusing to regulate. Controls might be justified even if it is impossible to establish a definite connection between, for example, low-level exposures to certain carcinogens and adverse effects on human health. Thus the Ministerial Declaration of the Second International Conference on the Protection of the North Sea, held in London in 1987, sensibly suggests: “Accepting that in order to protect the North Sea from possibly damaging effects of the most dangerous substances, a Precautionary Principle is necessary which may require action to control inputs of such substances even before a causal link has been established by absolutely clear scientific evidence.”29 
The widely publicized 
Wingspread 
Declaration, from a meeting of environmentalists in 1998, goes much further: “When an activity raises threats of harm to human health or the environment, precautionary measures should be taken even if some cause and effect relationships are not established scientifically. In this context the proponent of the activity, rather than the public, should bear the burden of proof.”30 In Europe, the Precautionary Principle is sometimes understood in a still stronger way, suggesting that it is important to build “a margin of safety into all decision making.”31 According to one definition, the Precautionary Principle means “that action should be taken to correct a problem as soon as there is evidence that harm may occur, not after the harm has already occurred.”32 The word “may” is the crucial one here, because it signals the need for corrective action even in the face of merely speculative evidence that the risk is serious.33 
In a comparably strong version, it is said that “the Precautionary Principle mandates that when there is a risk of significant health or environmental damage to others or to future generations, and when there is scientific uncertainty as to the nature of that damage or the likelihood of the risk, then decisions should be made so as to prevent such activities from being conducted unless and until scientific evidence shows that the damage will not occur.”34 What is striking about this passage is its requirement that potentially hazardous activities be prevented until they are shown to be safe. I have noted that the Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” conference goes so far as to say that if “the ‘worst case scenario’ for a certain activity is serious enough then even a small amount of doubt as to the safety of that activity is sufficient to stop it taking place.”35 A. Hazardous Precautions 
The weak versions of the Precautionary Principle are unobjectionable and important. Every day, individuals and nations take steps to avoid hazards that are far from certain. We do not walk in moderately dangerous areas at night; we exercise; we buy smoke detectors; we buckle our seatbelts; we might even avoid fatty foods (or carbohydrates). Sensible governments regulate risks that, in individual cases or even in the aggregate, have a well under 100% chance of coming to fruition.36 An individual might ignore a mortality risk of 1/500,000, because that risk is quite small, but if 100 million citizens face that risk, the expected number of deaths is 200, and the nation had better take the problem seriously. 
For the moment let us understand the Precautionary Principle in a strong way, to suggest that regulation is required whenever there is a possible risk to health, safety, or the environment, even if the supporting evidence remains speculative and even if the economic costs of regulation are high. Recall that under the Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” conference, a serious worst-case scenario is said to justify abandonment of activity even if there is only “a small amount of doubt as to the safety of that activity”; recall too that under the National Environmental Policy Act, agencies must pay close attention to risks that have only a small probability of occurrence.37 To avoid absurdity, any emphasis on the idea of “possible risk” must be understood to require a certain threshold of scientific plausibility. To support regulation, no one thinks that it is enough if someone, somewhere, urges that a risk is worth taking seriously. But under the Precautionary Principle in its stronger forms, the threshold burden is minimal, and once it is met, there is a presumption in favor of regulatory controls. This version, as we shall see, helps to clarify a significant problem with the idea of precaution, in a way that bears on the more refined versions as well. 
The real problem with the Precautionary Principle, thus understood, is that it offers no guidance—not that it is wrong, but that it forbids all courses of action, including regulation. Taken seriously, it is paralyzing, banning the very steps that it simultaneously requires. In some cases, it should be easy to see that in its own way, stringent regulation would actually run afoul of the Precautionary Principle. Consider the “drug lag,” produced whenever the government takes a highly precautionary approach to the introduction of new medicines and drugs onto the market.38 If a government insists on such an approach, it will protect people against harms from inadequately tested drugs, in a way that fits well with the goal of precaution; but it will also prevent people from receiving potential benefits from those very drugs, and hence subjects people to serious risks that they would not otherwise face. Is it “precautionary” to require extensive premarketing testing, or to do the opposite? Or consider the case of DDT, often banned or regulated in the interest of reducing risks to birds and human beings.39 The problem with such bans is that in poor nations, they eliminate what appears to be the most effective way of combating malaria—and thus significantly undermine public health.40 Precautionary steps seem both mandated and forbidden by the idea of precaution in its strong forms. 
Similar issues are raised by the continuing debate over whether certain antidepressants impose a (small) risk of breast cancer.41 A precautionary approach might seem to caution against use of such antidepressants because of their carcinogenic potential. But the failure to use those depressants might well impose risks of its own, certainly psychological and possibly even physical (because psychological ailments are sometimes associated with physical ones as well). Or consider the decision, by the Soviet Union, to evacuate and relocate more than 270,000 people in response to the risk of adverse effects from the Chernobyl fallout. It is not clear that on balance, this massive relocation project was justified on health grounds: “A comparison ought to have been made between the psychological and medical burdens of this measure (anxiety, psychosomatic diseases, depression and suicides) and the harm that may have been prevented.”42 More generally, a sensible government might want to ignore the small risks associated with low levels of radiation, on the ground that precautionary responses are likely to cause fear that outweighs any health benefits from those responses.43 
The Precautionary Principle is often invoked in connection with genetic modification of food44—a plausible invocation in light of the multiple risks created by that practice.45 But many people believe that a failure to allow genetic modification might well result in numerous deaths, and a small probability of many more.46 The reason is that genetic modification holds out the promise of producing food that is both cheaper and healthier—resulting, for example, in “golden rice,” which might have large benefits in developing countries.47 The point is not that genetic modification will likely have those benefits, or that the benefits of genetic modification outweigh the risks. The claim is only that if the Precautionary Principle is taken literally, it is offended by regulation as well as by nonregulation. 
The example suggests that regulation sometimes violates the Precautionary Principle because it gives rise to substitute risks, in the form of hazards that materialize, or are increased, as a result of regulation.48 It is possible to go much further. A great deal of evidence suggests the possibility that an expensive regulation can have adverse effects on life and health.49 An early study found that a statistical life can be lost for every expenditure of $7 million50; one study suggests that an expenditure of $15 million produces a loss of life.51 Another suggests that poor people are especially vulnerable to this effect—that a regulation that reduces wealth for the poorest 20% of the population will have twice as large a mortality effect as a regulation that reduces wealth for the wealthiest 20%.52 To be sure, both the phenomenon and the underlying mechanisms are disputed.53 It is unnecessary to accept any particular amount here, or even to suggest that there has been an unambiguous demonstration of an association between mortality and regulatory expenditures. The only point is that reasonable people believe in that association. It follow that a multimillion dollar expenditure for “precaution” has—as a worst case scenario—significant adverse health effects, with an expenditure of $600 million as leading to perhaps as many as sixty lives lost. 
This point makes the Precautionary Principle hard to implement not merely where regulation removes “opportunity benefits,” or introduces or increases substitute risks, but in any case in which the regulation costs a significant amount. If this is so, the Precautionary Principle, for that very reason, raises doubts about many regulations. If the principle argues against any action that carries a small risk of imposing significant harm, then regulators should be reluctant to require large expenditures to reduce risks, simply because those expenditures themselves carry risks. Here is the sense in which, the Precautionary Principle is paralyzing: It stands as an obstacle to regulation and nonregulation, and to everything in between. 
A nation-by-nation study commissioned by the German Federal Environmental Agency goes so far as to conclude that there are two separate camps in the industrialized world: “precaution countries” (Germany, Sweden, the Netherlands, and the United States) and “protection countries” (Japan, France, and the United Kingdom).54 If the argument thus far is correct, this conclusion is implausible—not empirically but conceptually. The universe of risks is far too large to permit categorizations of this kind. The most general point is that no nation is precautionary in general and costly precautions are inevitably taken against only those hazards that seem especially salient or insistent.55 Taken in its strongest and crudest forms, the Precautionary Principle wrongly suggests that nations can and should adopt a general form of risk aversion. It is possible to take precautions against particular risks, but it is not possible to take precautions against all of them. It is possible to display aversion to particular hazards, but it is not possible to display aversion to all of them.56 54 See Sand, supra note, at 448. 
55 See David Vogel, The Hare and the Tortoise Revisited: The New Politics of Consumer and Environmental regulation in Europe, 33 B. J. Pol. S. 557, 570-71 (2003). for a demonstration of this point for Europe. 
56 It might be tempting to defend the Precautionary Principle—certainly in the context of health, safety, and the environment—on the ground that early warnings, in the form of merely suggestive evidence of harm, often turn out to be correct. See The Precautionary Principle in the Twenty-First Century, supra note. And it is right to insist that indisputable proof of harm should not be required to justify regulation; this is the sense in which the weak version of the principle is both unobjectionable and important. But the fact that suggestive evidence must be taken seriously does not render the strong version coherent, simply because B. A Note on Distributional Issues 
Those who endorse the Precautionary Principle often do so on grounds of fairness, believing that the principle will assist the most vulnerable members of society.57 Does the principle actually have that effect? In the United States, the Clean Air Act takes a highly precautionary approach, requiring an “adequate margin of safety” and hence regulation in the face of scientific uncertainty.58 At the same time, the Clean Air Act delivers especially large benefits to poor people and members of minority groups—larger benefits, on balance, than it gives to wealthy people.59 In the international domain, aggressive action to combat climate change would be more beneficial to poor countries than to wealthy ones.60 In the context of global warming, at least, the Precautionary Principle might be invoked to prevent especially severe burdens on those in the worst position to bear them. 
It makes a great deal of sense to emphasize the distribution of domestic or international risks, and the distributional effects of global warming are among the strongest points in favor of aggressive regulation of greenhouse gases.61 But in many cases, the Precautionary Principle, as applied, would have unfortunate distributional effects. Consider the case of DDT. A ban on DDT, often supported by reference to the suggestive evidence of harm is often on all sides. In any case, suggestive evidence of harm has often been found not to be an early warning worth heeding, but instead a false alarm, producing unjustified fear and significant social losses of many kinds. See Aaron Wildavsky, But Is It True? (1996). Consider, for example, fears of contaminated cranberries in 1959, of MSG in Chinese restaurants in 1968, of cyclamates in 1968, of flouordated water in 1950, and of mercury in tuna in 1970. All of these widely publicized “hazards” turned out to pose no serious risk. See Allan Mazur, True Warnings and False Alarms 110-141 (2004). For a valuable effort to distinguish between prescient warnings and false ones, see id. at 97-109, and in particular the suggestion tat the “clearest hallmark of a true public warning during the period 19481971 was a reputable scientific news source. Warnings reaching the press from scientists operating in a conventional way at an orthodox scientific institution were true more than twice as often as those reaching the news from government officials or citizen advocates.” Id. at 87. 
57 See, e.g., Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless (2004). 58 42 USC 7409 (b)(1). 59 See Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air Act Regulation, 24(1) Regulation 34 (2001). 60 See, e.g., Joseph Aldy, Peter Orszag, & Joseph Stiglitz, Climate Change: An Agenda for Gloval Collective Action (unpublished manuscript 2001); Bjorn Lomborg, The Skeptical Environmentalist 291302 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001). 
especially high priority, in light of the many needs of those countries, needs that might be addressed by wealthier nations. For controversial but illuminating treatments, see Bjorn Lomborg, The Skeptical Environmentalist 322-23 (2001); Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle: A Critical Appraisal of Environmental Risk Assessment 71-8 Precautionary Principle, is eminently justified in wealthy nations. But such a ban is likely to have—and is actually having—unfortunate effects in at least some poor countries, where DDT is the cheapest and most effective way of combating serious diseases, most notably malaria.62 The case of genetic modification of food might well be a similar example; according to some projections, the benefits are likely to be enjoyed by poor people, not the wealthy.63 And recall that expensive regulations have a disproportionately serious effect on poor people, simply because any price increases are hardest for them to handle, and because the costs of regulation may well manifest themselves in fewer and less remunerative jobs.64 
Distributional issues should indeed be a central concern of a system of risk regulation,65 but the Precautionary Principle is a crude, indirect, and sometimes perverse way of incorporating distributional concerns. As a result, an emphasis on distribution does not rescue the Precautionary Principle from the charge of incoherence. The real question is whether more refined understandings of the principle can be developed. 
It is possible to identify an Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle, applicable to a subset of environmental risks.66 On plausible assumptions, the problem of irreversibility does justify aggressive measures to combat environmental risks, under a general attitude of “act, then learn,” as opposed to the tempting alternative of “wait and learn.” With respect to global warming, for example, some people believe that it is most sensible to use research as the first line of defense, refusing to commit substantial resources until evidence of harm is clear.67 But if research alone allows continued emissions to produce irreversible risks, it might be best to take precautions now as a way of preserving future flexibility.68 In the environmental context in general, this point suggest that regulators should proceed with far more aggressive measures than would otherwise seem justified.69 
Begin with the monetary valuation of an environmental amenity, such as a pristine area. Some people will be willing to pay to use the area; others will be willing to pay to preserve it, even if they will not use it. Hence “existence value” is sometimes included in the valuation of environmental amenities,70 and indeed federal courts have insisted that agencies pay attention to that value in assessing damages to natural resources.71 But people are also willing to pay for the option to use an environmental amenity in the future, even if they are unsure whether they will exercise that option.72 Suppose that a pristine area might be developed in a way that ensures irreversible change. Many people would be willing to pay a significant amount to preserve their option. Under federal law, option value must also be considered in the assessment of natural resource damages.73 Many regulations explore the role of option value in the environmental context.74 
Here, then, is a simple sense in which irreversible environmental harm causes a loss that is not adequately captured in the standard economic measure of value. Some skeptics contend that it “is hard to imagine a price for an irreversible loss,”75 but people do identify prices for such losses.76 
The idea of option value, as used in the monetary valuation literature just discussed, is closely related to the use of the notion of “options” in the domain that I shall be emphasizing here. The simple claim is that when regulators are dealing with an irreversible loss, and when they are uncertain about the timing and likelihood of that loss, they should be willing to pay a sum—the option value—in order to maintain flexibility for the future.77 The option might not be exercised if it turns out that the loss is not a serious one. But if the option is purchased, regulators will be in a position to forestall the loss if it turns out to be large. 
In the domain of finance, options take multiple forms.78 An investor might be willing to purchase land that is known to have deposits of gold; even if the cost of extraction is too high to justify mining, ownership of the land creates an option to mine if the cost falls.79 A standard “call option” is a right to purchase an asset prior to a specific date at a specified price.80 In another variation, people might seek the right to abandon a project at a fixed price, perhaps on the occurrence of a specified set of events. Alternatively, they might obtain the right to scale back a project, to expand it, or to extend its life. Options that recognize multiple sources of uncertainty, of the sort that can be found for many environmental problems, are termed “rainbow options.”81 
Option theory has countless applications outside of the domain of investments. Suppose, for example, that because of law or social norms, it is difficult to divorce, so willing to incur costs to maintain their flexibility before marrying—higher costs than they would be willing to incur if divorce were easier. Narrow judicial rulings, of the sort celebrated by judicial minimalists,83 can be understood as a way of “buying” an option, or at least of “paying” a certain amount in return for flexibility. Judges who leave things undecided, and who focus their rulings on the facts of particular cases, are in a sense forcing themselves, and society as a whole, to purchase an option to pay for flexibility in the resolution of subsequent problems. Whether that option is worthwhile depends on its price and the benefits that it provides. 
It should be readily apparent how an emphasis on option value might explain the emphasis, in NEPA and other environmental statutes, on irreversible losses. The central point of NEPA is to ensure that environmental factors receive serious consideration,84 and if irreversible losses are involved, the delay produced by the duty to generate an environmental impact statement can be seen as payment for an option. It should also be clear that the idea of option value might help give content to the Precautionary Principle, which would, on this view, be understood as requiring societies to pay a kind of premium in the face of potentially irreversible losses.85 An important implication involves global warming; the argument for a global carbon tax is significantly strengthened by an appreciation of the option value of conserving the atmospheric environment.86 Let us elaborate the argument for the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle. 
In a classic essay, Arrow and Fisher demonstrate that the ideas of uncertainty and irreversibility have considerable importance to the theory of environmental protection.87 They imagine a situation in which the question is whether to preserve a virgin redwood forest for wilderness recreation or instead to open it to clear-cut logging. Assume that if the development option is chosen, the destruction of the forest is effectively assess the costs or benefits of a proposed development. If development produces “some irreversible transformation of the environment, hence a loss in perpetuity of the benefits from preservation,” then it is worth paying something to wait to acquire the missing information. Their suggestion is that “the expected benefits of an irreversible decision should be adjusted to reflect the loss of options it entails.”89 
Much more recently, Fisher has generalized this argument to suggest that “[w]here a decision problem is characterized by (1) uncertainty about future costs and benefits of the alternatives, (2) prospects for resolving or reducing the uncertainty with the passage of time, and (3) irreversibility of one or more of the alternatives, an extra value, an option value, properly attaches to the reversible alternative(s).”90 To pass a costbenefit test, it follows that an irreversible decision must clear a higher hurdle. The intuition here is both straightforward and appealing: More steps should be taken to prevent harms that are effectively final than to prevent those that can be reversed at some cost. If an irreversible harm is on side, and a reversible one on the other, an understanding of option value suggests that it is worthwhile to spend a certain amount to preserve future flexibility, by paying a premium to avoid the irreversible harm. 
Judge Richard Posner has invoked a point of this sort as a justification for aggressive steps to combat global warming.91 Posner acknowledges that the nature of the threat of global warming is disputed, and hence it is tempting to wait to regulate until we have more information. But there is a serious problem with waiting, which is “the practically irreversible effect of greenhouse-gas emissions on the atmospheric concentration of those gases.”92 Thus Posner concludes that making “shallower cuts now can be thought of as purchasing an option to enable global warming to be stopped or 88 The assumption may be unrealistic, under ordinary understandings of what counts as irreversibility. If seeds are retained, the forest can be recreated, though perhaps with a significant interim loss. I deal below with some of the complexities in the notion of irreversibility. 
89 Id. at 319. 90 See Anthony Fisher, Uncertainty, Irreversibility, and the Timing of Climate Policy 9 (2001). 91 See Richard A. Posner, Catastrophe 161-62 (2004). A more technical discussion to the same effect is Graciela Chichilnisky and Geoffey Heal, Global Environmental Risks, 7 J Econ Perspectives 65 (1993), emphasizing the need for a distinctive approach to “risks that are poorly understood, endogenous, collective, and irreversible.” Id. at 67; see especially pp. 76-84 for a treatment of option value and irreversibility. 
92 Posner, supra note, at 161. uncertainty. Perhaps regulators are usually able to assign probabilities to outcomes; and if if not, perhaps they can assign probabilities to probabilities (or, if this proves impossible, probabilities to probabilities of probabilities). In many cases regulators might be able to specify a range of probabilities—saying, for example, that the probability of catastrophic outcomes from global warming is above 2% but below 30%.212 Many scientists and economists believe that global warming is not likely to create catastrophic harm, and that the real costs, human and economic, will be high but not intolerable. In their view, the worst-case scenarios can be responsibly described as improbable.213 
Perhaps we can agree that pure uncertainty is rare. Perhaps we can agree that at worst, environmental problems involve problems of “bounded uncertainty,” in which we cannot assign probabilities within specified bands. It is possible to think, for example, that the risk of a catastrophic outcome is above 1% but below 10%, without being able to assign probabilities within that band. The pervasiveness of uncertainty depends on what is actually known. As I have emphasized, Posner believes that “no probabilities can be attached to the catastrophic global-warming scenarios, and without an estimate of probabilities an expected cost cannot be calculated.”214 Note in this regard that a 1994 survey of experts showed an extraordinary range of estimated losses from global warming, varying from no economic loss to a 20% decrease in gross world product.215 This finding, it has been suggested, is enough to support the view that uncertainty is real and must be taken seriously in environmental policy.216 In my view, uncertainty is both real and rare in the environmental domain; but this is an empirical judgment, and it may be wrong. 
difficult question: What is the appropriate approach to genuine uncertainty? Is maximin a rational strategy? I begin with some points about actual behavior and then turn to normative issues. show a degree of uncertainty aversion, in the sense that they will avoid gambles to which probabilities are not assigned. The relevant work was done by Daniel Ellsberg.217 Assume that people are asked to choose among two lotteries, each involving an urn with 100 balls. All of the balls are either black or red. For the first lottery, the urn contains an equal division of black and red balls. For the second lottery, the urn contains an unknown proportion of black balls and red balls. People receive a specified amount of money for correctly guessing the color of balls randomly chosen from the urn. It turns out that most people prefer the first lottery to the second, and thus display aversion to uncertainty.218 On the assumption of uncertainty aversion, it might be possible to defend maximin as a decision rule.219 
Note, however, that uncertainty aversion is bounded. So long as uncertainty aversion is not infinite, maximin will not always be the preferred decision rule. And indeed it is reasonable to think that most people will reject maximin if the question is properly framed. To test this possibility, I asked seventy-one University of Chicago law students the following problem: 
The government is considering two environmental problems. For the first, the government is able to estimate the probability that a bad outcome will occur. It believes that there is a 90% chance that 600 people will die (and the death of 500 people is the worst-case scenario). It also believes that there is a 10% chance that 400 people will die. For the second problem, the government cannot assign probabilities to the various outcomes. The “worst-case scenario” is that 700 people will die. 
Do you think: (a) the first problem has higher priority? (b) the second problem has higher priority? (c) the two problems have equal priority? 
No fewer than 63% chose (a), with the remainder equally divided between (b) and (c). As noted above, law students at any particular institution may offer idiosyncratic responses to such questions; but within the general population, it is reasonable to 217 See Daniel Ellsberg, Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms, 75 Q J Econ 643 (1961). 218 Id. 219 Chu and Liu, supra note, at 265-66; Woodward and Bishop, supra note, at 496-98. conjecture that most people will show no consistent preference for maximin, and that they will reject an approach that eliminates the worst worst-case scenario, under circumstances of uncertainty, in favor of an approach that eliminates a highly probable but somewhat less bad worst-case scenario. 
Why is this? The Principle of Insufficient Reason says that when people lack information about probabilities (say, 1% to 40%), they should act as if each probability is equally likely.220 Whatever its normative status,221 actual decisions may well use that principle, which fits well with the results in the experiment just described. Consider another experiment with a larger group of law students from two institutions (the 
One thousand people are at risk from an environmental hazard. (a) If one approach is taken, a minimum of 400 people will die, and a maximum of 500 people will die. Regulators are unable to assign probabilities to the various outcomes. (b) If another approach is taken, a minimum of 10 people will die, and a maximum of 600 people will die. Regulators are unable to assign probabilities to the various outcomes. Which approach should be chosen? (a) The first approach (b) The second approach 
No less than 85.5% of respondents rejected maximin and chose (b). Why did (b) seem better to so many respondents? On a reasonable interpretation, people begin by presuming at least roughly equal probabilities under circumstances of uncertainty, and conclude that they would much rather go the route that has a much higher expected value, given that presumption. This interpretation is supported by the results of the following experiment,223 which asks people to compare a choice under risk with a choice under uncertainty: 
The government is considering two environmental problems. For the first, the government is able to estimate the probability that a bad outcome will occur. It believes that there is a 60% chance that 500-600 people will die (and the death of 600 people is 220 See Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa, Games and Decisions 284 (1958). 221 Id.; Isaac Levi, On Indeterminate Probabilities, 71 J. Phil 391 (1974). 
222 One hundred and seventy-three law students were surveyed, seventy-one from the University of Chicago, one hundred and two from the University of Alabama. Interestingly, the answers from the two groups were essentially identical. 
223 This experiment was limited to seventy-one University of Chicago law students. the worst-case scenario). It also believes that there is a 40% chance that 200-400 people will die. For the second problem, the government cannot assign probabilities to the various outcomes. The worst-case scenario is that 700 people will die. 
Do you think: (a) (b) (c) the first problem has higher priority? the second problem has higher priority? the two problems have equal priority? 
For this problem, maximin was also rejected by a majority of respondents, but here the margin was much thinner: 52% favored (a), 25% were undecided, and 22% favored (b). The rejection of maximin is the most striking result here, and it is not entirely clear why the choice seemed relatively difficult. But the Principle of Insufficient Reason is consistent with that difficulty. Under the second problem, the expected number of deaths is 350 is equal probabilities are assigned, a number that is close to the expected number of deaths for the first problem; with a small degree of risk aversion, the choice between the two problems becomes extremely difficult. 
To see the role of the Principle of Insufficient Reason, suppose that people are asked to choose between: a 99.5% chance of a loss of 200 lives, and a .5% chance of a loss of 2 lives, with an uncertain chance of losing between 2 lives and 205 lives. 
For most people, it is reasonable to suppose that a) is much worse than b)—and hence that b) will be the overwhelming choice. Here, then, people will select a choice that eliminate the worst-case scenario. But compare: c) d) a risk of 60% of a loss of 200 lives, and 40% of 2 lives, with an uncertain chance of losing between 205 lives and 2 lives. 
For most people, the choice here is much less clear, and it is likely that many people will choose c) and refuse to follow maximin. It follows that people would have a great deal of difficulty in choosing between a 51% risk of a loss of 200 lives, and a 49% chance of a loss of 1 life, as compared with an uncertain risk that threatens to produce losses of between 200 and 1 lives, with no possibility of assigning probabilities to the various possibilities. 
The precise role of the Principle of Insufficient Reason, and the nature of people’s choices under circumstances of uncertainty, remain to be established. The discussion thus far should be enough to show that people will often reject maximin and that the Principle of Insufficient Reason is a starting point for their intuitions. The implication for environmental protection, and for other problems involving safety and health, is clear. People will not consistently follow maximin under circumstances of uncertainty. If the worst-case scenario is extremely vivid, and if it is drawn to their attention, they might neglect the issue of probability and attempt to eliminate it.224 But under ordinary circumstances, they will select maximin only when the Principle of Insufficient Reason, accompanied by a degree of risk aversion, suggests that they should. 
(b) A cost-benefit analysis of maximin? A great deal of work explores the question whether people should follow maximin under circumstances of uncertainty.225 Some of this work draws on people’s intuitions, in a way that illuminates actual beliefs but may tell us little about what rationality requires.226 Those intuitions, of the sort described by the experiments above, may be based on some kind of confusion. Other work is highly formal, 227 adopting certain axioms and seeing whether maximin violates them. The results of this work are not conclusive.228 Certainly maximin has not been ruled out as a candidate for rational choice under uncertainty. 
I cannot resolve these difficult issues here, but will rest content with a general suggestion. In deciding whether to follow maximin in the environmental context, a great deal should turn on two questions: (a) How bad is the worst-case scenario, compared to other bad outcomes? (b) What, exactly, is lost by choosing maximin? Of course it is possible that choosers, including regulators, will lack the information that would enable them to answer these questions. But in the regulatory context, answers to both (a) and (b) may well be possible even if it is not possible to assign probabilities to the various outcomes with any confidence. By emphasizing the relative badness of the worst-case scenario, and the extent of the loss from attending to it, I am attempting to build on the Rawls/Gardiner suggestion that maximin is the preferred decision rule when little is lost from following it. I have objected that this suggestion threatens to trivialize the case for maximin; but it is possible to develop the underlying intuition into a far more general, and useful, method for orienting both private and public choice. 
To see the relevance of the two questions, suppose that you are choosing between two options. The first has a best-case outcome of 10 and a worst-case outcome of –5. The second has a best-case outcome of 15 and a worst-case outcome of –6. It is impossible to assign probabilities to the various outcomes. Maximin would favor the first option, to avoid the worse worst-case; but to justify that choice, we have to know something about the meaning of the difference s between 10 and 15 on the one hand and –5 and –6 on the other. If 15 is much better than 10, and if the difference between –5 and –6 is a matter of relative indifference, then the choice of the first option is hardly mandated. But if the difference between –5 and –6 greatly matters—if it is a matter of life and death—then maximin is much more attractive. 
These points have the important implication of suggesting the possibility of a (rough) cost-benefit analysis229 of maximin under conditions of uncertainty. Sometimes a rejection of maximin is compelled by that analysis because the worst-case scenario is not much worse than the second worst-case scenario (and hence the benefits of maximin are low),and because maximin imposes extremely high costs.230 But sometimes the worst229 By suggesting this possibility, I do not mean to assign dollar equivalents to the various outcomes or to say anything controversial about the ingredients of the analysis. I am referring generally to an all-thingsconsidered approach to social welfare. 
230 It might be suggested that when people reason in this way, they are implicitly assigning probabilities to the relevant events. Suppose that the choice is between (a), with uncertain payoffs of 15 or 5, and (b) with uncertain payoffs of 8 or 6; suppose too that 15 is much better than 8 and that 5 is only a little worse than 6. On the analysis in text, (a) should be chosen. But perhaps that judgment depends on an implicit assignment of a significant probability, in case (a), to 15, and of an assignment of some probability of less than (say) 99%, in case (b), to 5. Without some such implicit assignment of probabilities, why would (a) be preferable? I cannot prove the point here, but I believe that this question, and this counterargument, are based on a denial of the possibility of acting under conditions of genuine uncertainty. If such conditions exist, and if people act under them, then they might indeed be assigning implicit probabilities; but they might also be acting in terms of the principles described in the text. case is the worst by far, and sometimes we lose relatively little by choosing maximin. It is typically thought necessary to assign probabilities in order to engage in cost-benefit balancing; without an understanding of probabilities, such balancing might not seem able to get off the ground.231 But a useful form of cost-benefit balancing is possible even without reliable information about probability. For the balancing exercise to work, of course, it must be possible to produce cardinal rankings among the outcomes—that is, it must be possible to rank them not merely in terms of their badness but also in at least rough terms of how much worse each is than the less-bad others. That approach will not work if cardinal rankings are not feasible—as might be the case if (for example) it is not easy to compare the catastrophic loss from global warming with the loss from huge expenditures on reductions of greenhouse gas emissions. Much of the time, however, cardinal rankings are possible. 
Irreversibility becomes highly relevant as part of this analysis. Recall that some of the costs of precautions are irreversible. If governments invest a great deal to control greenhouse gas emissions, they will be forcing private and public actors to incur irreversible costs. It follows that if governments follow maximin, they will be limiting their own flexibility , expending a great deal even though future information might move the situation from uncertainty to risk, as regulators learn more about the problem. Suppose that no probability can now be assigned to the catastrophic risk associated with abrupt global warming, and that for this reason regulators are tempted to spend a great deal to eliminate that risk. The relevant expenditures will greatly reduce future flexibility, ensuring sunk costs for a danger that might turn out to be quantifiable or even trivial. This point is not decisive against large expenditures, but it should be part of the analysis of whether worst-case scenarios ought to be eliminated. In this sense, there can be some tension between an Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle and a Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle. 
Imagine, then, two polar situations with respect to global warming. First, suppose that the catastrophic dangers associated with global warming could be eliminated if every nation contributed $10 million to a fund to combat that risk. On reasonable assumptions, that cost would be fully acceptable. Second, suppose that the catastrophic dangers 231 See Ackerman and Heinzerling, supra note. associated with global warming could be eliminated only if every nation contributed enough resources to reduce standards of living by 50% world-wide, with a corresponding increase in global poverty. If global warming really does pose an uncertain danger of total catastrophe, maximin argues in favor of this extraordinary reduction in world-wide standards of living. But to incur costs of this magnitude, we might want to insist that the danger of catastrophe rise about the minimal threshold—that there be demonstrable probability, and a not-so-low one, that the catastrophic risk will occur. 
To appreciate this point, and the need for an analysis of the effects of following maximin, imagine an individual or society lacking the information that would permit the assignment of probabilities to a series of hazards with catastrophic outcomes; suppose that the number of hazards is ten, or a twenty, or a thousand. Suppose too that such an individual or society is able to assign probabilities (ranging from 1% to 90%) to an equivalent number of other hazards, with outcomes that range from bad to extremely bad, but never catastrophic. Suppose finally that every one of these hazards can be eliminated at a cost—a cost that is high, but that does not, once incurred in individual cases, inflict harms that count as extremely bad or catastrophic. The maximin principle suggests that our individual or society should spend a great deal to eliminate each of the ten, or twenty, or hundred potentially catastrophic hazards. But once that amount is spent on even one of those hazards, there might be nothing left to combat the extremely bad hazards, even those with a 90% chance of occurring. We could even imagine that a poorly informed individual or society would be condemned to real poverty and distress, or even worse, merely by virtue of following maximin. In these circumstances, maximin should be rejected. 
This suggestion derives indirect support from the empirical finding that when asked to decide on the distribution of goods and services, most people reject the two most widely discussed principles in the philosophical literature: average utility, favored by Harsanyi, and Rawls’ difference principle (allowing inequalities only if they work to the advantage to the least well-off).232 Instead people choose average utility with a floor constraint—that is, they favor an approach that maximizes overall well-being, but subject 232Norman Frohlich and Joe A. Oppenheimer, Choosing Justice: An Experimental Approach to Ethical Theory (1992). to the constraint that no member of society may fall below a decent minimum.233 Insisting on an absolute welfare minimum to all, they maximize over that floor. Their aversion to especially bad outcomes leads them to a pragmatic threshold in the form of the floor. So too, very plausibly, in the context of precautions against risks. A sensible individual, or society, would not always choose maximin under circumstances of risk or uncertainty. Everything depends on what is lost, and what is gained, by eliminating the worst-case scenario; and much of that time, available information makes it possible to answer those questions at least in general terms. 
Nothing here is meant as a proof that maximin is forbidden, or even not required, by rationality. To decide on the relationship between rationality and maximin strategies, it is necessary to specify the right account of rationality.234 I am doubtful that any such specification can establish the status of maximin without making contentious assumptions. My claim is instead that maximin makes most sense when the worst-case scenario, under one course of action, is much worse than the worst-case scenario under the alternative course of action, and when the choice of maximin does not result in extremely significant losses. 
The most general conclusion is that a degree of risk aversion should be expected in cases of catastrophic risks; for such risks, margins of safety are entirely sensible. For this reason, a Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle, of the sort suggested by several understandings of the Precautionary Principle, is a coherent and defensible part of environmental policy.235 Indeed, such a principle might well be the best understanding of the Precautionary Principle itself. It has many uses, not only in environmental policy but in health and safety regulation as a whole, including the war on terrorism. 
But maximin is not generally a sensible strategy in the environmental context or elsewhere. First, it is senseless under circumstances of risk, unless we assume an implausibly high degree of risk aversion. Second, regulators are rarely operating under circumstances of pure uncertainty; often rough probabilities can be ascribed to serious 233 Id. 234 See Luce and Raiffa, supra note, at 286-97. 235 See notes supra. outcomes, and if not, at least rough probabilities can be ascribed to probabilities. Third, adoption of maximin, under circumstances of genuine uncertainty, is most reasonable when the worst-case scenario is exceptionally bad and when removal of that scenario does not inflict serious losses of its own. 
It follows that a Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle is best understood to embody a form of risk aversion for the most dangerous risks. Its central domain involves . uncertain dangers of catastrophe when the costs of reducing those dangers are not huge and when incurring those costs does not divert substantial resources from extremely pressing problems. Four qualifications are important: social risks; it makes no sense to take steps to avert catastrophe if those very steps would create catastrophic risks of their own. If a preventive war, designed to reduce the risks of terrorism from one source, would increase those very risks from another source, then the Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle is indeterminate. This point is a simple extension of that made earlier with respect to the unrefined Precautionary Principle and the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle. which requires regulators to choose the least costly means of achieving their ends. In the context of global warming, there are many methods by which to reduce the relevant risks.236 Both nations and international institutions should choose those methods that minimize costs. The same is true for efforts to combat terrorism. applied in a way that reduces extreme burdens on those least able to bear them. For global warming, there is a particular need to ensure that citizens of poor nations are not required to pay a great deal to contribute to the solution of a problem for which those in wealthy nations are most responsible.237 If an antiterrorism policy would impose special burdens on members of racial and religious minority groups— consider racial profiling—it is worth considering other policies that reduce or eliminate those burdens. 236 A good discussion is Nordhaus and Boyer, Warming the World, supra note, at 121-44. 237 See the overview in R. Percival et al., supra note. their expense. In cases of the kind I am discussing, where the worst-case scenario is truly catastrophic and when probabilities cannot be assigned, a large margin of safety makes a great deal of sense.238 
There is a final point. It is possible to combine a concern about catastrophe with a focus on irreversible harm, in a way that generates an Irreversible and Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle. Suppose that by adopting environmental controls at the present time, regulators can maintain flexibility to prevent a risk that is not only irreversible but potentially catastrophic as well. Suppose too that the likelihood of catastrophe cannot be specified with much confidence, or even that it is in the domain of uncertainty rather than risk. Risk-neutral, risk-averse, or uncertainty-averse regulators might be willing to pay a great deal to maintain the flexibility that would permit them to avoid the worst-case scenarios. We have seen that significant expenditures can reduce flexibility too; many problems involve not irreversibility, but irreversibilities. At the same time, the most important irreversibilities may well turn out to be environmental in character. 
This argument provides the strongest basis for aggressive measures to combat global warming.239 The natural objections would either point to the irreversible costs of maintaining flexibility or question the probability that catastrophe will actually ensue. The appropriate conclusion rests on an assessment of the empirical questions,240 but in my view, an appreciation of irreversibility and catastrophe argues for otherwise excessive steps to reduce greenhouse gases.241 
238 See Woodward and Bishop, supra note, at 505: “If one considers a spectrum of choice problems from pure uncertainty to pure risk, almost all of the attention of economics has been on one extreme. . . . This has led to policy advice and analysis that either implicitly or explicitly requires policymakers to divine probability distributions. We argue, however, that there are important cases where probability distributions cannot be reasonably formulated and under such conditions dramatically different decision criteria may be rational.” 239 See Posner, supra note, at 161-65. 240 See Fisher, supra note, for a good discussion. 241 See id.; William Cline, Climate Change, in Global Crises, Global Solutions, supra note, at 13, 15-21. 
When it comes to risk, why do experts disagree with ordinary people? Many people think that the reason lies in the fact that ordinary people have a “rival rationality.”242 On this view, experts are concerned with statistics, and, above all, with the number of lives at stake.243 By contrast, ordinary people are concerned with a range of qualitative factors that make certain risks a special cause of concern. Irreversibility and catastrophe are said to loom especially large in ordinary people’s reactions.244 Where experts simply calculate expected values, ordinary people, and lay rationality, show special aversion to potentially irreversible and catastrophic harm. If this is so, ordinary people display “rival rationalities,” and each “side must respect the insights and intelligence of the other.”245 
According to a competing view, the rival rationality of ordinary people is mostly a product of cognitive illusions, ignorance, and confusion.246 For the critics, ordinary people are also concerned with the central question, which is the number of lives at stake. Unfortunately, they are unable to answer that question well. When ordinary people show a concern about irreversible and catastrophic harms, it is because they fear that many lives are at risk, no less and no more. 
The discussion thus far suggests a possible rapprochement between the apparently rival rationalities. Sensible experts do not and should not believe that there is any particular magic in irreversibility, and they do and should insist that the line between catastrophic and non-catastrophic harm is one of degree. But they should also agree that irreversibility matters, in the sense that it makes sense to spend resources to maintain 246 See Howard Margolis, Dealing With Risk (1995). 
1061-1085 (1990). Note that the evidence describe above suggests that in certain settings, potentially catastrophic outcomes will receive less, not more, attention than their expected value, perhaps because people treat very low-probability risks (eg, 1 in 1 million) as if they were zero. The framing of the question undoubtedly matters a great deal here. Probably the best generalization is that people sometimes give low probability risks of catastrophe more attention than its expected value and sometimes give them more less. See Gary H. McClelland et al., supra note. I suspect that in some of the relevant studies, the evidence of grave concern for catastrophic harms stems from the affect heuristic, through which a general affective reaction to a risk—often a negative one—leads people to show concern about all aspects of the relevant risk. See Paul Slovic et al., The Affect Heuristic, in Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment 397 
flexibility for the future. Insofar as the National Environmental Policy Act247 instructs agencies to spend time to acquire relevant information before ensuring irreversible losses, it is on firm ground. Experts agree that any cost-benefit analysis that ignores option value is missing an important variable—a standard point in finance though not yet in environmental protection.248 In this sense, ordinary people are correct to see the importance of irreversibility, and to emphasize the importance, some of the time, of adopting a strategy of “act, and then learn.” 
What of catastrophic risks? Experts may have little to say on the question whether it is worse to create a 1/100 risk that 100,000 people will die, or a 1/100,000 risk that 1 million people will die. But they should agree that when regulators are unable to assign probabilities to catastrophic risks, it is worth doing a great deal to avoid those risks—or at least to spend resources while more information is acquired. Experts cannot rule out the choice of maximin under circumstances of uncertainty. At the very least, experts know that elimination of the worst-case scenario is sometimes justified by a kind of cost-benefit analysis, one that pays attention to the relative egregiousness of the worst case and the costs of eliminating it. Sensible experts are interested not only in the expected value of catastrophic risks, but also in producing strategies for eliminating them when probabilities cannot be confidently assigned. For these reasons, an understanding of irreversibility and catastrophe help not only to refine but also to vindicate intuitions that have been found to play a significant role in ordinary risk perceptions. 
The ideas of irreversibility and catastrophe have had a major impact on domestic and international law, and they play a large role in private and public decisions. My major goal in this Article is to unpack these ideas and to bring them to bear on law and policy. I have suggested the possibility of replacing the Precautionary Principle, which is incoherent, with more refined principles that embody an understanding of the distinctive problem of irreversible losses and of the need to attend to low-probability risks of disaster. 
247 42 USC 102 (C)(5). 248 See Dixit and Pindyck, supra note, at 4-7. and coherent. Drawing on the idea of real options, it suggests that regulators, including those who make environmental policy, should find it worthwhile to invest resources to preserve flexibility for the future. In the context of global warming, the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle argues for substantial current investments, above all because emissions of carbon dioxide stay in the atmosphere for an extremely long time. The difficulty here is that emissions reductions also impose irreversible costs. An emphasis on irreversibility does not always favor aggressive environmental regulation, or anything like an attitude of “act, then learn.” It is even possible to imagine an Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle that in many cases argues for a plan of “wait and learn.”249 Everything depends on the magnitude and likelihood of the full range of irreversible losses. In the context of global warming, the best approach is probably a world-wide agreement to cap greenhouse emissions, with the size of the cap decreasing over time as the expense of controls diminish.250 
If expected values matter, then societies should not ignore low probability risks of catastrophe. A minimal response would be a Catastrophe Harm Precautionary Principle, one that attempts to counteract the serious risk that both individuals and societies will treat small risks as if there were zero.251 The argument for this principle is strengthened by the fact that a catastrophic harm typically has secondary effects that ensure adverse effects that go far beyond a simple multiple of the number of people who are killed.252 A less minimal approach would build a degree of risk aversion into the Catastrophe Harm Precautionary Principle, so as to treat catastrophic harms as worth more than their expected value. A much more aggressive approach would be to adopt maximin, by which regulators identify the worst-case scenario and attempt to eliminate it. I have argued that for most environmental problems, this approach is senseless. Under circumstances of risk, maximin is far too cautious, and it would inflict serious harms—often including environmental harms—for no sufficient reason. Usually environmental problems involve 249 See Mendelsohn, supra note, at 45. 250 See Nordhaus and Boyer, supra note, at 121-44. 
251 On some of the cognitive mechanisms here, see Bazerman, Predictable Surprises, supra note; on the need to attend to low-probability risks, see Posner, supra note, at 245-65. 
risk, in the sense that a range of probabilities can be assigned, or at least in the sense that probabilities can be assigned to probabilities. 
As a matter of theory, pure uncertainty cannot be ruled out of bounds. The fact that people assign probabilities to uncertain outcomes does not negate the possibility of (objective) uncertainty. Under circumstances of uncertainty, maximin has some appeal if the worst-case scenario is truly catastrophic. And if it is not terribly costly to eliminate that scenario, regulators should certainly do so. But maximin can be an unappealing strategy, certainly under risk, and also when the worst-case scenario is not much worse than the second-worst case scenario and when the costs of eliminating the worst-case scenario are extremely high. To operate sensibly, precautionary steps must be attentive to the full range of consequences, not simply to a subset of them. But a Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle, applied with a wide viewscreen, has an important role in environmental law as well as ordinary life,253 and it is a strong candidate for replacing and refining any more general Precautionary Principle.   253 See William Cline, Climate Change, in Global Crises, Global Solutions, supra note, at 13, 18-19. 2.  William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An  Economic Approach (July 1991)  Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of  Tort (August 1991)  Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991)  Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992)  Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992)  Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992)  Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992)  William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992)  William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study  (August 1992)  Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An  Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992)  Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992)  Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial  Japan (March 1993)  Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993)  Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does)  (April 1993)  Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and  Firm‐Specific Human Capital (August 1993)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main  Bank System (August 1993)  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication  (September 1993)  Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993)  Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993)  Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994)  Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994)  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994)  J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994)  Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994)  Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of  Software (August 1994)  Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994)  David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994)  Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption  (January 1995)  Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995)  Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty  Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995)  Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April  1995)  Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995)  J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995)  Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995)  Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996)  37.  
David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short‐Term Assets  (January 2003)  Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996  Telecommunications Act? (January 2003)  Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities  and Verizon (January 2003)  William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An  Economic Perspective (February 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003)  Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003)  Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003)  Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003)  Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003)  Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May  2003)  Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003)  Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003)  Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003)  Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life‐Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003)  Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003)  Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003)  David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September  2003)  William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the  Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985  and 2000? (September 2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage  (September 2003)  Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September  2003)  Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts  of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)   Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure  Time (October 2003)  Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003)  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003)  David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004)  David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004)  Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright Law (April  2004)  Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004)  Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004)  Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of  Statistical Lives (February 2004)  Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A Critique of the  Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004)  Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceutical Patents:  Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004)  Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004)  Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004)  Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004)  
