University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1987 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Lochner's Misunderstood Legacy 
Lochner's Misunderstood Legacy 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Lochner's Misunderstood Legacy," 87 Columbia Law Review 893 (1987). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

VOL.  87 

1987 

NO.  5

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

Cass R.  Sunstein*

INTRODUCTION

Constitutional  law  tends, to  define  itself through reaction  to  great
cases.  The  defining case  for the last several  decades  was Brown v. Board
of Education '-an  example  of social  reorganization,  in  the interest  of a
racial  minority, brought about through  the judiciary.  Roe v.  Wade2 has
to  some  extent played  this  role  for the past decade,  and  its status  as  a
defining  case  may  grow  larger  in  the  next  generation.  But  for  more
than  a half-century,  the  most important  of all  defining  cases  has  been
Lochner v.  New  York. 3  The spectre  of Lochner has  loomed  over most  im-
portant constitutional decisions,  whether they uphold or invalidate  gov-
ernmental  practices.4  In  the  different  answers  to  the  question,  what
was  wrong with the decision in Lochner?, can be  found the various posi-

*  Professor  of Law, University of Chicago.  This  is  a revised  version of the Samuel
Rubin  lecture, delivered while  the author was Samuel Rubin Visiting Professor of Law  at
Columbia  Law  School  in  the  fall  of  1986.  The  author  would  like  to  thank  Bruce  A.
Ackerman,  Akhil  Amar,  Richard  Briffault,  Stephen  Ellman,  Richard  Epstein,  Richard
Fallon, Terry Fisher,  George Fletcher, Philip  Frickey, Wendy Gordon,  Kent Greenawalt,
Stephen  Holmes,  Pamela  Karlen,  Andrew  Kaufman,  Larry  Kramer,  Anthony  T.
Kronman,  Daniel  Meltzer,  Frank  Michelman,  Geoffrey  Miller, Martha  Minow,  Henry  P.
Monaghan,  Richard  A. Posner,  Steven  Shiffrin,  Richard  B.  Stewart,  Geoffrey  R.  Stone,
David  Strauss, Peter  L. Strauss, Laurence  H. Tribe, Mark  V. Tushnet, and Roberto  Un-
ger for  helpful  comments.  Participants  in  the  legal  theory  workshops  at  the  Harvard,
New  York  University,  University  of  Minnesota,  and  University  of  Pennsylvania  law
schools  also  gave  valuable help.  Daniel B.  Rodriguez  provided  research  assistance  and
useful  comments.

1.  347 U.S.  483  (1954).
2.  410 U.S.  113  (1973).
3.  198  U.S. 45  (1905).
4.  The most  recent example is  Bowers  v.  Hardwick,  106  S.  Ct.  2841  (1986),  where
the Court  rejected  a claim  that a state  prohibition  of sodomy  among consenting  adults
violated  the due  process  clause.  According  to  the  Court:

The  Court  is  most vulnerable  and  comes nearest  to  illegitimacy  when  it  deals
with judge-made  constitutional  law  having little  or no  cognizable  roots  in  the
language  or design  of the  Constitution.  That  this  is  so  was  painfully  demon-
strated  by  the  face-off  between  the  Executive  and  the  Court  in  the  1930's,
which  resulted  in  the  repudiation  of much  of  the  substantive  gloss  that  the
Court  placed  on  the  Due  Process  Clause of the  Fifth  and  Fourteenth  Amend-
ments.  There  should be,  therefore,  great resistance  to expand  the  substantive
reach  of  those  Clauses,  particularly  if  it  requires  redefining  the  category  of
rights  deemed  to  be fundamental.

Id.  at 2846.  It is  this  view of the  lesson  of the Lochner period  that  is  questioned  here.

873

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

tions  on  most  of the major constitutional  issues  of the modem  era.5

The received  wisdom  is that Lochner was  wrong because  it involved
'judicial  activism":  an  illegitimate  intrusion by  the courts  into  a  realm
properly  reserved  to  the  political  branches  of government.  This  view
has  spawned  an  enormous  literature6  and  takes  various  forms. 7  The
basic understanding  has been  endorsed by  the Court in many cases  tak-
ing the lesson  of the Lochner period to be the need for judicial deference
to legislative  enactments. 8

The  principal  purpose  of this  essay,  descriptive  in  character,  is  to
understand  Lochner from  a  different  point  of view.  For  the  Lochner
Court,  neutrality,  understood  in  a  particular  way,  was  a  constitutional
requirement.  The  key  concepts  here  are  threefold:  government  inac-
tion,  the  existing  distribution  of  wealth  and  entitlements,  and  the
baseline  set  by  the  common  law.  Governmental  intervention  was  con-
stitutionally  troublesome, whereas  inaction was  not; and both neutrality
and  inaction  were  defined  as  respect for  the behavior  of private  actors
pursuant  to  the  common  law,  in  light  of  the  existing  distribution  of
wealth  and  entitlements.  Whether  there  was  a  departure  from  the  re-
quirement  of neutrality,  in  short,  depended  on  whether  the  govern-
ment  had altered  the common  law  distribution of entitlements.  Market
ordering under the common  law  was  understood  to  be a  part  of nature
rather  than  a legal  construct,  and it formed  the baseline  from which  to
measure  the constitutionally  critical lines  that distinguished  action from
inaction  and  neutrality  from  impermissible  partisanship.  This  under-
standing of the Lochner period is  faithful  to what  the Court said  when  it
both engaged  in and abandoned  Lochner-like reasoning, and it points to
an important  element  in  the Lochner Court's  approach,  one  that has  lit-
tle to  do  with  an  aggressive judicial  role in  general. 9

5.  The  view  that  Lochner  was  wrong  is  not,  however,  unanimously  held.  See  R.

Epstein,  Takings:  Private Property and  the  Law of Eminent  Domain  5  (1985).

6.  See,  e.g.,  J.  Choper,  The  Supreme  Court  and  the  National  Political  Process
(1980);J.  Ely,  Democracy  and  Distrust  (1980);  M.  Perry, The  Constitution,  the Courts,
and  Human  Rights  (1982).

7.  Sometimes the  view is  based  on  the text of the Constitution  and  the  "intent"  of
its  framers,  see,  e.g.,  Monaghan,  Our  Perfect  Constitution,  56  N.Y.U.  L.  Rev.  353
(1981);  sometimes  it is based on  conceptions of democracy,  see, e.g., Bork, Neutral  Prin-
ciples  and  Some First Amendment  Problems,  47 Ind. L.J.  1 (1971);  sometimes  it grows
out of"process-perfecting"  theories,  see, e.g.,J.  Ely, supra  note 6, at 73,  228-29  n.91;
sometimes  it  depends  on  distinctions  between  matters  of policy,  to  be  resolved  by  the
legislature, and  matters  of principle,  to be resolved  by  the  courts, see R.  Dworkin,  Tak-
ing  Rights  Seriously  (1979).

8.  See,  e.g.,  Bowers  v.  Hardwick,  106  S. Ct. 2841  (1986);  Dandridge  v. Williams,
397 U.S. 471  (1970);  Griswold v. Connecticut,  381  U.S. 479  (1965);  Ferguson v. Skrupa,
372  U.S.  726  (1963);  Williamson  v.  Lee  Optical,  348  U.S.  483  (1955).

9.  Whether  this understanding  of Lochner should  be accepted  in  place  of one  that
stresses an  active judicial  role is an  inescapably  normative question, taken  up infra notes
144-67  and  accompanying  text.  The  principal  effort here  is to  set  forth an  alternative
approach  that fits  the  history at least as well  and  that has  dramatically different  implica-
tions.  See infra  notes  168-205  and  accompanying  text.  Moreover,  this  understanding

1987]

LOCHNER 'S LEGACY

Understood  in this  way, however,  Lochner has  many descendants  in
current  law.  Numerous  decisions  depend  in  whole or in  part  on  com-
mon  law  baselines  or  understandings  of inaction  and  neutrality  that
owe their origin  to Lochner-like understandings.  And if Lochner is under-
stood  in  these  terms,  its  heirs  are  not  Roe  v.  Wade10  and  Miranda v.
Arizona,"  but instead  such  decisions  as  Washington v.  Davis,12  Buckley v.
Valeo,13  Regents  of California v.  Bakke, 14  and  various  cases  immunizing
those who are thought not to be  "state  actors"  from constitutional con-
straints.  These  and  other  decisions  can be  understood  from  a  unitary
perspective  through  the lens of the Lochner period.  Such a  perspective
may  or may not justify dramatic  departures  from current law.  It may be
that modem doctrine,  insofar  as it shares Lochner's premises,  is  entirely
unobjectionable.

The  second  purpose  of the  essay  is  normative.  To  some  degree,
Lochner-like themes are  so deeply ingrained  in the  constitutional  order,
indeed  in  the  very  concept  of  constitutionalism, 15  that  it  would  be
hopeless  to attempt to abandon them even  if it were desirable  to do  so.
But in  some  settings,  the modem  progeny  of Lochner, like Lochner itself,
depend on false premises  and lead  to unfortunate  results.  Most impor-
tant,  the  baselines  selected  by  the  Court  and  the  use  of the key  con-
cepts -"neutrality"  and  "inaction"-  are  often  a mistake,  for the same
reasons  that  originally  led to  the  rejection  of Lochner and  the common
law  system  of regulation  generally.  The  eventual  task is  to design  a  set
of constitutional  doctrines  that does  not derive from common  law  rules
but  that  instead  builds  on  still-emerging  principles  that  might  be
roughly  associated with  the New  Deal.  The  final  section of this  Article
ventures  some thoughts  on  how  to  accomplish  that task.

Almost  eighty  years  since  the  case  was  decided,  the  lesson  of the
Lochner period  has  yet  to  be  settled.  The  purpose  of this  Article  is  to
suggest  that  the  case  should  be  taken  to  symbolize  not  merely  an  ag-
gressive judicial role,  but an  approach that imposes  a constitutional  re-
quirement  of  neutrality,  and  understands 
to
preservation  of  the  existing  distribution  of  wealth  and  entitlements
under  the baseline  of the common  law.  Thus  understood,  Lochner has
hardly  been  overruled.

the  term 

to  refer 

was not  invented in the Lochner era.  See Fletcher v.  Peck,  10  U.S.  (6 Granch)  87  (1810)
(using contract  clause  and  "general  principles  ...  common  to our free  institutions"  to
invalidate  rescissions  of a land grant).

10.  410  U.S.  113  (1973).
11.  384  U.S.  436  (1966).
12.  426  U.S.  229  (1976).
13.  424  U.S.  1 (1976).
14.  438  U.S.  265  (1978).
15.  For general  discussion,  see  Constitutionalism  and  Democracy  (J.  Elster & R.

Slagstaad  eds.  forthcoming  1988).

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

I.  THE  RsE  AND  FALL  (?)  OF  LOCHNER

It  will  be  useful  to  begin  with  excerpts  from  two  important  deci-
sions  associated  with  the  Lochner  period.  The  first  excerpt  is  from
Adkins  v.  Childrens Hospital,16  a  1923  decision  invalidating  minimum
wage  legislation  for women  and  children.  The  Court  said:

To  the extent  that  the sum  fixed  [by  the minimum  wage  stat-
ute]  exceeds  the fair value  of the services  rendered,  it amounts
to  a compulsory exaction from the employer for the support of
a  partially  indigent  person,  for  whose  condition  there  rests
upon  him  no  peculiar  responsibility,  and  therefore,  in  effect,
arbitrarily  shifts  to his  shoulders  a  burden which, if it belongs
to  anybody,  belongs  to  society as  a  whole.' 7
The  next  excerpt  is  from  the  case  generally  thought  to  spell  the
downfall  of Lochner.  In  the 1937  decision of West  Coast Hotel v.  Parrish, Is
the Court  upheld  a  minimum wage  law  for women.  The  Court  said:
The  exploitation  of a  class  of workers  who  are  in  an  unequal
position  with  respect  to  bargaining  power  and  are  thus  rela-
tively defenceless  against the denial of a living wage..,  casts  a
direct  burden  for  their  support  upon  the  community.  What
these workers  lose  in  wages  the  taxpayers  are  called  upon  to
pay .... 
The  community  is  not  bound  to  provide  what  is  in
effect a  subsidy  for unconscionable  employers.' 9
The  notion  of subsidy  is  of course  incoherent  without  a  baseline
from  which  to  make  a  measurement.  Both  of these  excerpts  refer  to
subsidies,  but  by  the  time  of  West  Coast Hotel,  the  concept  has  been
turned  on its head.  In Adkins,  the Court  saw minimum  wage legislation
as  requiring a  subsidy  to  the public  from an  innocent  employer.  Such
legislation was  thus  a  kind  of "taking"  from A  to  B.  According  to  the
Court, if B  is needy, it is not A,  but the public at large,  who should pay.
In  West  Coast Hotel, it  is  the  failure  of a  state  to  have  minimum  wage
legislation that amounts  to a  subsidy--this  time, from the public to  the
employer.2 0  The  common  law  system,  for  the  West  Coast Hotel  Court,
turns  out to  subsidize  "unconscionable  employers."  In the fifteen-year
period  between  Adkins  and  West  Coast  Hotel,  the  baseline  has  been
shifted.  What accounts  for the shift?  In answering  that question, it will
be  useful  to  turn  to Lochner itself.

16.  261  U.S.  525  (1923).
17.  Id. at 557-58.
18.  300  U.S.  379  (1937).
19.  Id. at 399.
20.  To  say  this  is  not,  of  course,  to  suggest  that  minimum  wage  legislation  was
constitutionally required.  Notably,  both Adkins and  West  Coast Hotel involved statutes dis-
criminating on  the basis  of gender;  such  statutes  tended, in both purpose  and  effect,  to
diminish  the employment  prospects  of women.  See  Landes, The  Effect  of State Maxi-
mum-Hours  Laws  on  the Employment  of Women  in  1920,  88 J. Pol. Econ.  476  (1980);
Nelson,  Women's  Poverty  and  Women's  Citizenship:  Some  Political  Consequences  of
Economic  Marginality,  10  Signs 209,  228-29  (1984).

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

Lochner involved  a  regulation  enacted  by  the  state  of  New  York
prohibiting employers  from permitting  or requiring bakers  to  work for
more  than  sixty  hours in a  week.  The  Court's  analysis  came in  several
steps.  The Court  said that the right of contract-in particular, the right
to buy and sell labor-is part of the liberty protected by the due process
clause.  But  the Court recognized  that the "police  power"  was  available
to justify  intrusions  on liberty  of contract;  thus,  for example,  the gov-
ernment  could  protect  health  or  morals  by  restricting  contractual
agreements.  Here,  however, the  Court  concluded  that maximum  hour
legislation  was not permissible as  a "labor law,"  because bakers were of
full  legal  capacity and  "in  no  sense  wards  of the  State." 2 1  Only wards
could be  protected  through labor  legislation.

The  Court  also  concluded  that  the  statute  could  not  be  defended
as a health  law.  The problem was  that  the state could not demonstrate
a  close  connection  between  maximum  hour regulation  and  the protec-
tion  of health.  There was  no  sufficient  showing  that a  maximum  hour
law  was  necessary  to  protect health;  and  if the evidence  brought forth
here  were  thought  sufficient,  the  state's  power  would  be  unlimited.
The  Court  concluded  that the  statute  was  "in  reality,  passed  from...
motives" 22  other  than  protection  of health-motives  that  were  illegiti-
mate  but  that the  Court  did  not specify.

For  the  contemporary  observer,  two  features  of the  Court's  ap-
proach  are especially  distinctive.  The first  is the sharp  limitation of the
category  of permissible  government  ends.  Efforts  to  redistribute  re-
sources  and  paternalistic  measures  were  both  constitutionally  out  of
bounds.  They  did not fall within the "police  power";  the employer had
committed  no  common  law  wrong,  and  regulatory  power  was  largely
limited  to the redress of harms recognized  at common  law. This  limita-
tion  of the  category  of permissible  ends  had  important  implications,
excluding  a wide  range of measures  enacted  by majorities.  The  scope
of the "police  power,"  as understood  in the Lochner era, has never  been
entirely  clear.23  But there  can  be  no doubt that most forms  of redistri-
bution  and  paternalism  were  ruled out.

The  second  step  in  the  Court's  approach  consists  of careful  scru-
tiny  of  the  relationship  between  the  permissible  end  invoked  by  the
state to  support  the statute  and  the  means  chosen  by  the state to  pro-
mote  that end.  The Court  was  unsatisfied  by the claim  that limitations
on working  hours  contributed  to  the health of bakers,  notwithstanding
the plausible  nature  of the claim-hence Justice  Harlan's  powerful  dis-
sent.24  It  would  thus  be  possible  to  accept,  as  did Justice  Harlan,  the
limitation  of police  power  and  at  the same  time to  uphold  the legisla-

21.  198  U.S.  at  57.
22.  Id.  at 64.
23.  For an effort  proceeding from similar premises, see R. Epstein, supra  note 5,  at

15-16.

24.  198  U.S.  65-74.

878

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

tion  attacked  in Lochner.  On the other  hand,  one could reject  both fea-
tures  of the  Court's  approach,  as  did Justice  Holmes  in  his  famous
dissent.

There is,  moreover,  a close  relationship  between  the  two elements
of the Court's approach;  the one reinforces  the other.  The careful scru-
tiny  of means-ends  connections  operates  to  "flush  out" 25  impermissi-
ble  ends.  If  there  is  no  class  of  impermissible  ends,  means-ends
scrutiny  is  incoherent.2 6  And  by  impermissible  ends,  the  Court  ap-
peared  to  be referring  to what  we may  call  "raw"  interest-group  trans-
fers.2 7  Because the only available  public justifications  were insufficient,
the  minimum  wage  statute  was  invalidated  as  an  interest-group  deal,
reflecting  nothing  other  than  political  power.  Above  all,  the  Court's
concern  was  that  maximum  hour  legislation  was  partisan  rather  than
neutral-selfish  rather  than  public-regarding. 28  It  was  neutrality  that
the due process clause  commanded, 2 9 and neutrality was  served only by
the  general  or  "public"  purposes  comprehended  by  the  police  power.
If the  statute  could  be justified  as  a  labor  or  health  law,  it  would  be
sufficiently  public  to  qualify  as  neutral.  Since  no  such justification  was

25.  SeeJ.  Ely,  supra  note 6,  at  146.
26.  See  Note,  Legislative  Purpose, Rationality,  and  Equal  Protection,  82  Yale  LJ.

123  (1972).

27.  To say this is not  to say that redistribution  was always  impermissible.  Taxation
and other measures  might  redistribute wealth  without running afoul  of the due  process
clause;  and  the  poor laws were  generally immune  from constitutional  attack.  Grey, The
Malthusian  Constitution,  41  U.  Miami  L.  Rev.  21  (1986).  But  redistribution  on  an  ad
hoc  basis,  of the sort  represented by maximum hour  and  minimum  wage  laws,  was  un-
constitutional  if  unsupported  by  a justification  deemed  "general"  or  "public."  Cf.
Calder v.  Bull, 3 U.S.  381  (1798)  (Chase, J.) (discussing natural  law principles  prohibit-
ing  transfers  from A to  B).

The  preference  for  redistribution  through  taxation  rather  than  regulation  might
have been  the product  of the  broader interest  in promoting generality  in  lawmaking.  If
redistribution  is  ad hoc, it could  be perverse  and  in any  event less  visible.  The require-
ment of generality  in redistribution promotes visibility and  at the same  time ensures  that
any  redistribution  is  to  those genuinely  or most in  need.  Compare  the  debate  over  af-
firmative  action,  discussed  infra text accompanying notes  113-17.  The ad hoc  character
of affirmative  action  schemes is sometimes  thought  to be  an argument against  them and
in favor of more  general  methods of alleviating the  distribution  of benefits  and  burdens
among  blacks and whites.  On  the other hand,  the requirement of generality  might  allow
well-organized  private groups  to mobilize in defense of the status quo.  In  this sense the
requirement  fits  comfortably  with  the  broader  hostility to  redistribution.

28.  Stated  in  this  way,  the requirement  remains  the  law.  Statutory  classifications
must  be defensible as public-regarding  under a wide range of constitutional  provisions.
See  Sunstein,  Naked  Preferences  and  the Constitution,  84  Colum.  L. Rev.  1689  (1984);
for  various  defenses,  see  infra  note  166.  In  the  Lochner  era,  however,  the  category  of
justifications  that  would  count as  "public"  was  small,  excluding  paternalistic  and  redis-
tributive  matters.  Cf.  Hawaii  Hous.  Auth.  v.  Midkiff, 467  U.S.  229  (1984)  (rendering
meaningless  the public  use requirement  under  the eminent  domain  clause).

29.  Cf.  Wechsler,  Toward  Neutral  Principles  of Constitutional  Law,  73  Harv.  L.
Rev.  1  (1959)  (discussing  similar  requirement  of  neutrality  imposed  on judges),  dis-
cussed  in  more  detail  infra  notes  109-11  and  accompanying  text.

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

available,  it was  invalidated  as impermissibly  partisan-what  might now
be called special-interest  legislation.  The legislative  result was  thus  un-
principled;  it  depended  on  "whose  ox  is  gored."  Under  this  frame-
work,  the  common  law  categories  were  taken  as  a  natural  rather  than
social  construct.  The  status  of the  common  law  as  a  part  of nature
undergirded  the  view  that  the  common  law  should  form  the baseline
from  which  to  measure  deviations  from  neutrality,  or  self-interested
"deals." 3 0

Justice  Holmes'  celebrated  dissenting opinion is  a rejection of neu-
trality  altogether.  It  comes  close  to  modem  interest-group  pluralism,
which  treats  the  political  process  as  an  unprincipled  struggle  among
self-interested  groups  for  scarce  social  resources.3 1  Under  this  view,
Lochner's means-ends  scrutiny,  examining  whether  there  is  a  "public"
and hence neutral justification  for the statute, is difficult  to understand.
Holmes'  opinion  treats  the political  process  as  a  kind  of civil  war,  in
which  the powerful  succeed;  if courts  interfere,  they  will be  bottling up
forces  that  will  express  themselves  elsewhere  in  other  and  more  de-
structive forms.3 2  Thus for Holmes,  the Constitution  does  not prevent
"the  natural  outcome  of a dominant  opinion." '33

Holmes'  opinion is  probably  best known  for its apparent  humility:
the rejection  of Spencer's  Social Statics,34  with  which  Holmes  was  sym-
pathetic  as  a  matter of personal  predilection;  the proposition  that  the
Constitution  does  not embody  any particular  social  and  economic  the-
ory;  and  its  author's  apparent  willingness  to  disregard  his  personal
views  in the process of constitutional interpretation.  But the opinion is

30.  Two  qualifications  are in order here.  First, not every  common law  right was,  by
virtue  of its  status  as  such,  immunized  from  collective  control.  Marginal  and  not-so-
marginal  adjustments  were  permissible.  Nonetheless,  the basic  framework  of the  com-
mon  law  formed the baseline  from which  to decide  cases.  Indeed,  one can  trace  to  this
period  the idea that legislative extinguishment of "core"  common law rights was permis-
sible  only if the  legislature  furnished  an  adequate  alternative  remedy.  See,  e.g.,  New
York  Cent.  R.R.  v.  White,  243  U.S.  188  (1917)  (upholding  workers'  compensation  in
part because  of quid pro  quo); see  also Duke  Power Co. v.  Carolina  Envtl.  Study Group,
438  U.S.  59,  88  & n.32  (1978)  (upholding liability-limiting  provisions of Price-Anderson
Act  against due  process  challenge  but  suggesting relevance  of quid  pro  quo).

Second,  the protection  of common  law rights depended  not merely  on the  fact that
the rights at issue were protected by the  common law, but also on the  (unsurprising) fact
that the  common law  corresponded  to a widely held  normative  theory  about the  proper
role of government.  The interests protected  at common law  thus  tracked  the category of
natural  rights.  For  a modern  statement,  see  Epstein,  A  Theory  of Strict  Liability,  2  J.
Legal  Stud.  151  (1973);  R.  Epstein,  supra  note  5.

31.  See, e.g.,  R.  Dahl, A Preface  to Democratic  Theory  (1956);  Stigler, The Theory
of Economic  Regulation,  2  Bell J.  Econ.  & Mgmt.  Sci.  3  (1971);  see  also  R.  Posner,
Federal  Courts:  Crisis  and Reform  (1985)  (making a similar point about  Holmes).

32.  See  Becker,  A Theory  of Competition Among Pressure Groups  for Political In-
fluence,  98  Q.J.  Econ.  371  (1983)  (making  this  argument).  On  Holmes,  see  Rogat,
Some  Modern  Views-The Judge  as  Spectator, 31  U.  Chi. L.  Rev.  213  (1964).

33.  198  U.S.  at 76.
34.  H.  Spencer,  Social Statics  (1882).

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

best  understood  as  an  outgrowth  of the  very  species  of constitutional
social  Darwinism  that  it  purports  to  reject.  Holmes'  market-oriented
conception  of politics and  his skepticism about normative argument  are
the  very  personal  building  blocks  for  his  enthusiasm  for  judicial
deference.

3 5

The  decline  of the Lochner understanding  was  slow  and  wavering.
In some cases  the Court  upheld  statutes  by deferring  to claims  of plau-
sible  means-ends  connections.  Elsewhere  the Court  seemed  gradually
to  conclude  that redistributive  goals  were  permissibly  public  and  thus
in some  sense neutral,  even  if there was  a  departure  from  the common
law;  the common  law  categories  thus  broke down.3 6  But it was  in  West
Coast Hotel that  the  Court  rejected  the  theoretical  foundations  of the
Lochner period.  The  case  involved a  statute  providing minimum  wages
for women.  Perhaps  oddly, at least  to modem readers,  the emphasis  of
the opinion was not on the undemocratic  character of the Court's previ-
ous  approach  or  on  the value  ofjudicial  deference  to  legislative  deter-
minations. 3 7  Instead  the  Court  stressed  the need  for  minimum  wage
regulation,  referring  to  "the  exploiting  of workers at wages so low as  to
be  insufficient  to  meet  the  bare  cost  of living"  and  the  fact  that  "the
exploitation  of a  class  of workers  who  are in  an  unequal  position  with
respect  to  bargaining  power  casts  a  direct  burden  for  their  support
upon  the  community."3 8  In  perhaps  the  most  striking  passage  of the
opinion,  the Court  referred  to  the  subsidy problem  and  added,  "[t]he
community  may direct its law-making power  to correct  the abuse  which
springs  from  [employers']  selfish  disregard  of the public interest."' 39

In  the Lochner era  itself, of course,  the police  power  could  not  be
used  to  help  those  unable  to  protect  themselves  in  the marketplace. 40
The expansion  of the police  power in West  Coast Hotel signalled a critical
theoretical  shift,  amounting  to  a  rejection  of the  Lochner Court's  con-
ception  of the appropriate  baseline.  The key lies  in the notion  that fail-
ure to  act would  amount  to "a  subsidy  for unconscionable  employers."
The  idea  that  what  appears,  in  the Lochner framework,  to  be  govern-
ment  "inaction,"  or  neutrality,  might  amount  to  a  subsidy  is  at  first
glance  quite  puzzling.  The Court's  claim  is that  the failure  to impose  a
minimum wage is not nonintervention  at all but simply another form of
action-a  decision  to rely  on traditional  market  mechanisms,  within the

35.  See,  e.g.,  Rogat,  supra  note  32,  at  251-55;  Rogat  &  O'Fallon,  Mr. Justice

Holmes,  A Dissenting  Opinion-The  Speech  Cases,  36 Stan.  L.  Rev.  1349  (1984).

36.  See,  e.g.,  Nebbia  v.  New York,  291  U.S.  502  (1934);  Bunting  v.  Oregon,  243

U.S.  426  (1917);  Muller  v.  Oregon,  208  U.S.  412  (1908).

37.  The Court did, however,  refer to these themes.  See  West Coast Hotel, 300 U.S.

at  397-98.

38.  Id. at 399.
39.  Id. at 399-400.
40.  This  oversimplifies  a complicated  framework;  the scope of the Lochner era police

power  was  by  no  means  precisely defined.

1987]

LOCHNER 'S LEGACY

common  law  framework,  as  the  basis  for regulation. 41  West  Coast Hotel
rests on an understanding  that in any case,  government-through  mini-
mum  wage  laws  or  the  common  law  system-is  making  a  choice.  The
common  law  could  not be  regarded  as  a natural  or  unchosen  baseline.
The  traditional treatment of the police power was  unable  to survive  this
understanding. 42  For  the  Court  in  West  Coast Hotel,  the  baseline  for
analysis  was  instead  a  system  in  which  all workers  had  a  living  wage.

Similar developments  occurred in  other areas  of the law.  Consider
for  example,  the  law  of eminent  domain,  with  which  Lochner must  be
closely associated:  both  involved perceived  "takings"  from A to B,  and
an  underlying  framework  built  on  common  law  baselines.4 3  Miller v.
Schoene 44  tested  the  constitutionality  of a  statute requiring  the destruc-
tion of ornamental cedar trees  infected with a disease damaging  to local
apple  orchards.  The  owners  of  the  cedar  trees  complained  that  the
statute  amounted  to  a  "taking"  of their  property  for which  compensa-
tion  was  constitutionally  required.  The  Court  responded  that  "the
state  was  under the  necessity  of making  a choice  between  the preserva-
tion  of one  class  of property  and  that  of the  other  wherever  both  ex-
isted  in dangerous  proximity.  It  would have  been  nonetheless  a choice
if,  instead  of enacting  the  present  statute,  the  state,  by  doing nothing,
had  permitted  serious  injury  to the  apple orchards within its borders  to
go unchecked.  When forced  to such a choice  the state  does  not exceed
its  constitutional  powers  by deciding  upon the  destruction  of one  class
of property in  order to save  another  .... -45 This was  so notwithstand-
ing  the fact  that the  injury  at issue  was  not tortious  at common  law.  In
Miller as  in  West  Coast Hotel,  adherence  to  common  law  baselines  no
longer  seemed  neutral,  and  departures  from  those  baselines  were  no
longer impermissibly  partisan.  The same  phenomenon  occurred under
the  contracts  clause,  as  the  Court  expanded  the  range  of justifications
that would  allow the  state  to  assert its  "police  power"  in order to  abro-
gate  private  agreements. 4 6  In  these  circumstances  it should  be  unsur-

41.  Here the parallel  to the affirmative action  debate is  especially striking.  See infra

notes  113-17  and  accompanying  text.

42.  The point is emphasized  in L. Tribe, American  Constitutional Law §§  8-5 to -7

(1978).

Why  this  change should have occurred is a complex matter.  In  part, the Depression
was  responsible;  in  a  period  of  widespread  poverty  and  unemployment,  it  became
harder  to see  nineteenth  century  market  ordering  as in  the  interest of all.  In  part,  the
partial  but increasing use  of government power  to alleviate  suffering made  the common
law  system  seem  less  and  less  natural  and  inviolate.  See  id.  Consider  in  this  regard
Franklin  Roosevelt's  suggestion:  "We  must  lay hold of the  fact that  economic  laws  are
not  made by nature.  They are  made by  human beings."  1 Public Papers of Franklin D.
Roosevelt  657  (1938).

43.  See  infra notes  81-88  and  accompanying  text  (discussing the  takings  clause).
44.  276 U.S.  272  (1928).
45.  Id.  at 279.
46.  See  infra  notes 81-88  and  accompanying  text.

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

prising  that  Erie  v.  Tompkins, 4 7  the  principal  case  recognizing  the
constructed  rather  than  prepolitical  character  of the common  law,  was
decided  only  one year  after  West  Coast Hotel.

We  may  thus  understand  Lochner as  a  case  that  failed  because  it
selected,  as  the  baseline  for  constitutional  analysis,  a  system  that  was
state-created,  hardly  neutral,  and without prepolitical  status.  Once  the
Court's  baseline  shifted,  its  analysis  became  impossible  to  sustain.  As
every  student of the law of torts  is aware,  one cannot  treat as a  "taking"
from A  to B  a decision  to  transfer resources  to  which A had  no entitle-
ment  in  the  first  place.  The  whole  notion  of "taking"  depends  on  a
belief in  an  antecedent  right  to  the  property  in  question. 48  Once  the
common law  itself was  seen to allocate entitlements and wealth,  and the
allocation  seemed controversial,  a decision  to generate a new pattern of
distribution  could  not  be  for that  reason  impermissible.

The  defect  of the Lochner era  might,  then,  be  understood  in  three
ways  that  are  closely  related  but  that have  some  significant  differences
as well.  In its narrowest  form,  the problem  was  the Court's  decision  to
take  market  ordering under  the  substantive  standards  of the  common
law  as  the baseline from which  to  decide  constitutional  cases.4 9  In this
formulation,  the difficulty  lay in the use of the common  law as  the start-
ing point from which  to administer the critical line  distinguishing action
from  inaction  and  partisanship  from  neutrality.  More  broadly,  the
Lochner Court  regarded  consideration  of "whose  ox  is  gored"-when
those  helped  were  the  disadvantaged-as  impermissible  partisanship;
consideration  of the plight of the disadvantaged  was  insufficiently  pub-
lic  or general  and  not neutral  at all.  This  conclusion,  reflecting  a  kind
of legal formality,  turned  out to depend  on the antecedent  selection  of
a baseline  grounded  in  the common  law.  More  broadly  still,  the  Court
took as  natural  and  inviolate  a system  that was  legally  constructed  and
took  the status  quo  as  the  foundation  from which  to  measure  neutral-
ity.50  The  use  of the status  quo  as  the foundation  for measurement  is
of course  different  from similar  use of the  common  law.  We  shall  see
both uses  in  the  discussion  to  follow.

These  three  understandings  are  closely  related  to  one  another.
The  decision about what  is partisanship  and  what is neutrality  depends

47.  304  U.S.  64  (1938).
48.  See, e.g.,  Calabresi & Malamed,  Property Rules,  Liability Rules,  and Inalienabil-
ity:  One View  of the  Cathedral,  85  Harv.  L.  Rev.  1089  (1972);  Michelman,  Property,
Utility,  and  Fairness:  Comments  on  the  Ethical  Foundations  of  "Just  Compensation"
Law,  80  Harv.  L. Rev.  1165  (1967).

49.  The  terms  "common  law"  and  "nineteenth  century  market  ordering"  will  be
used interchangeably  throughout;  the reference  is to  the allocation of rights of use, own-
ership,  transfer,  and  possession  of property  associated  with  "laissez-faire"  systems  and
captured  in  the  common  law  of the  late  nineteenth  century.  Of course  common  law
systems  have  not always  taken  this  form,  and  market  ordering  could  take  place  under
dramatically  different  allocations  of entitlements.

50.  The  status quo  need not,  of course,  be  the  common  law.

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

on the baseline  used for measurement;  thus  the  second  defect  presup-
poses  some variation  on  the  first.  The  third  understanding,  stressing
use  of the status  quo,  is  in  turn  simply  a  generalization  of the  Lochner
Court's  treatment  of the  common  law.  For better  or worse,  these  un-
derstandings  of the  Lochner era  treat judicial  activism  as  a  secondary
concern.  The  central  problem  of the Lochner Court  had  to  do with  its
conceptions  of neutrality  and  inaction  and  its  choice  of  appropriate
baseline.

II.  LOCHNER  AND  CURRENT  CONSTITUTIONAL  LAW

This understanding  of Lochner is  hardly  uncontroversial,  but  vari-
ants have been  offered. 5 1  And if Lochner is understood in these  terms, it
has  not been entirely  overruled.  Numerous  decisions,  in  widely  dispa-
rate  areas  of constitutional  law,  depend  on  Lochner-like  baselines  and
similar  principles  of neutrality and  inaction;  one  or more of the under-
standings  of Lochner set above  are  reflected  in  many  areas  of current
law.  The  areas  to  be  covered  span  a wide  range,  including  affirmative
action,  campaign  finance  regulation,  gender  discrimination,  the  state
action  doctrine,  the  distinction  between  de  facto  and  de jure  discrimi-
nation,  and judicial  review  of inaction  by  federal  administrative  agen-
cies.  The discussion begins  with areas using  common law  baselines and
later  shifts  to  areas  in  which  the  status  quo  is  the  foundation  for
decision.

It is important  to  understand that for present purposes,  the goal is
descriptive  rather  than normative.  To  say  that a  decision  depends  on
Lochner-like premises  is  not  to  say  that  it  was  wrong.  The  normative
issue  is  dealt  with below.

A.  Funding Limitations and the  First Amendment

We  begin  with Buckley  v.  Valeo, 5 2 which involved  a first amendment
attack  on  campaign  finance  regulation.  The  regulation  at  issue  im-

51.  See  B.  Ackerman,  Reconstructing American  Law  (1984);  L.  Tribe, supra  note
42, at 427-55;  Kennedy,  Form  and  Substance in Private  Law Adjudication,  89 Harv.  L.
Rev.  1685  (1976);  MacKinnon,  Pornography,  Civil Rights,  and  Speech,  20 Harv.  C.R.-
C.L.  L.  Rev.  1 (1985).

Similar points  were  made  by  the  legal  realists.  See  Cohen,  Property  and  Sover-
eignty,  13  Cornell L.Q. 8 (1927);  Hale, Coercion  and Distribution in a Supposedly Non-
Coercive  State, 38  Pol.  Sci.  Q. 470  (1923).

A question arises here  about the criteria for deciding when  a particular understand-
ing  of  the  Lochner era,  or  of any  other  period,  ought  to  be  accepted.  Of course  the
primary requirement is  that the  understanding be true to the decided  cases-certainly in
terms  of  result,  and,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  in  terms  of the  rhetoric  as  well.  But  among
conflicting  understandings  that fit  the  cases  equally  well,  the  choice has an inescapable
normative dimension.  R. Dworkin,  Law's  Empire 90-98  (1986).  On  the  different impli-
cations of the approach  set out here and  the more conventional  understanding, see infra
notes  167-205  and  accompanying  text.

52.  424 U.S.  1 (1976).

884

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

posed  a  ceiling  on  campaign  expenditures  by  candidates  and  political
parties.  In  defense  of  the  regulation,  the  government  argued  that  it
sought to equalize the relative ability  of individuals  and groups  to influ-
ence  the  outcomes  of elections.  Disparities  in  wealth,  the  government
claimed,  enabled some  to drown  out the voices  of others.  Restrictions
on  the  speech  of the wealthy  served  the  interest  of "dissemination  of
information  from 'diverse  and  antagonistic  sources.'  -53  By  equalizing
participation  in  the political  realm,  campaign  finance  regulation,  it was
said,  did  not  undermine  but  instead  promoted  first  amendment
interests.

In Buckley,  the Court concluded  that this justification  for regulation
was  illegitimate.  In  the  Court's  words,  "the  concept  that  government
may  restrict  the  speech  of some  elements  of our  society  in  order  to
enhance  the  relative  voice  of  others  is  wholly  foreign  to  the  First
Amendment."'5 4  The effort  at equalization  was  not within  the permissi-
ble ends  of government.  As  far  as  the first  amendment  is  concerned,
the state must  take disparities  in wealth,  and the existence  of some with
more  "voice"  than  others,  as  part  of  nature  for  which  government
bears  no  responsibility.  To  do  otherwise  was,  for  the Buckley  Court,  a
kind of first amendment  "taking."

Buckley  is  a direct heir to Lochner.  In  both cases,  the existing  distri-
bution  of wealth  is  seen  as  natural,  and  failure  to  act  is  treated  as  no
decision  at all.  Neutrality  is inaction,  reflected  in a  refusal  to intervene
in  markets  or  to  alter  the  existing  distribution  of wealth.  Buckley,  like
Lochner, grew  out of an  understanding  that for constitutional  purposes,
the existing distribution  of wealth  must be taken as  simply "there,"  and
that  efforts  to  change  that distribution  are impermissible.  Under both
cases,  the  category  of permissible  legislative  ends  was  sharply  limited.
To  be  sure, Buckley  was  a  construction  of the first amendment,  whereas
Lochner rested on  the due  process  clause; and  that distinction  may turn
out to  be  important. 55  But whether  or  not Buckley  was  rightly  decided,
it has  much  in  common  with Lochner.

B.  Defining Liberty  and Property

The due  process  clause accords  procedural protection  to  "liberty"
and  "property,"  terms  that  the Court  has  had  some  difficulty  defining
in  recent  years. 56  The  principal  problems  have  arisen  in  deciding
which,  if any,  statutory  benefits-those  said  to  be  "conferred  by  the

53.  Nicholson,  Buckley  v.  Valeo:  The  Constitutionality  of  the  Federal  Election
Campaign Act  Amendments  of 1974,  1977 Wis.  L.  Rev.  323,  336  (quoting Buckley,  424
U.S.  at 49).

54.  424 U.S.  at 48-49.
55.  See infra  notes  190-203  and  accompanying  text.
56.  See,  e.g.,  Monaghan,  Of "Liberty"  and  "Property,"  62  Cornell  L.  Rev.  405
(1977);  Stewart  & Sunstein,  Public  Programs  and  Private  Rights, 95  Harv.  L. Rev.  1193
(1982);  Van Alstyne,  Cracks  in the New  Property,  62  Cornell  L. Rev.  445  (1977).

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

885

goverment"-are  entitled  to  procedural protection. 5 7  For a long pe-
riod the Court concluded  that some benefits were  "created"  by the gov-
ernment,  whereas  other benefits  were  not.  Only  the latter-generally
interests  protected  by  the  common  law-were  entitled  to  procedural
protection.  In  the wake of an assault  on this  position, rejecting Lochner-
like  baselines  deriving  from  common  law,58  the  Court  has  apparently
concluded  that  statutory  benefits  will  sometimes  be  considered  "lib-
erty"  or  "property"-  but  only  when  there  is  a  statutory  entitlement,
defined  as a  limitation on  the administrator's  discretion  to provide  the
benefit  in  question. 59

Lochner-like  premises  powerfully  influence  this  debate.  For  the
most part, liberty and property are defined  by reference  to  the common
law.60 
Interests  protected  at  common  law-including  most  promi-
nently  the right  to  private  property,  the  right  to  bodily  integrity,  and
other  rights  protected  in  the Lochner era-are  axiomatically  entitled to
protection.  The  difficulties  arise  with  other  sorts  of rights,  including
the right to  freedom  from  discrimination,  the right to  government  em-
ployment, and the right to welfare.  The statutory  entitlement approach
is  based  on  a  partial  rejection  of Lochner-era understandings.  But  the
Court's  failure to  put benefits  said to  be  created by  the government  on
the  same  footing with  benefits  said  to  be  "natural"  is  a  clear  holdover
from the Lochner period.  The distinction itself treats  the common law as
unchosen  and  statutory benefits  as  a form of "intervention"-the  same
choice  of baseline  that  affected  the Lochner Court.  An  alternative  ap-
proach  would  have been  to  select liberty  and property interests  by ref-
erence  to  some  criterion  of importance  independent  of the  common
law,  or  at least  not  determined  by  common  law  categories. 6 1

Similar  issues  have  arisen  as  a  matter  of substantive  due  process.

57.  See  Cleveland  Bd.  of  Educ.  v.  Loudermill,  470  U.S.  532  (1985);  Arnett  v.

Kennedy,  416 U.S.  134  (1974);  Board  of Regents  v.  Roth,  408  U.S.  564  (1972).

58.  See  Goldberg  v. Kelly, 397  U.S.  254  (1970);  Reich, The  New Property,  73 Yale

LJ.  733  (1963).

59.  See  Cleveland  Bd.  of Educ. v.  Loudermill,  470  U.S.  at 538-42.
60.  See,  e.g.,  Ingraham  v.  Wright,  430  U.S.  651  (1977)  (bodily  integrity).  For  a
recent  statement,  see  Easterbrook,  Substance  and Due  Process,  1982  Sup.  Ct. Rev.  85,
which  draws a sharp  distinction between common  law and  statutory interests  and which
understands  the  distinction  in Lochner-like  terms,  as  responding  to  the  differences  be-
tween  interests  created by  government  and  interests  from  some  other source.

Sometimes,  however,  the  statutory entitlement  approach has  been  used  to remove
even common law interests  from the category of liberty and  property.  See Paul v.  Davis,
424 U.S.  693  (1976).  Note  also that  it would  be possible  to treat  common law interests
as protected  only because and  to the extent  that they can be classified  as "entitlements";
under  this  view,  the  statutory  entitlement  and  common  law  cases  are  closer  than  they
might at first appear.  But this  sort of positivist approach  to liberty and  property miscon-
ceives  the intended  function  of the  due  process  clause,  which  was to  protect  important
interests  from  procedural  irregularity,  regardless  of whether  there  was  a state-created
right.  See  Monaghan,  supra  note 56, at 433-34,  442-43.

61.  See  Stewart & Sunstein,  supra note 56,  at 1257-58, for a  discussion of the  diffi-

culties  produced  by  such  an  approach.

886

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

In Flemming v.  Nestor,6 2 the Court concluded  that social  security benefits
were not constitutionally  protected  "property. ' 6 3  The same conclusion
has  been reached  elsewhere,  as courts  have  concluded  that government
may eliminate  benefits  of its own  creation-where  that notion  is defined
by  reference  to  the  common  law.64  The  failure  to  accord  substantive
protection  to statutory  benefits derives  from Lochner era  distinctions be-
tween  common  law  interests  and  other  benefits.  Similarly,  the  con-
straints  of  Article  III  have  been  administered  under  Lochner-like
premises.  The  Court  is  less  likely  to  require  an  Article  III  tribunal
when  a  right  created  by  Congress  is  at  stake.  The  common  law  thus
defines  a  large  amount  of  the  territory  captured  by  Article  III
requirements.6 5

C.  State Action

The  state action  doctrine  is  a product  of an  (uncontroversial)  un-
derstanding  that  the  Constitution  is  directed  to  acts  of government
rather  than  acts  of  private  individuals.  But  how  does  one  decide
whether  government  is  "acting"?  The  legal  test  could  in  theory  de-
pend on  whether  government  agents  are  involved  in  the process.  But
as  the  dispute  provoked  by  such  cases  as  Shelley  v.  Kraemer6 6  makes
clear,  such  a  test  would  be  inadequate.  State  officials  are  involved  in
the  enforcement  of private  contract,  tort,  and  property  law  every  day,
and their involvement  does  not subject all private  arrangements  to con-
stitutional  constraints.  Instead,  state  action  doctrine  has  always  de-
pended  on  a  baseline  establishing  the  legitimate  or  at  least  ordinary
functions  of government.  And in  setting forth  such a theory,  and using
it as  the basis  of inquiry, courts have  not merely searched  for state "ac-
tion,"  but instead  relied on common  law  baselines like  those in Lochner.
For example,  the Constitution  is frequently  said  to  be  a charter  of
"negative"  rather than  "positive"  rights. 67  This  understanding  can  be
found in  a number of areas  of state action  doctrine.  When  the govern-
ment  fails  to  provide  protection  against  private  racial  discrimination,
the  failure is  said  not to  be  "state  action"  and  thus  raises  no  constitu-
tional  question. 68  Nongovernmental  discrimination  is  created  by  the
private  rather  than  the public  sphere.  So  too,  no  constitutional  ques-

62.  363  U.S.  603  (1960).
63.  Id. at  608-11.
64.  See  United  States  R.R.  Retirement  Bd.  v.  Fritz,  449  U.S.  160  (1980).
65.  The  point  emerges  explicitly  in  Northern  Pipeline  Constr.  Co.  v.  Marathon
Pipeline  Co.,  458  U.S.  50  (1982);  see  also  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Comm'n  v.
Schor,  106  S. Ct. 3245  (1986);  Thomas  v.  Union  Carbide Agric'l  Prods.  Co.,  473  U.S.
568  (1985).

66.  334  U.S.  1 (1948)  (invalidating racially  restrictive  covenant).
67.  See,  e.g.,  Currie,  Positive  and  Negative  Constitutional  Rights,  53  U.  Chi.  L.

Rev.  864  (1986).

68.  Reitman  v.  Mulkey,  387  U.S.  369,  374-77  (1967);  see  Black,  "State  Action,"
Equal  Protection,  and  California's  Proposition  14,  81  Harv.  L.  Rev.  69  (1967);  Karst  &

1987]

LOCHNER 'S LEGACY

887

tion  is  raised  when  private  property  owners  deny  the public  access  to
their  property.  As  the  Court  held  in  Hudgens  v.  NLRB, 69  the  first
amendment  is  not violated  when landowners  invoke  state  trespass  law
in  order to prevent  picketers  from displaying  their messages  on private
lands.  All  of these  issues  are  resolved  by  the  choice  of a  Lochner-like
baseline  of government  "inaction,"  one  that  appears neutral  and  natu-
ral.  Neither enforcement  of the trespass  law nor repeal  of laws  forbid-
ding  private  discrimination  is  taken  as  state action-a  conclusion  that
relies  upon  common  law  notions  about  the role  of government.

But  consider  PruneYard Shopping Center v.  Robins.70  That  case  in-
volved  a decision  by  the California  Supreme  Court  extending  rights  of
free  speech,  under  the  state  constitution,  so  as  to  permit  people  to
picket on privately owned  shopping centers.  The  shopping center own-
ers invoked  the due process  and takings  clauses  as  a bar  to  the abroga-
tion  of  their  property  rights,  as  those  rights  had  been  understood
before  the California  court's decision.  The  Supreme  Court  upheld  the
abrogation,  but left no doubt that the partial abrogation  of the state law
of trespass  was  "state  action"  sufficient  to  call  for  constitutional  scru-
tiny.  Indeed,  a fair reading  of the opinion  is  that  some  abrogations  of
state  trespass  law  would  amount  to  an unconstitutional  taking-a  con-
clusion that should  be unexceptionable.  Property  rights  are  defined  by
state  law.  Abrogation  of trespass  law,  either  with respect  to  particular
persons  or across-the-board,  is  ordinarily  the central  meaning  of a  tak-
ing  of property.

Why did the abrogation  of trespass law  in PruneYard appear uncon-
troversially  to  be  state  action,  while  application  of the  same  law  was
understood  to  be  no  such  thing  in  Hudgens?  Indeed,  which  case  in-
volved  "action,"  and which  "inaction"?  At  first  glance,  the invocation
of a trespass  law  might seem more plausibly  to be  action  than the abro-
gation  or  removal  of the  very  same  law.  The  cases  confirm  that  the
state  action  inquiry  is  not  a  search  for  whether  the  state  has  "acted,"
but  instead  an  examination  of whether  it  has  deviated  from  functions
that  are  perceived  as  normal  and  desirable.  And  that  examination  is
powerfully  influenced  by  the  common  law;  thus  it  is  the  abrogation
rather  than  the enforcement  of a  trespass  law  that  appears  to  be  state
action.  The baseline,  in short, has been  defined in  terms that  are remi-
niscent  of that in Lochner.

It will  be useful to return to the treatment of private racial discrimi-
nation.  There  is  general  agreement,  at  least  in  the  courts, 7 1  that  no
constitutional  question  is  raised  if a  state  fails  to  provide  protection

Horowitz,  Reitman v. Mulkey:  A Telophase  of Substantive  Equal Protection,  1967 Sup.
Ct.  Rev.  39.

69.  424  U.S.  507,  512-21  (1976).
70.  447  U.S.  74,  82-85  (1980).
71.  But see Black, supra  note 68,  at 83-91;  Karst  & Horowitz,  supra  note 68  (relat-

ing Reitman  to an  "expanding  concept"  of equality  and  state  responsibility).

COLUMBIA  LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

from private racial discrimination,  or if a state repeals  a  statute that had
provided  such protection.  This  understanding  is  made  explicit  in  one
of the most vexing of modem  state action cases,  Reitman v.  Mulkey. 72  At
issue  in Reitman  was  a  California  constitutional  amendment  providing
that  no  state  statute  may  be  enacted  that  interferes  with  the  private
right  to  sell  property  to  whomever  the property  owner  chooses.  By  a
five-to-four  vote, the  Court  invalidated  the amendment  on the  ground
that its  purpose  and  effect were  to  encourage  private  racial  discrimina-
tion.  But  the  Court  was  careful  to  emphasize  that  the  amendment
stood on a very  different footing from a  "mere"  failure  to provide pro-
tection  against  private  racial  discrimination. 73  For  purposes  of  the
Constitution,  PruneYard appeared  an  easy  case,  and  the  failure  to  pro-
vide  protection  against  trespass  was  obviously  state  action;  whereas
Reitman was  quite difficult,  and  the failure to provide  protection against
racial discrimination  was  obviously not state action.  What  accounts for
this?

The  answer  lies  in  the fact  that  the  search  for  state  action  can  be
made coherent only against a background  normative theory of the legit-
imate  or normal  activities  of government.  Without  such  a  theory,  the
search is unguided.  It is only  because  of the persistence of Lochner-like
theory  that state  action  was  uncontroversially  at stake  in PruneYard but
difficult  to  find  in Reitman v.  Mulkey. 74  In PruneYard, there  was  a  devia-
tion from the common  law baseline.  In a case  in which  the state fails  to
provide protection  against racial  discrimination,  or  enforces  the  law  of
trespass,  there is  not.  In  state action doctrine,  as  in  the Lochner period,
the  common  law  provides  the  benchmark  from  which  to  measure
intervention.

D.  Affirmative Rights:  Of Welfare and Others

For the last  two  decades  there  has been  considerable  debate  about
the  existence  of affirmative  rights  against  government. 75  The  conven-
tional  wisdom, 76  referred  to  above,  has  it  that  the  Constitution  is  a
charter  of  negative  guarantees-rights  against  government  interfer-
ence-and  that  "affirmative"  rights  are  exceptional  or  nonexistent.
Thus  it is  said  that  government  may  not intrude  on  private  rights,  but
there  is  no  claim  against  the  government  if it  has  failed  to  act.  The
basic  position has  resulted in rejection  of claims  to various  public  serv-

72.  387  U.S.  369  (1967).
73.  Id.  at 373-77.
74.  The  distinction  may be defended,  however,  because  of the  difference  between
the  first amendment and  the  equal protection  clause; different  provisions  may repudiate
or incorporate  Lochner-like principles.  See  infra notes  190-203  and accompanying  text.
75.  See,  e.g., Currie,  supra note 67; Michelman,  Welfare Rights  in  a  Constitutional
Democracy,  1979  Wash.  U.LQ. 659; Winter,  Poverty,  Economic  Equality and  the Equal
Protection  Clause,  1972  Sup.  Ct. Rev.  41.

76.  Currie,  supra note  67; Winter,  supra  note  75.

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

ices,  ranging from  police protection  to  welfare.  Perhaps  the most well-
known example  is  Harris v.  McRae,77  in  which  the plaintiffs  challenged
the  government's  failure  to  fund  abortions  needed  by  poor  women.
The  Court  held  that  government  had  no  duty to  remove  barriers  "not
of its  own  creation."' 78  The  idea  is  that  poverty  is  simply  "there";  it is
not a  product  of government  action.  By  now it  should  be  easy  to  see
that this  idea depends  on Lochner-like definitions  of neutrality,  inaction,
and  appropriate  baselines.

There is,  however,  a peculiarity  in the notion that  the Constitution
does  not guarantee "affirmative  rights."  We have  seen that  the takings
clause  protects  against  repeals,  partial  or  total,  of  the  trespass  laws.
When a  state  abrogates  the  law  of trespass,  it is  removing what  might
be seen  as  "affirmative"  protection;  but its  action  does  not become  for
that reason  constitutionally  acceptable.  The  protection  of private  con-
tracts  can  be  understood  in  similar  terms.  The  contracts  clause
amounts  to  a  right to  state  enforcement  of contractual  agreements;  if
the state fails  to protect  by refusing  to  enforce a  contract, it is violating
the  clause.

Here  and  elsewhere,  it is  misleading  to  understand  the  Constitu-
tion  solely  as  a guarantor  of "negative"  rights.  The  Constitution  pro-
tects  some  rights  and  not  others.  Whether  rights  are  treated  as
"negative"  or  "positive"  turns  out  to  depend  on  antecedent  assump-
tions  about  baselines-the  natural  or  desirable  functions  of govern-
ment.  State protection  of private property  and contract appears  to be a
"negative"  guarantee  because  it is  so  usual,  indeed built  into  the  very
concepts  of property and  contract. 79  Provision of welfare is  treated dif-
ferently  because  it is  in  some  respects  new  and  in  any  event  hedged
with  limitations  and  reservations.  Here  Lochner's premises,  having  to
do with  neutrality  and  inaction,  account  critically  for current  constitu-
tional  doctrine  with respect  to  "affirmative"  rights.

All  this  sheds  some  light on  claims  of a constitutional  right to  "af-
firmative"  protection.  Viewed  through  the  lens  of the  Lochner period,
claims  for  "positive  rights"  cannot  be  dismissed  by  reference  to  the
"negative"  character  of  constitutional  guarantees  or  the  word  "de-
prive"  in  the  fourteenth  amendment.  Whether  there  is  a  deprivation
depends  on antecedent conceptions  of entitlement;  if there  were a pre-
existing  right  to  welfare,  the  failure  to  provide  it  would  in  fact  be  a
deprivation.  In  these  circumstances  one  might  argue  that  there  have
always  been  constitutional  rights  to  certain  kinds  of positive  guaran-
tees,  and  that in the modern era  the right to a minimal level of material
goods,  like  the  right  to  protection  against  trespass,  has  constitutional
status.  In  mature  form,  this  argument  would  be  quite  elaborate,  and

77.  448  U.S.  297  (1980).
78.  Id. at 316.
79.  See  Currie,  supra  note 67,  at 864-67.

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

(Vol. 87:873

for  present  purposes  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  whether  the  argument
might  be  made  persuasive.8 0  It should  suffice  to  suggest  that cases  re-
jecting so-called  "affirmative"  rights  depend  on Lochner-like  premises.

E.  Takings and Contractual Impairments

The most  conspicuously  Lochner-like provisions  in the  Constitution
are  the  contracts  and  takings  clauses,  especially  in  their  incorporation
of the  status  quo  and  of common  law  principles.  The  takings  clause,
protecting  private  property,  provides  the  analytical  foundations  for
Lochner itself.  And it is hard  to  read the provision without  accepting,  at
least  to  some  degree,  certain  premises  about  neutrality,  inaction,  and
common  law  baselines.  The  contracts  clause  protects  a  species  of pri-
vate  property;  it thus  grows  out of the same framework  as Lochner.  But
in the last fifty years,  the constraints  of the contracts  and takings clauses
have  been  significantly  curtailed,  in  part for  the  same  reasons  that led
to  the  abandonment  of Lochner itself.  These  developments  suggest,
among  other  things,  that  text  and  animating  purposes  have  been  far
from  central  to  decisions  about  whether  to  rely  on  Lochner-like
principles.

The decline  of the contracts  clause has  been  a subject of increasing
modern  controversy.  The clause  provides  that no  state  shall  enact  any
law  "impairing  the  obligations  of contracts."  For  a  long  period  the
clause operated  as a significant barrier  to government action; the clause
is  now for  the most part8 l  a  dead  letter.  How might  this  development
be  explained?

The answer  lies  in the dramatic  expansion  of the police  power-in
short,  from  an  understanding  based  on  Lochner to  one  rooted  in  West
Coast Hotel.  For a long period  the  contracts  clause has  permitted  states
to  abrogate  contracts  so  long as  they  are  operating  within  the  "police
power."  If a  state  bans  the sale  of heroin,  and  the ban  applies  retroac-
tively  to  prevent  enforcement  of a  contract,  there  is  no  constitutional
problem.8 2  The  reserved  powers  of the  state,  it is  said,  operate  as  an
implicit limitation  on  the power  to  contract.  But if the police power  is
understood  in Lochner-like terms,  there  is  still  enormous  room  for im-
munity  from  legislative  interference-a  claim  demonstrated  by  the  in-
terpretation  of the  contracts  clause  for  much  of the nation's  history.8 3

80.  See  Black,  Further  Reflections  on  the  Constitutional  Right  of Livelihood,  86
Colum.  L.  Rev.  1103  (1986);  Michelman,  Foreword:  On  Protecting  the Poor Through
the Fourteenth  Amendment, 83  Harv.  L. Rev. 7  (1969);  S.  Holmes, Liberal  Guilt:  Some
Theoretical  Origins  of the Welfare State in Responsibility,  Rights  and Welfare  (D. Moon
ed. forthcoming  1987).

81.  The  qualification 

is  necessary  because  of  Allied  Structural  Steel  Co.  v.

Spannaus, 438  U.S.  234  (1978)  (invalidating statute on  contract  clause  grounds).

82.  See  Manigault  v.  Springs,  199  U.S.  473  (1905).  The  Court  might,  however,

have  decided  that  there  was a  requirement  of compensation.

83.  See  G. Gunther,  Constitutional  Law:  Cases  and  Materials  487-90  (11th  ed.

1985).

19871

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

In Home Building Loan Association v.  Blaisdell,84  however,  the  Court read
the police  power  very  broadlyv-thus  replicating  the  outcome  in  West
Coast Hotel and  rendering  the  contracts  clause  functionally  identical  to
the due  process  clause.

Similar  developments  occurred  under  the law  of eminent  domain.
Here  Lochner-like  premises  might  be  expected  in two  places:  the  inter-
pretation  of the "public  use"  requirement  and  of the police  power  ex-
ception  to  the compensation  requirement.  The public use requirement
traditionally  meant  that  the  property  had  actually  to  be  used  by  the
public.8 5  But  gradually  the requirement  was  expanded  to  refer to  any
plausible  public justification,  including  those  that  are  redistributive  in
character.8 6  Thus  it  is  said  that  the  public  use  requirement  has  been
rendered  effectively  unenforceable,  much  like  the  rationality  require-
ment  of the  due  process  clause  post-Lochner.

Moreover,  the  police  power  exception  to  the  eminent  domain
clause  immunizes  various  regulatory  measures  from  constitutional  at-
tack,  even  if they  diminish  the  value  of property.  An  actual  physical
invasion of property is  often a prerequisite  for a finding of a "taking." 8 7
All  this  is  a  product  of an  abandonment  of Lochner-like baselines.  It
would  be  difficult,  however,  to  abandon  those  baselines  altogether
without  reading  the  contracts  and  takings  clauses  out  of the  Constitu-
tion; in  nature,  those  provisions  are  Lochner-like, though  their  scope  is
uncertain.8 8  The  narrowing  of the  scope  of the  contracts  clause  has
almost  converted  it into  a constitutional redundancy;  the takings  clause
is  still  important  in  the  context  of physical  invasions.

F. Judicial Review  of Agency  Inaction

One of the most important  issues  in modern  administrative  law  is
whether  inaction  by  administrative  agencies,  defined  as  the  failure  to
enforce regulatory  statutes,  should be  subject  to the  same  standards  as
administrative  action,  defined  as  regulatory  enforcement.  Under  the
traditional  approach,  agency  action  is  subject  to  a  strong presumption
of reviewability.89  Much  of administrative  law  grows  out  of an  under-

84.  290 U.S.  398  (1934).
85.  See  Dunham,  Griggs  v.  Alleghany  County  in  Perspective:  Thirty  Years  of

Supreme  Court  Expropriation  Law,  1962  Sup.  Ct. Rev.  63,  66.

86.  See, e.g., Hawaii Hous. Auth. v. Midkiff, 467 U.S.  229,  239-48 (1984);  Poletown
Neighborhood  Council  v.  City  of  Detroit,  410  Mich.  616,  304  N.W.2d  455  (1981);
Dunham,  supra  note  85,  at  66-71;  Note,  The  Public  Use  Limitation  on  Eminent  Do-
main:  An  Advance  Requiem,  58  Yale  LJ. 599  (1949).

87.  See,  e.g.,  Penn  Central  Transp.  Co.  v.  New  York  City, 438  U.S.  104,  130-31
(1978).  An  interesting example  here  is Pacific  Gas  & Elec. Co.  v. Public  Util. Comm'n,
106  S. Ct. 903  (1986),  in  which  the  Court dealt  with  the  question  of  "ownership"  of
extra space in a billing envelope.  The discussion of the plurality, id. at 912-13,  assumed
a prepolitical  property  right in the  relevant  utility.

88.  See infra notes  193-95  and  accompanying  text.
89.  See, e.g.,  Abbott  Laboratories  v.  Gardner, 387  U.S.  136,  139-41  (1967).

COLUMBIA  LA W  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

standing that government may interfere  with common  law rights  only if
it has  been  authorized  to  do  so  by  the legislature. 90  Judicial  review  is
necessary  to  test  the  question  of authorization.

Under  this  framework,  there is  little room  for review  at the behest
of beneficiaries  of statutes.  In  such  suits,  no  common  law  right  is  at
stake.  This  framework  accounts  for  conventional  limitations  on  the
class of persons  entitled to  obtain  "standing"  to review agency action 9
and also for a longstanding presumption against reviewability of agency
inaction.9 2  In  the  last  decade,  there  has  been  a  substantial  trend
against  this  traditional  understanding, 93  as  beneficiaries  of regulatory
programs  have  been  allowed  to  challenge  unlawful  agency  inaction.

In  its recent  decision  in Heckler v.  Chaney,94  however,  the Supreme
Court held  that agency  inaction  should  be presumed  unreviewable.  In
so holding, the Court emphasized  that "when  an agency refuses  to act it
generally  does  not exercise its coercive power  over an individual's  liberty
or property  rights,  and  thus  does  not  infringe  upon  areas  that  courts
often  are  called  upon  to  protect." 95

This  understanding  is  a  direct  modern  analogue  to  Lochner.  In
both cases,  deviations  from the common  law status  quo demand  special
justification.  In Heckler, as in Lochner, it is government interference  with
the  common  law  allocation  that  is  subject  to  legal  concern.  Govern-
mental  "inaction"  is  treated  as neutral  and  legally  unobjectionable;  in-
deed,  it  does  not  furnish  a  predicate  for judicial  intervention.  In  the
context  of administrative  law,  this  phenomenon  is  especially  striking.
The  rise of the modern  administrative  state was  based  largely  on a  re-
jection of common law  ordering.  For the proponents  of the administra-
tive  agency,  the  common  law  system  was  hardly  unchosen  or  neutral,
but  was  instead  highly  partisan9 6-a  perception  shared,  as  we  have
seen, by the Court in  West  Coast Hotel and  also in Erie.  Regulatory inter-
vention was  based  largely on a substantive rejection  of the common law

90.  See J.  Vining, Legal  Identity  (1978);  Stewart,  The  Reformation  of American

Administrative  Law,  88 Harv.  L.  Rev.  1667,  1672-73  (1975).

91.  See,  e.g.,  Alabama  Power Co.  v.  Ickes,  302  U.S.  464, 478  (1938).
92.  See,  e.g.,  Vaca  v.  Sipes,  386  U.S.  171,  181-83  (1967).
93.  See,  e.g.,  Dunlop  v.  Bachowski,  421  U.S.  560  (1975);  Carpet,  Linoleum  &
Resilient  Tile  Layers  Local  419  v.  Brown,  656  F.2d  564  (10th  Cir.  1981);  Adams  v.
Richardson,  480 F.2d  1159  (D.C.  Cir.  1973);  EDF  v.  Ruckelshaus,  439  F.2d  584  (D.C.
Cir.  1971).

94.  470  U.S.  821  (1985).
95.  Id.  at  832.  Other  considerations,  quite  independent  of  Lochner,  might  be
brought  forth  to  support  distinctions  between  review  of agency  action  and  review  of
agency  inaction.  In  particular,  review of inaction  implicates  concerns  having  to do with
scarce  prosecutorial  resources,  which  make judicial  review  for arbitrariness  harder  to
undertake.  For  a  discussion  of such  considerations,  see  Sunstein,  Reviewing  Agency
Inaction  after Heckler v.  Chaney, 52 U.  Chi.  L. Rev.  653  (1985).

96.  See,  e.g., J.  Landis,  The Administrative  Process  31-39  (1938);  see  also  Hale,
supra  note 51  (criticizing  the view that government's  proper role is limited  to  protecting
private  property  rights).

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

system.  Administrative  law  doctrines,  rooted in  traditional  private law,
thus  continue  to reflect Lochner-like premises  despite  the repudiation  of
those  premises  during  the  rise of the administrative  state.

G.  Standing

Similar  considerations  apply  to  the  problem  of standing.  Origi-
nally,  only those  whose  common  law  interests were  at stake  had  stand-
ing  to  challenge  administrative  action.  Thus  the  requirement  of  a
"legal  interest"  meant,  at its  inception,  that a  litigant  must  be  able  to
show  that an interest protected  by the common law was  at stake.9 7  This
test was built on an analogy  to private  law.  Those  adversely  affected by
illegality  could not always  challenge  it; it was  necessary  to show  that the
defendant  violated  some  duty  owed  to  plaintiff.  Thus  the  issues  of
standing, of a  cause  of action,  and  of a persuasive  claim  on  the merits
were  inextricably  intertwined,  in  a  system  of public  law  that  owed  its
origin  and  shape  to  common  law  understandings.

Eventually  the Court recognized  that  an interest protected  by  stat-
ute could also form the predicate  for standing.9 8  Thus  competitors and
regulatory beneficiaries  might have  standing  to sue  if they had  an inter-
est protected  by  statute.  Finally,  in Association of Data Processing Service
Organization v.  Camp,99  the  Supreme  Court  rejected  the  legal  interest
test altogether,  requiring  only an injury  "in fact"  and  "arguably  within
the  zone"  of statutory  protection  in  order  to  test  administrative  ac-
tion.1 0 0  The Data Processing decision  has  been celebrated  as a  rejection
of private property as  the predicate  for judicial  intervention  in favor  of
an approach  that calls  on  courts  to ensure  the identification  and imple-
mentation  of public values.101

In  three  ways,  however,  modem  standing  doctrine  still  contains
principles  from the common  law.  First,  the requirement  of an  injury in
fact  is  often justified on  the  ground  that  officious  intermeddlers  ought
not  to be  permitted  to  disrupt mutually advantageous  relationships.10 2
This  idea is  a direct  analogue  to  the common  law view  insofar as  it un-
derstands  public  law  cases  in  right-duty  terms.  Second,  the notion  of
judicial  restraint  in  the  law  of standing  often  has  built  into  it  a  tacit
distinction  between  the  interests  of regulatory  beneficiaries  and  those
of regulated  industries.  The former, it is  said, are  for the political  pro-
cess  rather  than  the courts;  the judicial  role is  said  to be  the protection
of traditional private  rights-a Lochner-like understanding.10 3  This  rea-

97.  See Alabama  Power  Co. v. Ickes,  302 U.S.  464  (1938);  Stewart, supra  note 90,

at  1723-24.

98.  See Chicago Junction Case,  264 U.S.  258  (1924).
99.  397  U.S.  150  (1970).
100.  Id.  at  153-57.
101.  SeeJ. Vining,  supra note  90, at  27-33,  38-41,  179-81.
102.  See Stewart,  supra  note 90,  at  1739.
103.  See Allen v. Wright, 468 U.S.  737,  750-52  (1984).

COLUMBIA  LA  W RE VIEW

[Vol.  87:873

soning is not a  tribute  to  "judicial restraint"  in  the abstract,  but distin-
guishes  between  two  categories  of interests  in  terms  of the respective
roles of politics  and courts.10 4  This distinction  should  be quite  contro-
versial;  it is held over from the Lochner era and its premises were repudi-
ated  during  the New  Deal.

Finally,  the  Court  has  recently  used  various  requirements  of
"nexus"  as  a  basis  for  denying  standing.' 0 5  Thus  the  plaintiff  must
show  that his  injury is  attributable  to  the defendant's  conduct and  that
the injury  is likely to be remedied  by a decree  in his favor.  In such cases
the  categorization  of the injury  is  critical;  the Court  has  frequently  re-
fused  to  recognize  probabilistic  or systemic  harms  and  instead  has  re-
quired  a  showing  of  the  sort  required  by  traditional  private  law. 10 6
Such  cases  express  an understanding  that  the distinctive judicial  role  is
to  protect  traditional  sorts  of legal  harms.  In  these  respects,  standing
doctrine,  even  in  the  era  following  Data Processing, continues  to  be
based  on Lochner-like conceptions  of the role  of the courts. 10 7

H.  Racial Discrimination

The law  of racial discrimination  is  centrally  affected  by Lochner-like
premises,  but  here  the  similarity  to  Lochner lies,  not  in  the  use  of the
common  law, but in  notions  of action  and  inaction  and in  the importa-
tion  of  the  status  quo  and  the  existing  distribution  of  wealth  and
entitlements.

In  particular,  three  areas  of modem  discrimination  law  reflect  a
debate  between  conceptions  that can  be traced  to Lochner and  West Coast
Hotel respectively.  The same  debate  can  be  found in an  earlier genera-
tion,  during  the  discussion  of the decision  in  Brown v.  Board of Educa-
tion,10 8  and  indeed  in  the most  famous  use  of the  term  "neutrality"  in
constitutional  scholarship.  In  Toward Neutral Principles of Constitutional
Law, 10 9  Professor  Herbert Wechsler  criticized  the opinion  in Brown on
the ground  that the Court had not supplied  a  "neutral" justification  for
the result.  In Wechsler's view,  the decision  provided  a conflict between
the  desire  of blacks  to  attend
two  sorts  of associational  preferences: 

104.  This  approach  is  especially  questionable  when  the  legal  claim  is  statutory
rather  than constitutional;  in  such  cases,  statutory beneficiaries  have  already  won in  the
political  process.  See  Wright, 468 U.S.  at 737.

105.  See id.;  Eastern  Kentucky  Welfare  Rights  Org.  v.  Simon,  426 U.S.  26  (1976);

Warth  v.  Seldin,  422  U.S.  490  (1975).

106.  See  Wright, 468  U.S. at  737;  Simon,  426  U.S.  at 26;  Warth, 422  U.S.  at 490.
107.  There  is an  irony  here.  Case-or-controversy  limitations  were  originally based
largely  on  concerns,  associated  with Justice  Frankfurter,  that  "progressive"  programs
should  not readily  be  subject  to judicial  challenge;  the  limitations  were  thus rooted  in
anti-Lochner efforts  to immunize from judicial challenge revisions  in  the common law.  In
recent years,  such limitations  have been used so as to prevent  those  challenging govern-
ment  action  to  do so  if a common  law  interest  is not  at stake.

108.  347  U.S.  483  (1954).
109.  73  Harv.  L.  Rev.  1 (1959).

1987]

LOCHNER 'S LEGACY

895

school  with  whites,  and  the  desire  of whites  to  attend  school  without
blacks.  So  far  as  Wechsler  was  concerned,  no  neutral  principle  had
been  brought  forward  to  permit  a  choice  between  these  two  sets  of
preferences. 010  The decision  depended on  "whose  ox was  gored,"  and
was  thus  not shown  to  be  neutral."'

This  criticism  has a  powerful  Lochner-like dimension.  The  existing
distribution  of  power  and  resources  as  between  blacks  and  whites
should be  taken  by courts  as  simply  "there";  neutrality lies  in  inaction;
it is threatened  when  the Court "takes  sides"  by preferring those disad-
vantaged.  Like the minimum wage legislation in Lochner, and for similar
reasons,  the attack on school segregation appeared  impermissibly  parti-
san  to  some  of Brown's critics.

In  both  cases,  moreover,  the  appropriate  response  derives  from
West  Coast Hotel:  the  existing  distribution  is  not natural  and  does  not
provide  a  neutral  baseline;  it  resulted  in  part  from  government  deci-
sions;  efforts  to  improve  the  lot of the  disadvantaged  fall  comfortably
within  the  police power,  should  not be  treated as  impermissibly  parti-
san, and may even be constitutionally  compelled,  especially  where there
is  racial discrimination  on  the face  of a statute.  Indeed, the notion that
the associational  preferences  of whites  and  blacks  shold  be  treated  the
same  seems  to  have  an  otherworldly  quality.  To  some  degree,  of
course,  Wechsler's  objection  was  institutional.  He  was  requiring  of
courts a justification  of the sort that the Lochner Court required  of legis-
latures.  The  category  of neutral  principles,  as  he  understood  it,  was
analogous  to  the  police  power  as  understood  by  the  Lochner  Court.
Both forbade consideration  of the plight of the disadvantaged  as a suffi-
ciently neutral  or general  reason for action.  But the institutional  differ-
ences  should  not  deflect  attention  from  the  same  basic  normative
foundation.  In  both cases,  "taking  sides"  in favor of the disadvantaged
seemed  impermissibly  partisan." 12

110.  Id.  at 31-34.  Consider  the parallel  to contemporary  debates  over affirmative
action,  where  favoring  blacks  over  whites  is  also  said  to  be  neutral.  See  generally
Strauss,  The  Myth of Colorblindness,  1986  Sup.  Ct. Rev.  99,  for an  argument  that af-
firmative  action  is not  in principle  different  from  nondiscrimination.

111.  Thus  understood,  Wechsler's  view  imposed  sharp  constraints  on  judges.
A  more  modest  formulation  of  the  requirement  of  neutral  principles  is set  out  in
Greenawalt,  The  Enduring  Significance  of Neutral  Principles,  78  Colum.  L.  Rev.  982
(1978),  where  the requirement  is understood  to  be a largely  procedural  injunction  that
judges  conduct  a  kind of internal  Socratic  dialogue.  Wechsler's  view  appeared  to  im-
pose a  substantive constraint, forbidding consideration  of "whose  ox is gored,"  in a  way
that borrows  from  Lochner era conceptions  of neutrality.  Id.  at  1001-13.  The  relation-
ship  between  the  procedural  and  substantive  versions  of the  requirement  of  neutral
principles  precisely  parallels  the  relationship  between  the  modern  requirement  of ra-
tionality  review  and  the  understanding  of the  Lochner Court.  In  both  Wechsler's  view
and  that of the Lochner Court,  impermissible  ends  are ruled  out.

112.  Here,  of  course,  the  problem  does  not  stem  from  use  of  common  law

baselines.

896

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

Similar  considerations  can  be  found,  in  somewhat  different  form,

in  several  areas  of modem  discrimination  law.

1. Affirmative  Action.  -

It  is  now  clear  that  "affirmative  action"-

discrimination  in  favor  of traditionally  disadvantaged  groups-will  be
treated  more  leniently  than  discrimination  against  members  of  such
groups.11 3  But the validity of a particular affirmative  action scheme will
depend  on a  variety  of factors:  the nature  of the institution  that made
the  decision;  the flexible  or  inflexible  character  of the  scheme;  the na-
ture of the harm  to members  of the majority;  and, perhaps  most impor-
to  the  effect  that  the  institution
tant,  the  existence  of  "findings" 
engaging  in affirmative  action  has  discriminated  in  the past. 1 4  The  fi-
nal  factor has  been the most sharply  disputed  among the justices.  The
dispute  centers  on when,  if ever, past  societal  discrimination  is  a suffi-
cient  predicate  for an  affirmative  action  scheme,  or whether  affirmative
action  must be justified by a more particularized  showing  of discrimina-
tory conduct on  the  part of the institution  in question.  Current  indica-
tions  are  that  societal  discrimination  is  insufficient. 51 5

The  constitutional  attack  on  affirmative  action  depends  on  a  per-
ception  that  the  natural  course  is  to  rely  on  market  measures.  The
Constitution, in this  view, requires  government  to allocate  employment
and  other  opportunities  according  to  criteria  that  have  nothing  to  do
with  race.  To  distinguish  discrimination  against  blacks  from  discrimi-
nation  against  whites  is  not  neutral;  it  makes  the  issue  depend  on
"whose  ox  is  gored."  Government  intervention  to  redress  social  dis-
crimination,  or some other harm, is  partisan.  Indeed, the  suggestion in
Adkins-that individuals  should  not  be  singled  out  for  burdens  that
ought to  be placed on the public as a whole-is very  close to  the under-
standing that underlies contemporary  attacks on affirmative  action.  But
if the current position of blacks is  thought not simply to be  "there,"  but
instead  to be a product of past and present social choices,  the argument
for  affirmative  action  becomes  much  more  powerful."t 6  No  require-
ment of "neutrality"  would  be understood  as  mandating  measures  that
are  (or seem)  indifferent to race.  The constitutional  arguments  for and
against affirmative  action  thus track the arguments  for and against mini-
mum  wage legislation.

Indeed,  the  very  term  "affirmative  action"-ironically,  embraced
by  defenders  of the  practice-is  based  on  Lochner-like  premises.  The
term suggests that  indifference  to race  (understood  here as  "inaction")
is  the  natural  course,  that  discriminatory  effects  deriving  from  color-

113.  Johnson  v.  Transportation  Agency  of Santa  Clara  County,  107  S.  Ct.  1442
(1987);  Wygant v.Jackson Bd.  of Educ., 476 U.S. 267  (1986);  Fullilove v. Klutznick,  448
U.S.  448  (1980);  Regents  of the  Univ.  of Calif. v. Bakke,  438  U.S.  265  (1978).

114.  See  cases  cited  supra note  113.
115.  See  Wygant  v. Jackson  Bd.  of Educ.,  476  U.S.  267  (1986).
116.  Cf. Strauss,  supra note  110,  at 100-08  (suggesting that the  antidiscrimination

principle  and  affirmative  action  are  compatible  rather than  conflicting).

1987]

LOCHNER 'S LEGACY

blind  rules  are  simply  "there,"  and  that  something that  counters  those
effects  should  be  labelled  "affirmative."  The  terms  "affirmative"  and
"action"  both rely  on Lochner-like conceptions  of appropriate  baseline;
both understand  respect for the status  quo and the existing distribution
of power  and  resources  as  the  point  of departure  for  constitutional
analysis.  Moreover,  racial discrimination  is objectionable  because of its
purposes  and  effects;  discrimination  against blacks  is  usually  accompa-
nied by racial hostility  on the part of the discriminators,  and its effect is
to perpetuate  the social  subordination of blacks.  Critics  of "affirmative
action"  take  advantage  of the rhetorical  power  of the  notion  of racial
discrimination  in  a  context  in  which  the  reasons  for  that  rhetorical
power-the  purposes  and  effects  of  discrimination-are  not  at  work
and  indeed  argue  in  the  other  direction.  Thus  it  is  that  Lochner-like
premises  infect  the  affirmative  action  controversy.

2.  Discriminatory Effects.  - The  Supreme  Court  has  now  made  it
clear  that  a  showing  of discriminatory  intent  is  necessary  in  order  to
make  out a violation  of the equal  protection  clause.' 17  Discriminatory
effects  are  in  themselves  insufficient.  Thus,  for  example,  if a  facially
neutral  test  for  police  officers  happens  to  exclude  a  disproportionate
number  of blacks,  there is  no equal  protection  problem  even  if the test
has  little  relation  to  capacity  to  perform  the job.

The  Court  has  required  proof  of discriminatory  purpose  in  part
because of a concern that if discriminatory  effects  were enough, numer-
ous government  decisions would  be called  into  constitutional  doubt. 1 18
Wealth  and  opportunities  correlate  with  race;  a  disproportionate
number  of blacks  are  poor,  uneducated,  unable  to  perform  well  on
standard  examinations,  the perpetrators  (and victims) of crimes,  and  so
forth.  Building on private law  models  of culpability, the Court has  thus
concluded  that the Constitution is  violated only when  there  is an intent
to  discriminate,  not  when  discriminatory  outcomes  are  produced  by
government  actions  that  do  not take  race  into  account.

This  understanding  also  depends  on  a  Lochner-like  premise  that
discriminatory  effects  are  simply  "there,"  so that  the course  of neutral-
ity  lies  in  indifference  to  race  (what  appears  and  is  treated  as  inac-
tion).'  19  But if discriminatory  effects  were seen as partly  the product of
past discrimination  by the state,  it would be hard  to  treat them as  natu-
ral  and  unobjectionable.  If  disproportionate  harms  to  blacks  result
from  a  legacy  of discrimination,  a  set  of legal  doctrines  that  treated

117.  See  Washington v.  Davis,  426 U.S.  229  (1976).
118.  The  point is  made explicitly  in  Washington v.  Davis.  See id.  at 239-41.
119.  The  intent  test,  as  set  out  in such  cases  as  Personnel  Adm'r  v.  Feeney,  442
U.S.  256  (1979),  also  disregards  the  phenomenon  of selective  racial  care  and  indiffer-
ence.  Under  Feeney  the  question  is  whether  the  government  actor  made  the  decision
"because  of"  not merely  "in spite of" its racially discriminatory  effects.  Id.  at 279.  But
the  equality question should  be whether  the actor would  have made  the decision  regard-
less of which group was helped and which hurt.  Such an  inquiry would also  turn on intent,  but
it would  call into  question  a larger  number of government  decisions.

898

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

such  harms  as  constitutionally  troublesome  would  hardly  seem  odd.
Doctrine  based  on compensatory  goals would  be a permissible and per-
haps  mandatory  course.

3.  Dejure/defacto. - For  a long  period  it was  unclear  whether  de
facto  segregation  was  a  cause  for  constitutional  concern.1 20  De  facto
segregation,  largely  in  the  North,  is  said  to  arise  from  the  voluntary
choices  of blacks  and whites;  de jure segregation  is  the product of law.
But here, as in the case of affirmative  action, the terminology itself rests
on Lochner-like premises.  The  notion  of de  facto  segregation  suggests
that  segregation  simply  happened;  it  is  "just there."  But  if the  exist-
ence of patterns  of segregation  were seen as an outgrowth  of the legacy
of racial discrimination,  an  attack on "de  facto"  segregation  might have
been  more plausible.  There  may  be  good  reasons  to  immunize  some
kinds  of segregation  from  legal  control,  but  the  doctrinal  distinction
depends  partly  on  understandings  of neutrality  and  inaction  that  are
close  cousins  of Lochner.

I.  Gender Discrimination

In the last two  decades,  the Court has  given  "heightened  scrutiny"
to  discrimination  against women,  invalidating  a wide range  of statutes.
Sometimes  the Court invalidates  statutes  because  they  are  based  on in-
accurate  stereotypes. 1 2'  But  the  difficult  cases  arise  when  the  Court
faces  measures  reflecting  differences  that are in some  sense  real.  Con-
sider,  for  example,  Califano v.  Goldfarb,122  involving  a  statute  allowing
spouses  of men  automatically  to  qualify for social  security benefits,  but
requiring  spouses  of women  to  establish  dependency;  Craig v.  Boren,1 23
invalidating  a  law  prohibiting  boys  from  drinking  alcoholic  beverages
until age twenty-one,  but allowing  girls to  drink at age eighteen;  Missis-
sippi University for Women  v.  Hogan,124  involving a  nursing school limited
to women;  and Rostker v.  Goldberg,125 upholding a law  requiring men but
not women  to register  for  the  military  draft.  In  all  of these  cases,  the
statute  under  attack  responded,  albeit  sometimes  crudely,  to  differ-
ences  between  men  and women  that were  in some  sense  real.  On  what
basis  did  the Court  invalidate  the  first  three  measures?

A clue can  be found in Craig v.  Boren, where  the Court, responding
to  statistics  showing  that  boys  tended  to  be  cited  for  drunk  driving
more  often  than  girls,  said  that  statistical  demonstrations  are  "in ten-
sion with  the normative philosophy that underlies  the  Equal Protection

120.  See  G.  Stone,  L.  Seidman,  C.  Sunstein  & M.  Tushnet,  Constitutional  Law

121.  See  Mississippi  Univ.  for  Women  v.  Hogan,  458  U.S.  718  (1982);  Reed  v.

558-59,  567-75  (1986).

Reed,  404 U.S.  71  (1971).

122.  430  U.S.  199  (1977).
123.  429  U.S.  190  (1976).
124.  458  U.S.  718  (1982).
125.  453  U.S.  57  (1981).

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

Clause."1 26  In all  of these  cases,  the differences,  even  if  "real,"  are not
simply  there, but are at least to  some degree' 27  artifactual:  a product  of
cultural  forces,  including  the  legal  system,  that  have  created  and  per-
petuated  differences  between  the  sexes.  Thus  in  Goldfarb, the  fact that
men  tend  to  be  wage-earners  more  often  than  women  was  not treated
as  exogenous  to  the  legal  system.  Indeed,  the  fact  was  reinforced  as
such,  even  if  in  a  minimal  way,  by  the  very  statute  in  Goldfarb, which
made  the package  of benefits  more  attractive  for men  than  for women
and  tended  to  make  it more  desirable  for  men  to  work.  Thus  in  the
Hogan case,  the Court  said  that the  statute  at issue  "makes  the  assump-
tion  that nursing  is  a field  for women  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy."' 128

Rostker is  a  striking  contrast.  There  the Court  reasoned  that  since
Congress  had  excluded  women  from combat,  the difference  in registra-
tion  requirements  responded  to  "real  differences"  between  men  and
women.  But those  real  differences  were  a product  of law;  it was  a  stat-
ute  that  created  them.  Rostker is  in  this  sense  reminiscent  of a  wide
range  of earlier  cases  failing  to  recognize  the constructed  character  of
gender distinctions  and  upholding  discrimination  because  of a percep-
tion  that  subordination  of women  was  a  part  of nature. 129

With  the  exception  of Rostker,  the  cases  under  discussion  derive
from  a partial rejection  of Lochner-like principles  that would  take gender
differences  as  exogenous  variables,  and would  understand  neutrality  to
lie  in  reasonable  responses  to  those  differences. 130  To  this  extent,  the

126.  429 U.S.  at 204.
127.  Two  qualifications  are necessary  here.  First, it is  not necessary  to ask to  what
degree  gender  differences have a biological  component.  Even if there is such  a compo-
nent,  it hardly justifies  the measures  at issue  in most cases;  it is  by no means  clear that
the legal  system  should  turn biological  differences  into  social  disadvantages.  The point
here  is  that  Lochner-like reasoning would  take  gender  differences  as  a proper  basis  for
legal  differentiation,  no matter their source,  and  that some  of the  current law  of gender
discrimination  is opposed  to such reasoning.  Cf. C.  MacKinnon,  Feminism  Unmodified
(1987)  (discussing ways in which legal system  naturalizes discrimination  against women).
The second problem lies  in deciding when  something is artifactual  or not.  A strong
view  of the lesson  of the Lochner period  is  that everything  is-precisely  because  govern-
ment decisions  not to change matters are,  after all,  decisions.  In this view, qualifications
of the sort in  the  text-suggesting  that gender differences,  poverty,  and  the distribution
of benefits and  burdens along racial lines are "partly"  a product  of the  legal system-are
unnecessary  and  misleading.  Such  qualifications 
themselves  import  Lochner-like
premises.

128.  458  U.S.  at 730.  Compare  the suggestion  inJ. Ely,  supra note 6,  at  153,  that
prejudice is "the  lens  that distorts  reality,"  an understanding  that depends  on the prem-
ise that there  is a prepolitical  reality  that law should  reflect.  See  C.  MacKinnon,  Femi-
nism  Unmodified  40-42  (1987).

129.  See,  e.g.,  Bradwell  v.  Illinois,  83  U.S.  130  (1872)  (Bradley, J.,  concurring).
Note,  however,  that  in  Rostker  the  plaintiffs  had  conceded  the legality  of the  combat
restriction,  so  the  Court's  conclusion  was  perhaps  defensible  in  context.

130.  Cf.  Strauss,  supra  note  110,  at  108-13  (exploring  how  rational  responses  to
racial  differences  might justify  racist classifications).  See  also  the  discussion  of rape  in
Estrich, Rape, 95  Yale LJ.  1087  (1986);  MacKinnon,  Feminism,  Marxism, Method & the
State:  Toward  Feminist Jurisprudence,  8  Signs  635  (1983).

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

law  of gender  discrimination  is an  outgrowth  of ideas  that abandon  the
status  quo as a neutral baseline and instead  rely on a baseline of gender
equality  operating  to  some  extent  as  a  criticism  of the  existing  order.
But  many  areas  of the  law  of gender  discrimination  share Lochner-like
premises.  Consider,  in  addition  to  the Rostker  decision,  cases  finding
discriminatory  effects  insufficient  for  constitutional  invalidation;' 3 1  de-
cisions  permitting  employers  to  exclude  fertile  women  from  employ-
ment  when  actual  or  potential  fetuses  may  be  endangered;13 2  and
Michael M. v.  Sonoma  County Superior Court,133  upholding  distinctions  in
age  for statutory rape.  Above  all, cases  involving discrimination  on  the
basis of actual  or potential  pregnancy,  or control  of reproductive  func-
tions,  are  Lochner-like to  the  extent  that  they  turn  differences  that  are
often regarded as natural into  legal disadvantages.' 3 4  In this  sense, Roe
v.  Wade itself might  be  seen  as  profoundly  anti-Lochner insofar  as  it ac-
corded  to women  the power  to  make  a decision  that  it had  been  previ-
ously  thought was  not  theirs  because  of nature.1 3 5

To  say  that  such  cases  treat  gender  differences  as  real,  when  the
social  and legal  meaning  of those  differences  is  a  decision  of the legal
system, is not necessarily  to say that they  were wrongly  decided.13 6  But
it  is  to  suggest  that  they  depend  on  Lochner-like  premises  about
neutrality.

J. Preferences and the Law

Both  public  and  private  law  generally  take  private  preferences  as
the  appropriate  basis  for  social  choice.  In  private  law,  paternalism
tends  to  be  disfavored,' 3 7  and  the  most  well-known  conceptions  of
public law  understand  the purpose  of legislation  to be  the aggregation

131.  See Personnel  Adm'r v.  Feeney, 442  U.S.  256  (1979).
132.  See generally Becker,  From Muller v.  Oregon to Fetal  Vulnerability  Policies,  53

U.  Chi.  L. Rev.  1219  (1986).

133.  450  U.S.  464  (1981).  Although  the  reasoning  in  Michael  M  depended  on
Lochner-like premises,  the outcome  might be defended  on quite  different  grounds.  See
Olsen,  Statutory  Rape:  A  Feminist  Critique  of Rights  Analysis,  63  Tex.  L.  Rev.  387
(1984).

134.  C.  MacKinnon,  Sexual  Harassment of Working Women  119-27  (1979).
135.  See  Tribe, The  Abortion  Funding Conundrum:  Inalienable  Rights,  Affirma-
tive  Duties,  and  the  Dilemma  of Dependence,  99  Harv.  L.  Rev.  330  (1985).  But  the
general  effort  in  the  law  of gender  discrimination  to  examine  whether  differences  are
.,real,"  or to understand  gender discrimination in terms  of irrational distinctions  reflects
Lochner-like reasoning.

136.  Even if the differences  are in some sense a product of biology, it is hardly clear
that  the  legal  system  should  recognize  them;  it  is  the  legal  system  that  makes  such
differences  count,  and legal  ratification  may  itself be a  form  of discrimination.  See  C.
MacKinnon,  supra note  134,  at 116-27  (discussing  how differences  are  turned  into  dis-
advantages);  L. Tribe, Constitutional  Choices  238-45  (1985).

137.  The most extreme views  come from some law and  economics  and rights-based
theorists.  See R. Epstein, supra  note 5  (presenting Lockean  theory of "takings"  clause);
R. Posner,  Economic Analysis  of Law  (3d ed.  1986).

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

901

of private  preferences.' 3 8  To  this  degree,  preferences  are  treated  in
Lochner-like fashion as  exogenous variables; and legal interferences  with
those preferences  are generally  thought to be  partisan and  illegitimate.
The processes  of preference  formation  and the-possibility  of distorting
factors  are  generally  not a  subject  for legal  inquiry. 13 9

Sometimes,  however,  constitutional  courts  conclude  that  prefer-
ences  are  a product of some kind  of distortion.  Consider, for example,
the constitutional  hostility  to  freedom-of-choice  plans  as  a  remedy for
school  segregation. 140  At  first  glance  it is  hard  to  see  why  such plans
should  be  objectionable,  for they  allow  blacks  and  whites  to  send  their
children  to  whatever  schools  they  prefer.  If the  result  is  continuing
segregation,  the  problem  might  be  thought  to  lie  in  private  choices
rather  than  in  the legal  system.

The  Court's  hostility  to  such  plans  depends  at least  in  part  on  a
conclusion  that  the  preferences  of whites  and  blacks  are  distorted  by
the  history  of discrimination. 14  Blacks  may  prefer  not  to  send  their
children to predominantly  white  schools because of a fear of racial hos-
tility and antagonism.  Whites  may be reluctant  to send their children  to
black schools  because of racial prejudice  brought about at least  in part
through  law.  In  these  circumstances,  the  preferences  are  not  simply
"there"  and  to be taken  as natural;  they  are  a result of legal  structures,
and  remedial  measures  must  take  that into  account.

A  similar issue  is  raised by  Palmore v.  Sidoti,14 2  in  which  the  Court
invalidated  a  child  custody  plan  giving  preferences  to  parents  of the
same  race  as  the child.  The  Court  said  that  the state may  not sanction
racial  prejudice  through  law,  but  it  is  unclear  why  the  Constitution
should  forbid  government  from  taking into  account  the reality  of pri-
vate  racism.  Here  too  the answer  depends  on a  perception  that racism
is  not  simply  exogenous;  it is  a  product  of public  and  private  choices
and is properly subject to legal remedy.  The same  considerations  apply
in  the area  of gender.  What  emerges  is  therefore a  system  that  gener-
ally  treats  preferences  as  exogenous  and  a  proper  basis  for  social

138.  See  Bork,  supra  note  7,  at  2-3;  R.  Dahl,  A  Preface  to  Democratic  Theory

(1956);  R.  Posner, supra  note  137.

139.  See Sunstein,  Legal  Interference  with Private Preferences,  53  U.  Chi.  L. Rev.

1129  (1986).

But note here  that in the Lochner era,  regulation of "morals"  was frequently  permit-
ted  even  outside of the  context of harm  to  others.  In  this sense,  the Lochner Court  did
not  take  all preferences  for granted.  But see Epstein,  Conference  Proceedings,  417  U.
Miami  L. Rev.  49,  74  (1987)  (suggesting that basis  of the regulation  of morals  actually
was  harm to  others).

140.  Green v.  County School Bd.,  391  U.S. 430  (1968).  See Gewirtz,  Choice in the
Transition:  School  Desegregation  and  the  Corrective  Ideal,  86  Colum.  L.  Rev.  728
(1986).

141.  See Gewirtz,  supra note 140, at 745-48.  There is also  a collective  action prob-
lem  here.  Individual  black families  may  rationally decide  not  to  send  their  children  to
white schools,  even  though it would  be in their  interest  if all  black  families  did so.

142.  466  U.S. 429  (1984).

COLUMBIA  LA W  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

choice,  but  that  in  certain  limited  contexts 143  concludes  that  prefer-
ences  reflect relations  of power brought about by, among  other things,
the legal  system  itself.

III.  ABANDONING  LOCHNER

We  have  seen  that Lochner has  many  progeny  in  modern  constitu-
tional law.' 4 4  Sometimes,  as  in Buckley  and  Wygant,  Lochner-like  prem-
ises  are  used  as  a  basis  for  invalidating  government  measures.
Sometimes,  as  in Harris v.  McRae  and  Washington v.  Davis, premises  of
that  sort are used  in  order to  uphold  such  measures.  Nor is  the prob-
lem  limited  to  constitutional  provisions  protecting  individual  rights.
The  structural  provisions  of the Constitution  were  designed  partly  to
protect  private  property  and  liberty  from  government  incursion. 14 5
The  rise  of the modem  administrative  state is  based  largely  on  a  per-
ception  that  aggressive  governmental  action,  repudiating  the common
law,  has  become  necessary. 14 6  One  of the  most  important  tasks  of
modem  constitutional  theory is  to  implement  the  original purposes  of
the structural  provisions in  a time when  traditional  conceptions  of lim-
ited  government  have  been  repudiated. 14 7

The claim  that there is  in many  areas  of current public law  an ana-
lytic  connection  to Lochner is  only descriptive,  and  it does  not necessar-

143.  The  limitation  derives from a fear  that if the  legal  system is  generally permit-
ted  to intervene whenever  preferences  are  "distorted,"  lines will  become difficult or im-
possible  to  draw  and  the  range  of  permissible  interventions  will  be  limitless.  See
Sunstein,  supra note  139,  at  1169-73, for general  discussion;  on  the related problem  of
"false  consciousness,"  see  also J. Elster,  Making  Sense  of Marx  (1984).

144.  The issue  arises  in private  law  as well.  One  might,  for example,  understand
the Coase theorem as above  all a rejection of Lochner-like approaches to such concepts  as
causation,  action,  and  inaction.  Cf. B.  Ackerman,  Reconstructing  American  Law  46-71
(1984)  (discussing  effect  of Coase  theorem  on  the  way  lawyers  structure  the  facts).
Much  private  law  theory  in  the  past  two decades  has attempted  to  come  to  terms  with
the destabilizing  effect of the Coase  theorem-just  as public  law theory  has had  to face
the confusions  produced  by  abandonment  of common  law  baselines.

145.  See  H.  Pitkin,  The  Concept  of  Representation  (1967);  J.  Nedelsky,  Private
Property  and  the American  Conception  of Representative  Government  (1984)  (unpub-
lished manuscript).

146.  See  Sunstein,  Constitutionalism  After the  New Deal,  101  Harv. L.  Rev.  (forth-
coming 1987); J. Landis,  supra  note 96  (rejecting traditional  conceptions  of separation
of powers).

147.  See  Sunstein,  supra  note  146;  B.  Ackerman  & W.  Hassler,  Clean  Coal/Dirty
Air  (1981);  Strauss,  The Place  of Agencies  in  Government:  The  Separation  of Powers
and the  Fourth  Branch,  84  Colum.  L.  Rev.  573  (1984).

Statutory interpretation  is affected  by Lochner-like premises as well-most familiarly
in the  notion  that  "statutes  in derogation  of the common  law  should  be narrowly  con-
strued,"  but in  more  modern approaches  as well.  See,  e.g.,  Easterbrook,  Statutes'  Do-
mains,  50 U. Chi. L. Rev. 533  (1983),  which amounts to an argument that when there are
statutory "gaps,"  courts  should resolve  all doubts  in favor of market ordering.  See  also
Macey,  Promoting  Public-Regarding  Legislation  Through  Statutory  Interpretation:  An
Interest Group  Model,  86 Colum.  L. Rev.  223  (1986)  (defining  factional  tyranny  in part
by reference  to  departures  from  the  common  law).  An  important  task  is  to  develop

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

903

ily argue for doctrinal change.  Indeed, it would be difficult  to imagine  a
constitutional  system  that did not have  some premises  in  common with
Lochner.  The  framers  themselves  shared  those  premises,  and  versions
can  be found  at every  stage of American constitutionalism.  But  the ar-
gument for Lochner-like premises  is conceptual as  well as  historical.  It is
hard to escape  Lochner in  thinking  about this  or any  other legal  system;
its premises  are built into  our language itself. 148  Without some founda-
tions  or  baselines  from  which  to  make  measurements,  legal  analysis
cannot  go forward,  and  in some  cases  it is  hard to  dispute  that under-
standings  like  those reflected  in  the common  law  or  the status  quo  are
the appropriate baseline.  The point is buttressed  by the fact that in any
legal system,  one should  hope for some degree of continuity  over time.
The  current system  owes  its foundations  to  the common  law.  It would
be  most  surprising,  and  probably  undesirable,  to  find  those  founda-
tions  entirely  abandoned.' 4 9

But Lochner was wrongly  decided,  and one of the reasons  that it was
wrong is that it depended  on baselines and  consequent  understandings
of action and  neutrality that were  inappropriate  for constitutional  anal-
ysis.  The  New  Deal  to  a  large  degree  rejected  those  understandings,
and the rejection  has  only partly  found its way  into law.  Which,  if any,
of current  doctrines  should  be  abandoned  for the  same  reason?  How
should  constitutional  law  proceed if it is  to  escape  its  roots in  Lochner-
like reasoning?  It is  difficult  to answer  these  questions  in  the abstract;
whether and how Lochner-like premises  should be rejected  is  too large  a
question  to discuss  as a whole.  This section ventures  some thoughts  on
the relevant  inquiries.

A.  Naturalness and the Problem of Baseline

The Lochner Court  chose  the status  quo, as  reflected  in  market  or-
dering  under the common law  system, as  the baseline  for measurement
of  departures  from  neutrality  and  of action  and  inaction.  There  are

approaches  to  statutory construction  that are not based  on hostility  to departures  from
common  law  categories.

The same  view  is reflected  in  approaches  to administrative  law that  distinguish be-
tween  the  rights  of statutory beneficiaries  and  those  of regulated  class  members.  See
Scalia,  Vermont Yankee:  The APA, the D.C. Circuit, and the  Supreme Court,  1978 Sup.
Ct.  Rev.  345  (suggesting  that  ordinary  concerns  supporting  procedural  safeguards  do
not apply when statutory beneficiaries are  the complainants);  Smith, Judicialization:  The
Twilight  of Administrative  Law,  1985 Duke  L.J.  427  (suggesting that  the principal  con-
cern of administrative  law  is  the  protection  of private  property).

See also  Stewart & Sunstein,  supra note 56; Note, Intent, Clear Statements,  and the
Common  Law:  Statutory  Interpretation  in  the  Supreme  Court,  95  Harv.  L.  Rev.  892
(1982),  for  related  discussions  of  the  use  of  supplemental  principles  in  statutory
construction.

148.  See G.  Lakoff, Women, Fire, and  Dangerous Things:  What Categories Reveal

About  the Mind  (1987).

149.  Cf. Kronman,  Alexander  Bickel's  Philosophy  of Prudence,  94 Yale  L.J.  1567,

1599-1605  (1985)  (suggesting a Burkean  understanding  of the legal  system).

904

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

often  good  reasons  to  abandon  that  baseline,  at  least  as  a  general
rule.15 0  The common law  is not prepolitical;  its conception  of the func-
tion  of the state has  been  repudiated  by  the political  branches  of gov-
ernment,  and  for  good  reasons.  Constitutional  and  statutory
interpretation  is  properly  informed  by  this  repudiation.15 1  Efforts  to
change  the common law  framework are not by virtue  of the fact consti-
tutionally  suspect,  and  measures  that  respect  that  framework  are  not
"inaction"  necessarily  to  be immunized  from legal  scrutiny.  Use  of the
status quo as  a baseline  is. sometimes  objectionable  for similar  reasons.
Consider  the fact that discrimination  on  the basis  of race is responsible
for  the existing  distribution  of benefits  and  burdens  along racial  lines.
If the  baseline  provided  by  the  common  law  or the  status  quo  is
abandoned,  there are two principal alternatives.  One possible response
to  the decline  of Lochner would be  to conclude that constitutional  courts
ought  to play little or no role in deciding whether  the existing  distribu-
tion  of wealth  and  entitlements  should  be  changed.  Associated  with
one  strand  in  the  New  Deal  but presaged  by Holmes'  Lochner opinion,
this view appears  prominently in Learned Hand's lectures  on the Bill of
Rights, 152 James  Landis'  work  on  administrative  law, 153  and  the  opin-
ions  of Justice  Frankfurter.' 5 4

Under  the  Holmesian  view  it  does  not  matter,  for  constitutional
purposes,  whether the state is reaffirming  or rejecting the common law,
or whether  it is  dramatically  changing the existing  allocation  of entitle-
ments  and  power.  The  abandonment  of  common  law  baselines  re-
quires  an abandonment  of baselines altogether,  at least for purposes  of
constitutional  law.  Neutrality  is  not  required  because  it  cannot  be
achieved;  all  legal  categories  are  socially  constructed  and  irreducibly
subjective.' 5 5  Such  an  approach  would  mean  that  the  basic  terms  of
social  life  are  for political  rather  than  legal  determination.' 56

Sometimes  this  view  is  founded  on  interest-group  pluralism;'5 7
sometimes  it  is  derived  from  skepticism  about  the  notion  of objectiv-

150.  See the  discussion of baselines  in Kreimer, Allocational  Sanctions:  The Prob-

lem of Negative  Rights  in  a Positive  State,  132  U.  Pa.  L.  Rev.  1293  (1984).

151.  I  collapse a complex  argument here.  Cf. B.  Ackerman,  supra  note  144  (inter-
preting  the  New  Deal  as  a structural  amendment  of the  Constitution).  One  need  not
accept  Ackerman's  view  in  order to  recognize  that  the  developments  in the  New  Deal
bear  on  the  interpretation  of ambiguous  constitutional  provisions.

152.  See L.  Hand,  The  Bill  of Rights  (1958).
153.  SeeJ.  Landis,  supra  note 96.
154.  See,  e.g.,  West Virginia  State  Board  of Educ.  v.  Barnette,  319  U.S.  624,  646

(1943)  (Frankfurter, J.,  dissenting).

155.  Cf.  Peller, The Metaphysics  of American  Law,  73 Calif. L. Rev.  1151  (discuss-

ing  the  constructed  character  of legal  categories).

156.  The tradition discussed here  did not apply its usual  skepticism to its own prin-
ciples  about  the  primacy  of  democratic  politics;  if it  had,  this  conclusion  would  have
been  harder to  reach.

157.  See  supra  note 31.

19871

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

905

ity s5 8  and  about distinctions  between  reason  and  power.15 9  For those
who  believe  in  interest-group  pluralism,  efforts  to  ensure  neutrality,  in
the form of public-regarding  legislation, ignore the inevitably self-inter-
ested  character  of political  behavior.  Neutrality,  however  understood,
is  thus  inconsistent  with the very nature  of politics. 1 60  The  conclusion
is  that baselines  should  be  rejected  for purposes  of constitutional  law;
courts should  uphold legislation  except in the most extreme  cases.  For
those skeptical  about  objectivity,  neutrality  is  an  unacceptable  effort  to
privilege  a  position  that  is  itself contingent  and  likely  to  reflect  some
kind  of social interest. 16 1  At its most  general  level,  this  concern  is  re-
flected in a wide  range  of work questioning the legacy  of the Enlighten-
ment.16 2  This  position  offers  obscure  guidance  for  constitutional
courts;  it  counsels  a  general  rejection  both  of neutrality  and  of base-
lines,  but at least  in  some  forms,  it offers  no  alternative  position  from
which  to  decide  cases.

Approaches  that follow Holmes  and abandon  baselines for the pur-
poses  of constitutional  law,  like  the approach  in  Lochner, have  the ad-
vantage  of easy  administration;  they  are  reflected  in  some  of current
law under the  contracts,  due process,  and takings  clauses;  and they  can
claim  as  well  a  proper  appreciation  of  democratic  values. 163  The
Holmesian  abandonment  of baselines  is  of  course  reflected  in  tradi-
tional understandings  of the lesson of the Lochner period.  The  decision

158.  See T. Nagel,  The View from Nowhere  (1986);  R. Bernstein, Beyond  Objectiv-

ism  and  Relativism  (1983).

159.  Compare  M.  Foucault,  Power/Knowledge:  Selected  Interviews  and  Other
Writings,  1972-77  (C. Gordon ed. 1981)  (suggesting that knowledge depends  on partic-
ular  constellations  of  interest)  with  J.  Habermas,  Knowledge  and  Human  Interests
(1971)  (suggesting possibility  of escaping  power  through communication).  For recent
discussion,  see  Nagel,  supra  note  158.

160.  Compare  Linde, Due Process  of Lawmaking,  55  Neb.  L. Rev.  197  (1976)  (set-
ting  forth  this  conception  of legislation)  with  R.  Dworkin,  supra  note  51  (arguing  in
favor of efforts  to create  "integrity"  in  law).  On this  approach  to  the  interpretation  of
statutes,  compare  Easterbrook,  supra  note  147,  at 539-44,  with  Posner,  Legal  Formal-
ism, Legal  Realism,  and  the Interpetation  of Statutes and the Constitution, 37  Case W.
Res.  L.  Rev.  179  (1987).

161.  See M.  Foucault, supra  note  159.  Cf. Minow,  Foreword:  Justice Engendered,
101  Harv.  L.  Rev.  (forthcoming  1987)  (challenging  neutrality).  But  see J.  Habermas,
Autonomy and Solidarity  (1986)  (challenging tendency  to relativism and irrationalism  in
Foucault).

162.  SeeJ.  Derrida,  Of Grammatology  (G.  Spivak trans.  1976);  M. Foucault,  supra
note  159; J.  Kristeva,  Desire  in Language  (1980);  G.  Lakoff, supra  note  148;  R.  Rorty,
Consequences  of Pragmatism  (1982).  Despite  the  enormous  differences  among  them,
all are  united in their skepticism  about Enlightenment  reason.  J. Habermas,  supra note
161,  contains  a  brief  summary  at  one  of  the  most  well-known  responses;  see  also J.
Habermas,  Reason  and  the  Rationalization  of Society  (1984).

163.  See, e.g.,J. Ely,  supra note 6,  at 105-34; R. Posner, supra note 137,  at 581-87;
Bork,  supra  note  7,  at  18-19;  Easterbrook,  Legal  Interpretation  and  the  Power  of the
Judiciary,  7  Harv. J.L.  & Pub. Pol'y  87  (1984);  Monaghan,  supra  note 7,  395-96.

906

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

whether  to  accept  those  understandings  is  inescapably  normative,  and
the  traditional  view  might  be  defended  on  the foregoing  grounds.

In  so  extreme a  form,  however,  this  position  is  unacceptable  pre-
cisely  because  it  is  based  on  odd  understandings  of republicanism 16 4
and  of the  workings  of majoritarianism.165  The  Holmesian  position
would  result in  a failure  to  enforce many  constitutional  provisions  that
invite judicial  use  of baselines,  sometimes  deriving  from  the  common
law,  and  that  are  self-conscious  limits  on  the ability  of government  to
restructure  or  to  fail  to  restructure  the  existing  order.  Consider  the
first  amendment,  the  takings  clause,  the  equal  protection  clause,  and
the contracts  clause, all of which impose  limits  on governmental  power.
Moreover,  neutrality-  understood not as preservation  of market order-
ing  or  as  disregard  of past  discrimination  but  as  a  requirement  of a
public-regarding justification  for legislation-continues  to  be required,
and  for  good  reasons. 166  The  Holmesian  position,  reflected  in  some
traditional  thinking  about Lochner, would amount to an  abandonment of
constitutionalism  altogether.  Its  crude  and  conclusory  references  to
the  primacy  of  electoral  politics  are  insufficient  to  support 
that
abandonment. 167

A  third  approach  would  avoid  the difficulties  associated  with  both
Lochner and  the Holmesian  alternative,  but it would  carry  with  it large

164.  Consider,  for example,  the interpretation  of Madison in  Bork, supra  note 7,  at
2-3, suggesting that in a Madisonian  system  majorities  are allowed  to rule in  some areas
of life  "for no better  reason  than that  they are  majorities."  Compare  the  interpretation
in  D.  Epstein,  The  Political  Theory  of The  Federalist  178  (1984)  (suggesting  that  the
system  was  intended  to  ensure a large  measure  of deliberation  on  the  part  of national
representatives).

165.  Some  of the  problems  here  include  the  difficulties,  stressed  in  public  choice
theory,  in  aggregating  private  preferences  through  majority  rule.  See,  e.g.,  W.  Riker,
Liberalism  vs.  Populism:  A  Confrontation  Between  the  Theory  of Democracy  and  the
Theory  of  Social  Choice  (1982).  Moreover,  for  various  reasons  some  preferences
should  not be  counted,  see Goodin,  Laundering  Preferences,  in Foundations  of Social
Choice  Theory  (J.  Elster & A. Hylland  eds.  1986).  Consider  also  the  slippage  between
constituent  pressures  and  legislative  outcomes,  and  the  various  obstacles,  captured  in
the collective  action  problem, to accurate  preference-aggregation  through  majoritarian-
ism, see R. Hardin,  Collective  Action  (1982).  On  these various  questions,  see  generally
Sunstein,  Constitutions  and  Democracies:  An Epilogue,  in  Constitutionalism  and  De-
mocracy  (J.  Elster & R.  Slagstaad eds.  forthcoming  1988).

166.  That requirement  has  a disciplining  effect,  albeit  a  weak  one,  on  the sorts  of
measures  that  can be proposed  and  enacted,  and  also  tends  to  transform  the nature  of
political discourse  in desirable  ways.  See Goodin,  Laundering  Preferences,  in  Founda-
tions  of  Social  Choice  Theory  (J.  Elster  & A.  Hylland  eds.  1986);  Sunstein,  Interest
Groups  in American  Public  Law,  38  Stan.  L.  Rev.  29  (1985);  Sunstein,  Naked  Prefer-
ences and  the Constitution,  84  Colum. L. Rev.  1689  (1984).  In  the area ofjudicial  deci-
sion,  the  requirement  of  neutrality-in  the  form  of  an  effort  to  justify  differential
treatment-remains  important,  see R.  Dworkin,  supra  note 51  at  176-224;  Greenawalt,
supra  note  11I,  at 989,  992.  That  requirement is  the judicial  analogue  of the  require-
ment of public-regardingness  imposed  on legislators, and  in neither  context should it be
confused  by  importation  of Lochner-like premises.

167.  See  supra  notes  164-65  (suggesting that  majoritarianism,  understood  in  plu-

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

907

problems  of its own.  That approach would attempt  to generate  a base-
line  independent  of either  the  common  law  or  the status  quo  through
some theory ofjustice,  to  be  derived from the language  and  animating
purposes  of the text and based to  a greater  or lesser degree on existing
interpretations.  Such  an  endeavor would  require  a  theory of interpre-
tation, a theory  of institutional  role,  and a  theory ofjustice.  The  effort
would  be  the  legal  analogue  to  the various  efforts  in  modem  political
theory  to  go  beyond  or replace  classically  liberal  social  contract  theo-
ries. 168  The text would be the foundation  for a theory169  that would be
independent  of common  law  ordering,  or  the  status  quo,  and  would
serve  as  a  basis  for  evaluating  it.  Approaches  of this  sort  might  treat
the  Constitution  as  a  unit,  reflecting  a  single  overarching  theory.  For
reasons  explored  below, it  would  be  preferable  to  proceed  provision-
by-provision, 170  constructing  theories  for  each  constitutional  clause
and  allowing  considerable  variation  among  them.  Helpful  guidance
can be  found  in  republican  theories  of politics,  which  carry  with  them
substantive  constraints 17 1 and  whose  premises  are  highly  congenial  to

ralist fashion, does not capture the view  of the framers and  is not likely  to provide desir-
able  outcomes).

A closely  related approach  would  attempt to cabin judicial  discretion by  referring to
the intent of the framers,  the text of the  Constitution, or some  other limitation  on judi-
cial  discretion.  Such  an approach  would  reflect  a belief that  because  of the  problems
posed by  democratic  theory  for an  aggressive judicial  role,  constitutional  courts  ought
not  to rely  on  principles  of distributive justice  at all.  See  Monaghan,  supra  note 7,  at
374;  Easterbrook,  supra  note  163,  at 91,  97.

That  view  cannot  be  dealt  with  in  detail  here;  it  has  been  amply  discussed  else-
where.  Partial  responses  are  set out in Brest, The  Misconceived  Quest for the  Original
Understanding,  60 B.U.L. Rev. 204  (1986);  Dworkin, The Forum of Principle, 56 N.Y.U.
L. Rev. 469  (1981);  Sunstein,  Interest Groups  in American  Public Life,  38  Stan. L. Rev.
29 (1985);  Tushnet,  Following  the Rules  Laid  Down:  A  Critique of Interpretivism  and
Neutral Principles,  96 Harv.  L. Rev.  781  (1983).  Such responses  point out the  difficul-
ties  of "applying"  the  framers'  judgments  in  changed  circumstances;  the  difficulties  of
deciding at what level of generality  "intent"  should be read;  the problem  of ascertaining
the  framers'  intentions  with  respect  to  interpretation;  the  various  difficulties  faced  by
majoritarianism  in  aggregating  private  preferences;  and  the fact  that  it is  by  no  means
self-evident  that  a well-functioning  democracy  merely  reflects  constituent  preferences.
A  final  position  on  such  matters  is  of course  necessary  in  order to  decide  whether  the
Holmesian  understanding  of the Lochner period  should  be accepted  in favor  of the  ap-
proach  set  out here.

168.  See, e.g.,  B. Ackerman,  SocialJustice  in the Liberal  State  (1980);  R.  Dworkin,
supra  note 7; J. Habermas,  The  Theory  of Communicative  Action  (T. McCarthy  trans.
1984); J.  Rawls,  A Theory  of Justice  (1971).  For present  purposes  it is  unnecessary  to
say whether and how such an approach  would build on novel understandings  of neutral-
ity or generate baselines  on some  independent  grounds.  Compare various  feminist ap-
proaches  to  the  neutrality  criterion,  set  out  in A. Jaggar,  Feminist  Politics  and Human
Nature  (1984);  N. Hartsock,  Money,  Sex,  and Power:  Toward a Feminist Historical  Ma-
terialism  (1985);  MacKinnon,  supra  note  130;  Minow,  supra  note  161.

169.  See  infra note  180  and  accompanying  text.
170.  See  infra note  183  and  accompanying  text.
171.  See  Michelman,  Foreword:  Traces  of Self-Government,  100  Harv.  L.  Rev.  4,

17-24  (1986);  Sunstein,  supra  note  166.

908

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

the  New  Deal  attack  on  the  common  law. 172  A  profitable  strategy
would  be to avoid abstraction  and  to examine  particular areas with  con-
siderable  care.1 73

Such  an  approach  would  force  courts  to  confront  the  question  of
why and how  the artifactual  quality  of a  particular system  is  relevant  to
the  legal  question.  The  fact  that  a  practice is  artifactual  hardly  means
that it should be  changed;  and the fact that it is in some sense natural is
not necessarily a reason  to respect it.' 74  Consider here the area of gen-
der discrimination;  it is  the legal system  that makes  relevant  any biolog-
ical  difference,  and  a  decision  to  turn a  difference  into  a  disadvantage
demands  independent support. 7-5  But a finding  that a practice or sys-
tem is  a product  of government  is relevant in  various  respects.  First, it
may  suggest that  changes  should not be  regarded  as  "takings";  the  no-
tion of a  taking depends  on an antecedent  baseline,  and if the baseline
is  not natural,  one  needs  an  independent  reason  to  respect  it.  More-
over,  if a practice  is revealed  as  simply  an adaptation  to the status  quo,
new  legal  rules will  not  be  futile.  Finally,  it is  sometimes  thought  that
interferences  with practices  that are  an outgrowth  of nature infringe on
liberty  or on some other right.  The Lochner era is itself an example, and
the areas  of race  and  gender  discrimination  might  be  similarly  under-
stood.  A  recognition  that  the practices  in  question  are artifactual  may
weaken  such  objections.  The  fact  that  a  practice  is  a  creature  of gov-
ernment  thus  removes  some arguments  for retaining  it,  though  stand-
ing  by  itself, it is  hardly  a powerful  reason  to  change  it.

Development  of  a  theory  of justice  that  interprets  the  constitu-
tional  text but  that  is  independent  of the  status  quo  is  extremely  diffi-
cult.  A  strong  version  of anti-Lochner thinking  would  make  it hard  to
provide  foundations  from which  to  begin  the inquiry;  even  theories  of
distributive justice  need  to  accept  some  grounds  from  which  to  pro-
ceed. 176  Such  theories  must  be  culturally  situated.  The  notion  of a
foundational  theory existing entirely  apart from conventions  is likely  to
be  chimerical,  and  in its  own way  reflective  of Lochner-like premises.  If

172.  Republican  approaches  tend  not to  see  rights  as  prepolitical;  the Lochner un-
derstanding of the common  law can thus  be criticized on  republican grounds,  and  those
grounds  tend to replicate the ideas  described  supra notes 7-8,  39-45 and accompanying
text.

173.  V.  Held,  Rights  and  Goods:  Justifying  Social Action  (1984);  Minow,  Where
Difference  has Its Home, 22 Harv.  C.R.-C.L. L. Rev  111  (1987).  But see  the criticisms  of
Held in Fishkin, Book  Review,  97 Ethics 473-74  (1987)  (arguing in favor of impartiality
and abstraction).  This  sort of approach  fits  comfortably  with  the  emerging  enthusiasm
for various  forms  of contextualized  practical  reason  in  various  fields.  See  R.  Bernstein,
Beyond  Objectivism  and  Relativism  (1983);  M.  Nussbaum,  The  Fragility  of Goodness:
Luck and  Ethics  in Greek Tragedy  and Philosophy  (1986);  Michelman,  supra  note  171.

174.  See L. Tribe, supra  note  136;  C.  MacKinnon,  supra  note  134.
175.  See  C.  MacKinnon,  supra  note  134;  C.  MacKinnon,  supra  note  127.
176.  See M.  Nussbaum,  supra  note  173;  Lukes,  Of Gods  and  Demons:  Habermas
and  Practical  Reason,  in  Habermas:  Critical  Debates  U.  Thompson  & D.  Heble  eds.
1982).

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

so,  the  task  is  instead  to  be  critical  of existing practices  without  pre-
tending to  have  transcended  the particular  culture altogether. 177

One  can  point  to  some  such  efforts  in  current  law.  The  first
amendment  prohibitions of discrimination  on  the basis of point of view
and  of government preference  of particular religions  are prominent  ex-
amples. 178  The  law  of racial  discrimination  is  a  particularly  helpful  il-
lustration  here.  Courts  have  developed  theories  that  permit  them  to
evaluate  particular  social  practices  from  an independent  baseline,  one
that prohibits  intentional discrimination  against blacks.  Discrimination
on  the basis  of gender,  alienage,  and  illegitimacy  is handled  in  similar
terms.  The  principal effort  here is  to develop  and justify  an alternative
baseline,  and  to  imagine  a world in  which  the illegitimate  or irrelevant
considerations  were  not  at work.

In some areas,  this  task appears  easy, but the setting of school  seg-
regation  suggests  why  development  of a  baseline  independent  of the
status  quo  is  sometimes  difficult.  For a  long  period,  the  controversial
questions  here had  to do with the constitutionality  of freedom of choice
and other plans in attempting to  eliminate the effects  of segregation. 179
Freedom-of-choice  plans  do  not  significantly  reduce  segregation,  but
court-ordered  transportation  plans,  including  racial  percentages,  can
hardly  be said  to be restoring  the system  to what it would be  if discrimi-
nation had never  taken place.  The  problem here is  to  imagine  a hypo-
thetical world  in which  housing patterns  and  educational  choices  were
unaffected  by  past discrimination.  The  search  for  a  status  quo  ante in
the area  of school segregation  has  an arbitrary  quality,  and  sometimes
the Court has  had to  come close  to requiring integration  in the absence
of any  other plausible  version  of a  reconstructed  system.' 8 0

The problem  is hardly limited to  the area of school segregation.  It
arises in many cases  in which  courts are  asked to reject the status quo as
the appropriate  baseline.  Consider,  for  example,  a decision  to  allow  a
showing of discriminatory  effects  to trigger the equal protection  clause.
To  a  greater  or lesser  degree,  such a  decision  would require  courts  to
imagine what the system of benefits  and burdens across  the races  would
look like  in  a world unaffected  by a legacy  of racism.  Although  inquir-

177.  See P. Ricoeur, Lectures  on Ideology and Utopia (1986)  (discussing critique of
prevailing  ideology  from  within  that  ideology  and  from  standpoint  of  "utopia");  M.
Nussbaum,  supra  note  173  (arguing in  favor  of Aristotelean  approach  to  ethics);  M.
Walzer,  Interpretation  and  Social  Criticism  (1987)  (urging "connected  criticism");  see
also R. Bernstein, supra note 173  (exploring various  approaches  that attempt to criticize
status  quo without  pretending  to evade  convention  entirely);  R. Rorty,  Philosophy  and
the  Mirror  of Nature  155-64  (1980)  (criticizing foundationalism  in philosophy).

178.  See  supra note  120.
179.  See  Fiss, The Fate of an Idea Whose Time Has Come:  Antidiscriminatory Law
in the Second Decade After Brown  v. Board  of Education, 41  U. Chi. L. Rev. 742  (1974);
Gewirtz,  Remedies  and  Resistance,  92  Yale  LJ. 585  (1983).

180.  See,  e.g.,  Dayton  Bd. of Educ.  v. Brinkman,  443  U.S.  526  (1979);  Columbus

Bd.  of Educ.  v.  Penick,  443  U.S. 449  (1979).

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

ies  of this  sort  are  familiar  in  some  areas  of the  law,  in  the  present
context  they  would be  difficult  to  anchor;  the causal  links  are  so  com-
plex that a reconstruction  of the past would  inevitably rest on uncertain
premises. 18 '  The  area  of  gender  discrimination  poses  similar
problems.  Imagine efforts  to see how veterans'  preferences  or abortion
would  be  treated  in  a world  unaffected  by sexism.18 2

This  is not  the occasion  to set out a  general  theory  of appropriate
baselines  from which  to  decide  constitutional  cases;  as  we will  see, the
answer  is  likely  to  vary  across  provisions.  It should  suffice  to  suggest
that  the  common  law  or  status  quo  baseline  in  Lochner will  often  be
unacceptable;  that the existing order should not be regarded  as natural
or inviolate;  that  the abandonment  of baselines  altogether is also  unac-
ceptable;  and  that  generation  of an  independent  alternative  is  some-
times necessary  but poses  large difficulties  of its own.  Current law is an
amalgam  of all  three approaches.  The primary  purpose here  is  to sug-
gest some of the ingredients  in  the decision  why  and  when Lochner-like
premises  should  be  abandoned.

An important  lesson  of the discussion  to follow is  the need  to  pro-
ceed  with  some particularity.  Abstract  or  general  approaches  are  un-
likely  to  be  helpful  here,  at  least  for  the  foreseeable  future.' 8 3  The
examination  of particular  areas  is  the  starting  point  for  extrapolating
more  general  principles.

B.  Swords and Shields

Even if the Holmesian  approach is  rejected,  a less extreme version
would  suggest that in deciding whether Lochner-like premises  should be
accepted,  it  is highly  relevant whether  the Court  is  permitting  govern-
ment to  act  or prohibiting it from doing so.  Courts might,  in short, be
inclined  to  uphold  measures  defended  in  terms  like  those in  West  Coast
Hotel,  even  as  they  were  disinclined  to  invalidate  legislation  under
premises  derived from  either Lochner or  West  Coast Hotel.  Deference  to
representative  processes  argues  in  favor  of this  result.' 8 4  Under  this
view,  the  parallel  of modem  decisions  to  Lochner is  closest  when  the

181.  Cf. J. Vining, supra note 90 (discussing difficulties  of reconstruction  of past in

general).

1981).

182.  See  Personnel  Adm'r  v.  Feeney,  442  U.S.  256  (1979);  see  Seidman,  Public
Principle and  Private  Choice:  The  Uneasy Case for a Boundary  Maintenance  Theory  of
Constitutional  Law,  96 Yale L.J.  1006  (1987).  Cf. C.  MacKinnon,  supra  note  134  (pro-
posing a test  of whether  legal  rules perpetuate  subordination  of women);  and  compare
Law, Rethinking Sex and  the Constitution,  132 U.  Pa. L. Rev.  956 (1984)  (criticizing that
approach  for not  being  subject  to judicial  management).

183.  See L. Tribe,  Constitution as Point of View  (unpublished manuscript, January

184.  To  some  degree  this  position  itself incorporates  Lochner-like premises;  it  dis-
tinguishes judicial  action  from inaction,  and  makes  the  distinction  turn  on whether  the
Court  is  forcing  dramatic  changes  in  the  status  quo.  Here,  however,  the  inquiry  de-
pends  on  institutional  concerns  having  to  do with  the role  of the judiciary.

19871

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

Court is invalidating  democratically-enacted  legislation.  Even  if one re-
jects  the most extreme claims  about the undemocratic  character ofjudi-
cial  review,  one might agree  that Lochner-like premises  should rarely  be
used  to  invalidate  legislation.

The  argument  for  upholding  the  statute  in  Buckley  v.  Valeo  was
therefore  quite  strong;  the case was  very  close  to Lochner itself-unless
there  is  some  difference  in  the  nature  of the  right,  an  issue  taken  up
below.  Similarly,  measures  calling  for  "affirmative  action,"  viewed
through  the lens  of the Lochner era,  should  generally  not be  thought to
raise  a  serious  constitutional  issue.  When  a legislature  or  other  entity
enacts  an affirmative  action program, it should  not be treated as  operat-
ing against  a  status  quo  baseline  that  is  in  some sense  natural  or neu-
tral.  The current distribution  of benefits  and burdens  along racial lines
is an outgrowth  of a long history of discrimination.  Efforts  to eliminate
the subordination  of blacks  can  hardly  be  regarded  in  the same  way  as
efforts  to  perpetuate  it.185

Similar  considerations  apply  to  redistributive  measures  enacted
under  the constracts  and  taking  clauses.  Notwithstanding  recent  criti-
cism  under Lochner-like premises, 18 6  current  law  under  both  clauses  is
generally  correct.  It permits  a wide realm  of action  for legislatures,  an
appropriate  conclusion  in  the  face  of  textual  ambiguity,  the  evident
desires  of the majority,  changed  circumstances,  and  the  growing scope
of the  police power.' 8 7  In  all  of these  contexts,  an  understanding  like
that in  West Coast Hotel should operate,  at least prima facie, as  a "shield"
against  constitutional  attacks  on  legislation, just  as  it  does  under  the
due  process  clause  in the  aftermath  of Lochner.

Because  of  institutional  concerns,  more  difficult  questions  are
raised  by the prospect of using  West  Coast Hotel as  a "sword,"  that is,  as
the basis for  constitutional  attacks  on existing  social  structures.  In this
category  can  be  put  the various  arguments  for  a discriminatory  effects
test under the equal  protection  clause.  So  too,  some of the arguments
in the racial and  gender  area attempt  to use  an understanding  like that
in West  Coast Hotel as  a sword against government.  In the same  category
can  be  placed  the claims  for welfare rights.  In  such  cases,  the fact that
the  plaintiff  is  attacking  legislation  enacted  by  a  popular  majority
counts  against  recognition  of the  claim.' 8 8

All  this  is  hardly  to  suggest  that  the  issue  of swords  and  shields

185.  See Lempert, The  Force of Irony:  On  the  Morality  of Affirmative  Action  and

United  Steelworkers  v.  Weber,  95  Ethics  86  (1984);  Strauss,  supra  note  110.

186.  Epstein, Toward  a Revitalization  of  the  Contract  Clause,  51  U. Chi.  L.  Rev.

703  (1984);  R.  Epstein, supra  note  5.

(reviewing  R. Epstein, Takings  (1985)).

187.  See  Grey,  supra  note  27;  Sax,  Book  Review,  53  U. Chi.  L.  Rev.  279  (1986)

188.  The relevant norms might, however, be regarded as binding on legislators and
administrators  even if they  are  not enforced  by  the judiciary.  See Sager, Fair Measure:
The  Legal  Status  of  Underenforced  Constitutional  Norms,  91  Harv.  L.  Rev.  1212
(1978).

912

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

should  control  the constitutional  question;  that  would  represent  a  re-
turn to Holmesian understandings  about the judicial  role and in its own
way reflect Lochner-like distinctions between  action  and inaction. 18 9  But
the issue  is highly  relevant.  Constitutional  law  is  often  an  uneasy mix-
ture  of substantive  theory  and  institutional  constraint.1 9 0  The  exist-
ence  of institutional  limits  on the part  of the judiciary forces  the courts
to  limit  the  scope  of  substantive  constraints  on  government  action.
This  combination  sometimes  produces  doctrinal  awkwardness,  but it is
hard  to think  of an  alternative.  In  these  circumstances,  it is  important
whether  a  decision  would  call  for  simple  validation  of a  measure  en-
acted by Congress  or instead  would require  courts  to undertake  signifi-
cant  social  change  on  their  own.

C.  The Nature of the Clause

The  catalog  of Lochner-like premises  in modern  public law  spans  a
wide  range,  and  it  implicates  a  large  number  of constitutional  provi-
sions,  including  the  contracts,  takings,  due  process,  and  equal  protec-
tion  clauses  as  well  as  the  first  amendment.  But Lochner-like premises
are  more necessary  or appropriate  under  some provisions  than  under
others.  A lawyer's  natural  reaction  to  the problem  would  be  to  disen-
tangle the various  provisions.  The  interpretive  process,  informed  to  a
greater  or lesser  degree  by  the text  and  original  purposes,  might  well
vary  across  clauses;  different  clauses  may  abandon  or  include  Lochner-
like  premises.  A theory of constitutional  interpretation  would of course
be necessary  to  accomplish  this  task.

At  the most  general  level,  it is  possible  to  understand  the original
Constitution  as  having  a  substantial  Lochner-like  dimension.  Both  the
institutional  and  the individual  rights provisions  of the document  were
influenced  by an understanding of the naturalness  of the distribution  of
property. 19'  The  Civil  War Amendments  were  at least  a partial  recog-
nition of the artifactual quality  of existing distributions,  and subsequent
judicial  interpretation  carried  that recognition  much further.  The vari-
ous  developments  associated  with  the New  Deal 192  were  a  substantial
abandonment  of the Lochner-like features  of constitutionalism,  in  its in-
stitutional  and  individual  rights  dimensions.  One  of the  most impor-
tant  tasks  of modern  constitutional  theory is  to  integrate  these various
developments  into  a  theory  of constitutional  interpretation.

Lochner, under a  textual  approach,  was  wrong above  all  because  it
was  an  interpretation  of the  due  process  clause.  That  clause  may  be

189.  See  supra  note  163.
190.  See  Sager,  supra  note  188,  at  1212.
191.  See  The  Federalist  No.  10,  at 83-84  (J.  Madison)  (C.  Rossiter  ed.  1961); J.

192.  See  generally Sunstein,  supra  note  146;  Ackerman,  Discovering  the  Constitu-

Nedelsky,  supra  note  145.

tion, 93  Yale  LJ.  1013  (1984).

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

913

only procedural  in  character; 193  it may require  the  government  only to
show  some  minimal  justification  for  its  decisions;  it  may  not  sharply
confine  the  permissible  ends  of the  state.  The  takings  clause,  by  con-
trast,  was  built  on  a  belief  in  the  meaning  and  importance  of private
property,  and  it would  be  difficult  to  read that  clause  in  the fashion  of
West  Coast Hotel without  reading  it  out  of the Constitution.  The  same
conclusion  may be  appropriate  under  the  contracts  clause.  At  a  mini-
mum,  then, the  takings  and  contracts  clauses  cannot  easily  be  read -to
create  a  constitutional  baseline  other  than  that  of the  status  quo;  the
notion  of property  itself develops  and  evolves  from  common  cultural
understandings  that cannot  easily be subject to independent judicial re-
construction.' 94  The  eminent  domain  and  contracts  clauses  are most
naturally  read  to  embody  Lochner-like  premises  about  neutrality  and
inaction.

At  the  same  time,  it would  be  possible  to  remove  both provisions
from their foundations  in Lochner.  In particular, courts  might recognize
the social  construction  of property  and  understand  the term  "takings"
against the backdrop  set by independent theories  of entitlement  and an
appreciation  of the social  functions  of private  ownership.  Such an  ap-
proach would  produce  difficult questions  ofjudicial authority  and com-
petence,  but some have  argued  in  favor  of an  effort  of that  sort.195  If
such  an  effort  is  to  be  made,  however,  it  should  proceed  slowly  and
incrementally  in  light of the  history  and  current  interpretation  of the
clause.

By contrast  to  the takings  and  contracts  clauses,  the equal  protec-
tion  clause  is  most  easily  read  as  a  self-conscious  rejection  of Lochner-
like  premises.  The  purpose  of the clause  was,  at least  to  some  degree,
to  break up  the  system  of subordination  of blacks;  the best interpreta-
tion  of  the  clause  recognizes  that  the  existing  allocation  of  power
among  the races  is both  artifactual  and  illegitimate,  and its  purpose is,
to  a  greater  or  lesser extent,  to  equalize  that allocation.  It  should  not
be  surprising  that  insofar  as  understandings  deriving  from  West  Coast
Hotel have been  used as  a  sword against government,  the equal  protec-
tion  clause  has  usually  been the  textual  source  of decision.

Much  of equal protection  law  grows  directly  out of West  Coast Hotel.
Consider  not  only  the  attack  on  racial  discrimination,  but  anti-
discrimination  law  involving  poverty,  illegitimacy,  alienage,  and  per-
haps  above all gender.  The equal protection  clause  is most obviously  a

193.  SeeJ.  Ely, supra  note 6,  at  18.
194.  See B.  Ackerman,  Private  Property  and  the  Constitution  (1977)  (comparing
views  of "ordinary  observer"  and  "scientific  policymaker"  in interpretation  of eminent
domain clause).

195.  See,  e.g.,  B.  Ackerman,  supra  note  194;  Baker,  Property  and  Its  Relation  to
Constitutionally Protected  Liberty,  134  U.  Pa. L.  Rev. 741  (1986);  Michelman,  Property
as a  Constitutional  Right, 38 Wash.  & Lee  L.  Rev.  1097  (1981).

914

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

rejection  of Lochner's premises, just as  the takings  and  contracts  clauses
are  most  obviously  their  constitutional  embodiment.

What  of the  first  amendment?  In  Buckley  itself,  the  Court  sug-
gested  that the provision disposed of the issue:  the constitutional  guar-
antee  of freedom  of speech  prohibits  the silencing  of some in  order to
promote  the speech  of others.  But it is  much too  facile  to  point to  the
text  of the  clause.  Whether  regulation  of powerful  private  speakers
might  sometimes  promote  "freedom  of speech"  is  the  question  to  be
decided.  There  was  a  powerful  argument  in  Buckley  that  campaign  fi-
nance regulation was  necessary in  order to promote freedom  of speech;
one  could  argue  that  such  regulation  was  closer  to  being  compelled
than  proscribed.' 96  On  the  other  hand,  a wholesale  abandonment  of
Lochner-like premises,  requiring courts  to  look at the content of speech,
would  wreak  havoc  with  existing  first  amendment  doctrine-as  it  did
earlier  in  the  century  with  private  property  under  the  due  process
clause.

Indeed,  the  central  commitment  of the  first  amendment,  as  cur-
rently  interpreted,  is  to  neutrality  on  the  basis  of  content  or  view-
point,19 7  and  this  commitment  has  a  Lochner-like  feature.  Issues  of
substantive  power  and  powerlessness  do  not  enter  into  the  constitu-
tional  inquiry.  Government  must be neutral  between  those viewpoints
that  are  good  and  bad,  or  those  speakers  that  have  power  and  those
that  have  none.1 98  A  set  of doctrines  growing  out of West  Coast Hotel
would  repudiate  Buckley;  efforts  to  redress  the  distorting  effects  of fi-
nancial  contributions  can  be  fit  within  the  police  power,  especially  in
light of theories  of free  speech  that grow out of republican  conceptions
of politics. 19 9  But doctrines  based on  West  Coast Hotel might also be  led
to reject the commitment  to viewpoint neutrality. 2 00  Under such an ap-
proach,  redistributive  and  paternalistic  goals  would  be  permissible
under  the  first  amendment. 20 1  The  police  power  under  the  first
amendment  would  thus  be  close  to  the  police  power  under  the  four-
teenth.  Such  an approach  would  permit  government  to  impose  a wide
range  of regulatory  restrictions,  mostly  on  the speech  of the powerful,
in  the interest  of reassessment  of the existing  distribution  of power.

There  are  reasons  to  be  skeptical  of so  general  an  approach.  The
problem of deciding who  is powerful  and who is  not is  too manipulable
and  too likely  to  be  skewed by impermissible  factors  to  be  the basis  for

196.  See Fiss,  Free Speech  and  Social  Structure,  71  Iowa L.  Rev.  1485  (1986).
197.  See Stone, Content  Regulation and  the  First Amendment,  25  Wm. & Mary  L.

Rev.  189  (1983).

198.  See MacKinnon,  supra note  51.
199.  See A. Meiklejohn,  Free  Speech  and  Its  Relation  to  Self-Government  (1948).
200.  See Fiss,  supra  note  196.
201.  See  Fiss, supra  note 196; Fiss, Why  the State?,  100  Harv. L. Rev.  781,  790-94
(1987).  Cf.  R.  Wolff,  B.  Moore  & H.  Marcuse,  A  Critique  of Pure  Tolerance  (1968)
(criticizing  traditional  beliefs  in  free  expression  and  tolerance).

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

915

first  amendment  doctrine.  Moreover,  there  are  good  reasons  to  com-
plain about restrictions on the speech  of the powerful.  Buckley  itself was
wrongly  decided;  the  principle  at  issue  there  might  be  confined  to  fi-
nancial  expenditures  without  endangering  the  general  principle  of
viewpoint  neutrality. 20 2  But it should  not be  surprising to  find Lochner-
like  premises  in first  amendment  doctrine.

All  this  suggests  that  some  constitutional  provisions  incorporate
Lochner-like premises,  others reject them,  and still others  create difficult
interpretive  problems.  The nature  of the provisions  will thus  be  a  sig-
nificant  factor  in deciding  about  appropriate  baselines.

D.  The Nature of the  Causal Links

Another  factor  has  to  do  with  the  reality  or perception  of a  close
causal  link  between  identifiable  government  action  and  the  practice
under  attack.  In  the  context  of welfare,  the  link between  government
action  and poverty may  seem too  attenuated  to justify a claim  of causa-
tion; numerous  other causal factors  play a role.  The same conclusion  is
drawn  in  the context of de  facto segregation.  School and  housing pat-
terns  are affected  by many factors,  and the relevant legal rules were not
in  force  in  the immediate  past.  The  case  of discriminatory  effects  may
be similarly understood,  for the existence  of such effects  is the  result of
a wide range  of factors.  Consider  by contrast  the courts'  ready accept-
ance  of remedial plans for actual racial discrimination  in the recent past
by  the defendant.  Here  the link between  state action  and racially based
harm  is  so  tight  that  causation  is  unquestionable.  Judgments  about
causation  thus  play  a  significant  role in  the  cases.

This  concern,  however,  imports  some Lochner-like premises  about
action  and  inaction  and  is  in  any  event  secondary.  In  the cases  under
consideration,  there  is  almost  always  "but  for"  causation.  The  causa-
tion issue produces  difficulties  when and because it is  hard to  imagine a
status  quo  ante.  Consider,  for  example,  a claim  that  de facto  segrega-
tion is  unconstitutional,  or even  an  attack  on de jure segregation  thirty
years ago.  To  imagine  what  the system  would  look like  if the conduct
under attack had not occurred is  necessarily  speculative and  largely un-
anchored.  This  point  presents  the  problem  of  baseline  in  another
form.

E.  The  Consequences:  Utilitarian and Other Losses

Judgments  about caustion  are  not based solely  on a reconstruction
-of history.20 3  Sometimes  the decision  is  affected  by the perceived  con-
sequences  of finding  a  causal link.  Consider, for  example, recognition
of a  constitutional  right to  welfare.  It may be conceded  here that  pov-

202.  For  general  discussion,  see  Fiss,  supra  note  196  (arguing against  viewpoint

neutrality  because  of maldistributions  of social  power).

203.  See  H. Hart & A.  Honor6,  Causation  in  the  Law  (1984).

COLUMBIA  LAW  REVIEW

(Vol. 87:873

erty is in some sense a creation of the state.  But if it were  to follow  that
welfare  was  constitutionally  guaranteed,  the  result  may  be  to  under-
mine  incentives  for productive  labor.  Another  example  has  to  do with
discriminatory  effects.  If such effects  were  sufficient  to produce invalid-
ity,  the consequences  would be  enormous.  Affirmative  action would  be
constitutionally  mandated.  Such a step would impose a severe strain on
the judiciary.  Moreover,  it would  impose costs  of two  kinds.  The  deci-
sion  about  which  discriminatory  effects  were  permissible  and  why
would  be  enormously  complex.  Serious  strains  would  be  imposed  on
the judiciary,  particularly  in  the remedial  process.

The  utilitarian  and  other  losses-including  enforcement  prob-
lems-of abandoning  Lochner are  thus  relevant to  the constitutional  in-
quiry.  They  will  tend to  be  largest  in cases  in which  other branches  of
government  support  the  practice  under  attack.  When,  for  example,
Congress  has  enacted  a  statute  abandoning  Lochner-like  principles,
these considerations  are secondary.  In  such cases  the elected branches
have  decided  that  the  utilitarian  losses  are  properly  incurred,  and
problems  of enforcement  are  minimized.  When  the  elected  branches
are on  the other side, however,  those losses  and problems  are properly
taken  into  account.  They  are  a  secondary  consideration,  buttressing
the development  of substantive  and institutional theories  in the wake  of
Lochner.

F.  Summary

We  have  seen  that  the  question  whether  Lochner-like  premises
should  be  abandoned  cannot  be  answered  in  the  abstract.  The  issue
depends  on  a  mixture  of  substantive,  institutional,  and  interpretive
considerations.  The substantive problems present issues of distributive
justice;  the institutional  issues  present  problems  of democratic  theory;
the interpretive  questions  raise problems  of linguistic  theory as  well as
substantive  and  institutional  issues.20 4  In  generating  a  set  of constitu-
tional  doctrines  in  the  aftermath  of Lochner, it is  necessary  to  proceed
with  considerable  caution.  No  formula is  available.  But the  foregoing
discussion  suggests  some generalizations  and examples  that  may prove
helpful  here.  In Lochner itself, the textual  pedigree  of the decision  was
uncertain;  and  the  outcome  reached  by  the Court  ran  in  the  face  of a
powerful  and mounting national consensus in the other direction.  Sim-
ilar considerations justify, at least  in broad  outline, the Court's  current
approach  to  the  takings  and  contracts  clauses.  These  provisions  are
necessarily  Lochner-like in  character;  they  cannot  be  read  out  of the
Constitution,  but a  generous  approach  to the police power  is appropri-

204.  For some, the  three problems, in concert,  mean  that judges  must decide  cases
by  reference  to the  "intent of the framers,"  or original meaning,  or some  other purport-
edly  sharp  constraint  on judicial  decisions.  That  approach  is  rejected  here.  See  supra
note  167  and accompanying  text.

1987]

LOCHNER'S LEGACY

ate under both provisions.  Affirmative  action  for both race and  gender
is relatively  easy.  The measures  in question  have  been adopted  demo-
cratically;  the  equal  protection  clause  is  a  repudiation  of Lochner-like
principles;  utilitarian  concerns  cannot  be  said  to  count  powerfully
against affirmative  action  and  may  argue in favor  of validation;  the un-
certainty  of causation  is  a  secondary  matter.  Judicial  review  of agency
inaction  and  standing  for  regulatory  beneficiaries  are  also  relatively
easy.  Here  Congress has  created and endorsed  a broad  presumption of
reviewability,  and most important,  review would serve  only to vindicate
constitutional  and statutory  provisions as  against  the executive  branch.
Some benefits  that are the creature  of statute should  stand  on the same
footing  as  common  law  interests  for purposes  of both  procedural  and
substantive  due  process.  The rise  of hearing rights  for beneficiaries  of
spending programs  is  therefore  appropriate. 20 5  Buckley  v.  Valeo was  de-
cided  incorrectly.  In  the  context  of financial  expenditures,  the  first
amendment  need  hardly  be  read  in  the Lochner-like fashion  suggested
by  the  Court.

The  most  difficult  cases  here  involve  discriminatory  effects  under
the equal protection  clause, welfare  rights, and some of the state action
cases,  including  those  that raise  the possibility  of a right  to  protection
against  private  racial  discrimination.  Viewed  through  the  lens  of the
Lochner period,  these  decisions  seem  incorrect  in  their  reasoning  and
questionable in  their outcomes.  All  of them  depend on premises  about
the appropriate  baseline that were  properly rejected  during the Lochner
period.  But as we  have  seen,  there are powerful  prudential and  institu-
tional  considerations  that  argue  in favor  of caution.  The primary  pur-
pose here  is not  to  suggest  how  such  cases  should  be  decided,  now  or
in  the near future,  but instead  to  remove  one  of the  props  supporting
current  doctrine  and  to  suggest  some  of the relevant  inquiries.

CONCLUSION

The Lochner Court  required  government  neutrality and  was  skepti-
cal  of government  "intervention";  it defined  both  notions  in  terms  of
whether  the state had  threatened  to  alter  the common  law  distribution
of  entitlements  and  wealth,  which  was  taken  to  be  a  part  of  nature
rather than  a legal  construct.  Once the common law  system came  to be
seen  as  a product of legal rules,  the baseline from which  constitutional
decisions  were  made  had  to  shift.  When  the Lochner framework  was
abandoned  in  West  Coast Hotel, the  common  law  system itself appeared
to be  a  subsidy  to employers.  The  West  Coast Hotel Court  thus  adopted
an  alternative  baseline and  rejected Lochner era  understandings  of neu-
trality  and action.

If the Lochner era  is  thought  to  embody  less  an  active judicial  role

205.  Cf.J.  Mashaw,  Due Process  in the Administrative  State  (1985)  (justifying such

rights  on  participatory  and  dignatory  grounds).

COLUMBIA  LA W REVIEW

[Vol.  87:873

and  more  particular  conceptions  of baseline,  neutrality,  and  action,  it
has  not  been  entirely  overruled.  Numerous  modem  decisions  reflect
similar  understandings.  Cases  distinguishing  between  "positive"  and
"negative"  rights  are  built on Lochner-like premises  that  take  the  com-
mon law as the baseline for decision.  Much  of the law of racial discrimi-
nation  can  be  understood  similarly,  though  here  the  baseline  is  the
status  quo  rather  than  the common  law.  The  constitutional  attack  on
affirmative action, indeed  the very  term,  suggests that the current distri-
bution  of benefits and burdens along racial lines is  simply "there."  The
state action  doctrine borrows heavily from common law  understandings
about  the proper  role of government.  Some  of first  amendment  doc-
trine,  especially  that  involving  campaign  financing,  is  based  on  similar
premises.

It is one  thing  to identify  Lochner-like premises  in  current constitu-
tional  law;  it is  quite  another to  suggest  when and  how  they  should  be
abandoned.  One  possible  approach  would  be  to  reject,  in  the  fashion
ofJustice  Holmes,  any baseline as a matter of constitutional law.  Under
this  approach,  the distribution  of wealth  and  entitlements  would  be for
political rather than legal determination.  But we have seen that such an
approach  is too  crude, for it would  spell an end  to constitutionalism.  If
the  idea  of baselines  is  to  be  retained,  and  if Lochner is  at  least  some-
times  to be abandoned,  the task for the future  is  to  develop  theories  of
distributive justice, derived  from  constitutional  text and  purposes,  that
might  serve  as  the basis  for  evaluating  any  particular  practice.

Whether  and  how  to  develop  and  implement  such  theories  is  a
mixture  of substantive  and  institutional  problems.  We  have  seen  that
whether Lochner-like premises  are  used  to  invalidate  or  uphold  legisla-
tion  is  relevant.  Moreover,  some  provisions  are  most plausibly  under-
stood in Lochner-like terms,  whereas  others self-consciously  reject  those
premises;  consider  the  equal  protection  clause.  Second-order  consid-
erations  include  whether  there  is  a  clear  causal  connection  between
identifiable  social practices  and  the harms invoked  by  the plaintiff.  So-
cial  consequences,  including  utilitarian  losses,  properly  play  a  role  in
the  decision.  Development  and  implementation  of an  alternative  ap-
proach  that  would  incorporate  those  inquiries  is  a  large  task  indeed.
But  there  is  reason  to  reject  several  lines  of cases  that  depend  on
Lochner-like  premises,  as  in  the  areas  of campaign  finance  regulation,
judicial  review  of agency  inaction,  gender  discrimination,  and  affirma-
tive action.  There is reason as well to raise questions  about the reason-
ing  and  perhaps  the  outcome  in  more  difficult  areas, 
involving
discriminatory  effects  and  "positive"  rights.

However  these  questions  are resolved,  the central  issue in  numer-
ous  areas  of the  law-involving  campaign  finance  regulation,  hearing
rights, affirmative  action,  gender and  race  discrimination,  standing, re-
view of agency inaction,  state action, and  "positive"  rights-is whether
there  is a  constitutional  requirement of neutrality that commands  pres-

1987] 

LOCHNER'S LEGACY 

919

ervation  of the status  quo  as  reflected  in  market  outcomes,  or  instead
whether the Constitution,  recognizing  the artifactual  quality of the mar-
ket allocation, permits and sometimes  demands  change.  One might un-
derstand  the Lochner era  as,  above  all,  a  warning  about  constitutional
doctrine  that defines  neutrality in  terms  of the perpetuation  of current
practice,  and  that  treats  government  conduct  tending  to  sustain  it  as
"inaction"  invariably  escaping legal  sanction,  and  government  conduct
proposing  change  as  "action"  tending  to  raise  legal  doubts.

