University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1994 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Economic Incentives, Environmental Law, and Democracy 
Economic Incentives, Environmental Law, and Democracy 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Economic Incentives, Environmental Law, and Democracy," 21 Ecology Law Quarterly 
455 (1994). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

19941

PANEL  II: PUBLIC VS.  PRIVATE  REGULATION

Panel  II: Public  Versus  Private
Environmental  Regulation

Cass R.  Sunstein, Fourth Panelist*

I  have  to tell you  I am  a  little  discouraged  with my  topic, which  is
the  defense  of  democratic  approaches  to  environmental  protection.
In  preparation  for this,  I really  wanted  to get  a  hold  of the  Vice  Presi-
dent's report  on reinventing  the government.'  So I  called the  Regula-
tory  Affairs  Office  in  the  Office  of Management  and  Budget  (OMB),
and  they said the  person to  call was  the Public  Affairs  Office  at  OMB.
I called  them and  they  said the person  to call  was  the Vice  President's
office.  I  called  them  and they said  the  person to  call  was  the  Govern-
ment Printing  Office.  It sounded  very depressing.  But I thought,  well,
maybe  that  will  work.  So  I  went  ahead  and  called  the  Government
Printing Office,  and  they said they could  have it to me probably  within
the  month.  (Laughter.)

I  have  heard  subsequently  that  part  of the  Gore  report  says  that
the  Government  Printing Office  will have  to compete  with  private  en-
terprise,  and that  may  explain  their reluctance  to send  it out.  (Laugh-
ter.)  Undaunted, I  am going  to try to defend  the democratic  approach
to environmental  problems.  Much of what  I have  to say  about private
remedies  and  public  remedies  will  be  through  a  democratic  lens.  It
might be  more  accurate  to say  that it is  a republican  approach,  repub-
lican  in  the sense  of what  James  Madison  said  in his  theory  of govern-
to  foster  public
ment,  designed 
deliberation.

limit  factional  power  and 

to 

2

Let  me  begin  with  a  bill  of particulars  indicting  common  law  ap-
proaches  to environmental  protection.  This is just an effort to abstract
a  bit  from  the  familiar  failures  of private  law.  I  guess  this  is  a  criti-
cism, a  partial criticism  at least,  of free  market environmentalism.  It is
familiar  that  there  are  collective  action  problems  with  individually
small  but,  on  aggregate,  very  large  injuries,  which  a  common  law  or
private  market system  will  fail  to  address.  So in  cases  in  which  there
are  lots  of  people  injured  a  little  bit, the  environmental  damage  may
be  very  high,  but  the  common  law  will  be  unable  to  respond.

Copyright  ©  1994  by  ECOLOGY  LAW  QUARTERLY

*  Professor,  University  of  Chicago  Law  School.
1.  AL  GORE,  FROM  RED  TAPE  TO  RESULTS:  CREATING  A  GOVERNMENT  THAT
WORKS  BETTER  &  COSTS  LESS:  REPORT  OF  THE  NATIONAL  PERFORMANCE  REVIEW
(1993).

2.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  10  (James  Madison).

ECOLOGY LAW  QUARTERLY

[Vol.  21:431

In  addition,  it  is very  hard  to get  an  adequately  coordinated  sys-
tem by using  the  common  law, and this is  potentially  disastrous in  the
environmental  area.  Litigation  is  focused  on  too  few  aspects  of  a
problem.  It  lacks  the  comprehensive  overview  that  one  would  need,
for  example,  to come  to terms with water  pollution.  Litigation  is  also
fortuitous  in  its  timing.  It  is random  and  ex  post.  If you  like the  cur-
rent  law  of  products  liability,  then  you  would  love  common  law  ap-
proaches 
to  environmental  protection,  where  the  problems  will
probably  be  even  worse.

In  addition  to the  collective  action  problems  and  the  difficulty  of
getting  adequate  coordination, there  is a lack of necessary  expertise  in
the judiciary.  Now,  I see  some judges  in the  room  who  actually  know
a  lot  about  environmental  problems,  but  they  are  exceptions.

There  is  a concern  about judges'  lack of political accountability  as
well.  The  truth  in  the  Chevron opinion  is  the  perception  that  where
there  is  a policy  decision  to be  made,  it  ought  to be  made  democrati-
cally  and  not judicially.3  Maybe  a  crisper way  to make  the  point is  to
say  that  if  you  had  a  common  law  system  working  really  terrifically
well, kind of a Posner-Epstein  heaven,  what you would end up with is,
at  best,  aggregating  private  willingness  to  pay.  You  would  produce  a
system  of wealth  maximization  in  which  you  made  policy  choices  by
aggregating  private  willingness  to pay.  That  is  what  the  common  law
system  and  one  idealized  view  of  it is  about.

But there is a  big difference  between  democratic judgments  about
social  problems  and  aggregated  willingness  to  pay.  And  in  a  demo-
cratic  system,  the democratic judgments  ought  to be preferred.  This  is
especially  the  case  if  what  ought  to  matter  in  environmental  policy
includes,  as I think  it should, the interests of future generations  and,  if
they  will  suffer,  the  interests  of creatures  who  are  not human.  This  is
not to say that  those are  decisive  interests, but they are relevant  inter-
ests,  and  they  are  not  likely  to  be  sufficiently  included  in  the  willing-
ness-to-pay  criterion.

These  various  problems-collective  action  problems,  lack  of  co-
ordination,  lack  of expertise,  and democratic  failures-suggest  that  a
common  law  system  will  be  both  inefficient  and  undemocratic.  This
was  the basic insight that  led to the  substitution of regulatory  machin-
ery  for the  common  law  in the  environmental  area.

The  story  we  have  seen  in  the  past  twenty  years  has  not been  a
success,  and,  ironically,  the  dimensions  along  which  it  has  failed  are
very  similar  to  the  dimensions  along  which  the  common  law  itself
failed.  As several of the  previous  panelists have  suggested, the system
we  now  have is  extraordinarily  inefficient.  By some estimates we  have

3.  Chevron  U.S.A.,  Inc.  v.  NRDC, 467  U.S.  837,  866  (1984).

1994] 

PANEL  II: PUBLIC VS.  PRIVATE  REGULATION 

457

spent  $900  billion for  pollution  control  since  1972.  I  think  $1000  bil-
lion is  actually  a trillion,  but I was  not entirely sure  of that, so  I took  a
lower  end  of  the estimate.  $900  billion.  (Laughter.)  And  many  esti-
mates  suggest  that  we  could  have  achieved  the  same  environmental
benefit  at one-quarter  of  the  cost. 4

Not  only  is  there  great  inefficiency  in  our  command-and-control
system,  but there  is  also democratic  failure,  above all  in the  influence
of  well-organized  factions  over  the  regulatory  machinery.  It  may  be
that ethanol  is  really, really great  and that governmental  specification
of ethanol  as the automobile  motoring  substance  of choice would be a
good  idea.  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  power  of  the  ethanol
lobby-the  farmer's  lobby-has  played  a  role  in  occasional  govern-
mental  enthusiasm  for  ethanol.

The  democratic  failure  means  that instead  of democratic  deliber-
ation-Madison's  aspiration-we  often  have  government  by  faction.
This problem  is  revealed, I  think,  by the  cost-benefit  charts published
by  OMB  that  are  reprinted  amusingly  and  depressingly  in  Judge
Breyer's  excellent  new  book  on  risk  regulation. 5  These  charts  show
that  the  cost-per-life-saved  of  environmental  regulations  varies  so
widely  for different  regulations  that  no  sensible  person  could  in  the
first  instance  have  advocated  such  regulations. 6

Now  to  make  a  very  simple  argument,  this  discussion  suggests
that  the  problems  of  the  common  law-lack  of  coordination,  lack  of
economic  efficiency,  lack  of real  application  of  expertise,  and  lack  of
democratic  deliberation-are just what we  have now.  I think it would
be  difficult  to contend  that  we would  be better off under the  common
law  system.  But  certainly  it  would  not be  hard  to  argue  that  we  are
not  tremendously  better  off  under  the  system  we  now  have  than  we
would  be  under  the common  law  system.

I want  to make  some  simple  recommendations.  These  reflect  an
effort, principally  from  the democratic  point of view, to synthesize  the
best  of  traditional  private  law  remedies-with  a  bow  in  the  direction
of my colleagues,  Epstein and Posner-with  the aspirations  of the reg-
ulatory state.  I  have  tried to import  some  of the flexibility  and poten-
tial efficiency  of  the  common  law, while  at the  same time  recognizing
the need for democracy  to lie  at the heart  of whatever  regulatory solu-
tions we  come  up  with.

This approach  is very simple.  I want to argue  first for information
and  second  for  economic  incentives.  The  preferred  remedy  for  envi-

4.  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Democratizing America Through  Law,  25  SUFFOLK  U.  L.

REV.  949,  955  (1991)  (citing THOMAS  TIETENBERG,  EMISSIONS  TRADING  41-45  (1985)).

5.  STEPHEN  BREYER,  BREAKING  THE  VICIOUS  CIRCLE:  TOWARD  EFFECTIVE  RISK

REGULATION  24-27  (1993).

6.  See  id.

ECOLOGY LAW  QUARTERLY

[Vol. 21:431

ronmental  problems  should  be disclosure  of information.  Regulation
should  be  the  secondary  remedy  if there  is  a  reason  why  information
does  not  work.  Information  first,  regulation  second.  What  we  have
done  over  the  past  generation  is  the  opposite.  Centralized  govern-
mental  regulation  has been  the  first  option,  and  information  has  been
disclosed  only  if  the  regulatory  option  has  been  rebutted.

Now  let  me  just  specify  what  I  mean  by  information  and  eco-
nomic  incentives,  emphasizing  the  democracy-reinforcing  features  of
both of  these  remedies.  By information,  I  mean  that  in  areas  such  as
environmental  risks  in  the  workplace  or  consumer  products,  with
some  risks  that  reasonable  people  might  take,  the  preferred  choice
ought  to  be  to  let  people  know  about  the  risk  rather  than  to  have
government-mandated  safety levels.  We should have  a  decent floor so
that  risks that  no  reasonable  person  would  take  will  not be  available.
But  otherwise,  we  should  allow  for  private  flexibility.

This  ought  to  be  efficiency  promoting,  and  it  also  ought  to  be
democracy  promoting.  One of the  real pathologies  of our current  sys-
tem  is  that people  do  not know  about  the levels  of risk  that they  face.
Hence,  it  is  wrongly  thought  that  nuclear  power  and  toxic  waste
dumps  are  top  priorities,  while  indoor  air  pollution  and  smoking  are
towards  the  bottom.  Public  assessments  of risk levels  are  all  over  the
map,  and  that  is  partly  because  information  is  lacking.

We  ought  to  move  in  the  direction  of  something  like  a  national
warning  system.  This  system  would  reveal  risk  levels  in  a  way  that
would  have  an  efficiency-promoting  aspect,  a  democracy-promoting
aspect,  and  a  coordinating  function.  The  system  would  show  people
what  OMB  has  publicized  a  bit-that  is,  what  the  risk  levels  are  in
various  sectors  of  the  economy  and various  aspects  of  people's  lives.
By  information,  I  do  not mean just disclosure as  a  preferred  rem-
edy.  I  mean  to  endorse  also  a  version  of  Judge  Breyer's  suggestion
that somewhere  in the Federal  Government  there ought  to be an over-
view  entity.7  This  body  would be  charged  with comparing  risk  levels,
with ensuring  that  there are  priorities,  with  exempting  tiny  risks,  as  in
the  Delaney  clause, 8  and  with  ensuring  that  we  get  the  biggest  bang
for  the  buck.  There  is  no  reason  that  government  regulation  of  the
environment  should  be  as  uncoordinated  as  it  now  is.  Currently,  re-
sponsibility  for  environmental  protection  is  broken  up  among  a
number  of  different  federal  agencies,  and  even  offices  within  EPA
have  such  different  mandates  that  sensible  priority  setting  is
impossible.

Id. at  60.

7. 
8.  21  U.S.C.  § 348(c)(3)(A)  (1988).

1994] 

PANEL  II: PUBLIC VS.  PRIVATE  REGULATION 

459

Thus, my suggestion  is disclosure  as  the  preferred  remedy  and  an
overview  entity  that  collects  information,  dispenses  information,  and
ensures  sensible  priority  setting.  That  is  what  I  mean  by information.
You  have  heard  a  bit about  economic  incentives.  What  I want  to
suggest  right  now  is  that  economic  incentives  not  only  promote  effi-
ciency,  but,  equally  importantly,  have  a  democracy-reinforcing  fea-
ture.  From  the  democratic  point  of  view,  this  makes  economic
incentives  much  better  than the  command-and-control  system.

Here  is  why.  Economic  incentives  focus  democratic  attention  on
the  question  of ends:  "How much  clean-up  at what price?"  Incentives
do  not  focus  on  the  question  of  means:  "Which  technology  is  best?"
So in thinking about  acid rain or any pollutant, the economic  incentive
approach  puts  into  Congress'  hopper  the  issue  not  of  which  technol-
ogy  ought  to be  imposed,  but  instead  what  level  of  pollution  makes
best sense.

The  issue  of  ends  forces  elective  representatives  to  make  the
tradeoff  between  environmental  and  other  values  explicitly  and
openly  in  a  way  that  the  current  attention  to  means  does  not.  Not
only is there  a  democratic  advantage  in focusing  on the right question,
there  also is a  democratic  advantage  in eliminating  the special  interest
deals  that are  likely when  attention  is placed  on the  issue of means.  If
the  question  is  ethanol,  methanol,  nethanol,  or  thethanol,  then  it  is
especially  likely  that  a  group  with a  stake  in  the  outcome  will  choose
one of  those.  If the issue  is instead  how much  reduction  are  we  going
to get, then the very generality  of the question  is likely to decrease  the
influence  of factions.

The  attention  to  economic  incentives  eliminates  the  attention  to
means,  reduces  factional  power,  and  puts  the  democratic  attention
where  it ought to be; it also  forces  a kind of coordinating  and compar-
ative judgment  that would  be  a  great  advantage.  If we  had  economic
incentives  as our remedy  of choice, then  the question would  be:  "Well,
we  spend  X  amount  for  that,  how  much  should  we  spend  for  this?"
Thus,  economic  incentives  have  a  built-in  mechanism  that  is  democ-
racy  reinforcing  in  the  sense  that  incentives  make  it  very  likely  that
comparisons  will be  obtained.  When  comparisons  are  obtained, dem-
ocratic  judgments  are  less  subject  to  factions  or  to  sensationalism.
Economic  incentives  also  put  a  high  premium  on  information.  If  the
question is how  much should we  spend to reduce global  warming,  then
people  will obtain a  lot of information  about the cost  to reduce green-
house  gases  and  about  the  benefits  of doing  it.  That  would  be  a  big
democratic  advantage  over  our  current  system.

The  failures  of  private  law  and  common  law  are  economic,  but
also  democratic.  The  promise  of  informational  remedies  and  eco-

460 

ECOLOGY LAW  QUARTERLY 

[Vol.  21:431

nomic  incentives  is  not only  economic,  but also,  more  fundamentally,
democratic.

Thank  you.

