Incompletely Theorized Agreements
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein
Source: Harvard Law Review, Vol. 108, No. 7 (May, 1995), pp. 1733-1772
Published by: The Harvard Law Review Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/1341816 .
Accessed: 23/06/2014 10:20

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

 .

The Harvard Law Review Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Harvard Law Review.

http://www.jstor.org 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

COMMENTARY 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

Cass R.  Sunstein* 

We think utility, or happiness, much too  complex and indefinite an  end 
to  be sought except through the medium of various secondary ends, con- 
cerning which there may be, and often is, agreement among persons who 
differ in their ultimate standard; and about which there does in fact pre- 
vail  a  much greater unanimity among thinking persons, than  might  be 
supposed  from  their  diametrical divergence on  the  great  questions  of 
moral metaphysics.  As  mankind are  much more nearly of  one  nature, 
than of one opinion about their own nature, they are more easily brought 
to  agree in their intermediate principles .  .  . than in their first principles 

JOHN  STUART  MILL1 

Why didn't the [Sentencing] Commission sit down and really go and ra- 
tionalize this  thing and not just take  history?  The  short answer to  that 
is: we  couldn't.  We couldn't because there are such good arguments all 
.  .  YTy listing  all  the 
over  the  place  pointing in  opposite directions. 
crimes that there are in rank order of punishable merit....  Then collect 
results from your friends and see  if  they all  match.  I  will  tell you  they 
won't. 

JUSTICE  STEPHEN  BREYER2 

*  Karl N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor of  Jurisprudence, Law  School  and  De- 
partment of  Political  Science, University  of  Chicago.  This  essay  is  an  expansion of  certain  sec- 
tions  of  the first of  my  I994  Tanner Lectures on  Human Values, delivered at  Harvard University 
in  November  I994;  the lectures themselves will  appear under the title Political  Conflict and Legal 
Agreement, in  I7  THE TANNER LECTURES ON HUMAN VALUES (Grethe B.  Peterson ed.,  forth- 
coming  I996).  I  am  especially grateful to  my  audiences at  Harvard for  their extraordinary gra- 
ciousness  and  for  their probing comments and  questions.  Of  the  many  people  who  offered help 
on  that  occasion,  I  single  out  for  special  thanks  my  commentators Jean  Hampton  and  Jeremy 
Waldron, and  also Joshua Cohen, Christine Korsgaard, Martha Minow,  Martha Nussbaum,  John 
Rawls, Tim Scanlon, and Amartya Sen.  For extremely helpful comments on  the manuscript, I  am 
grateful to  Bruce  Ackerman, Ruth  Chang, Joshua  Cohen, Jon  Elster,  Charles  Fried,  Amy  Gut- 
mann,  Don  Herzog,  Stephen  Holmes,  Elena  Kagan,  Dan  Kahan,  Larry Lessig,  Saul  Levmore, 
William  Meadow,  Frank  Michelman,  Martha  Minow,  Martha  Nussbaum,  Susan  Moller  Okin, 
Wiktor  Osiatynski,  Richard Posner, Joseph  Raz,  Frederick Schauer,  Stephen  Schulhofer, Anne- 
Marie Slaughter, Mark lushnet,  Candace Vogler, and Lloyd Weinreb.  I  am also indebted to  par- 
ticipants in a  work-in-progress lunch at the University of  Chicago and to members of  legal theory 
workshops at Oxford University and the University of  California, Berkeley.  I  am also grateful to 
Sophie  Clark  for  research assistance.  Parts of  this  commentary will  appear  in  a  book,  LEGAL 
REASONING  AND  POLITICAL  CONFLICT  (forthcoming I996). 

1  John  S.  Mill,  Bentham,  in  UTILITARIANISM  AND  OTHER  ESSAYS  I32,  170  (Alan Ryan  ed., 

2  Justice Breyer is  quoted in Jeffrey Rosen, Breyer Restraint,  NEW  REPUBLIC,  July  II,  I994, 

I987). 

at  I9,  25. 

I733 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I734 

HARVARD LAW RE VIEW 

[Vol. I08:3733 

like  that; again, grand principles have  to  be 
I  prefer not  to  [talk] 
applied in  concrete cases.  My  job  involves  reasoning from the  specific 
case  .  .  . 

JUSTICE  RUTH  BADER  GINSBURG3 

INTRODUCTION 
There  is  a  familiar  image  of  justice.  She  is  a  single  figure.  She  is  a 
goddess,  emphatically  not  a  human  being.  She  is  blindfolded.  And 
she  holds  a  scale. 

In  the  real world, the law  cannot be  represented by  a  single figure. 
Legal  institutions  are  composed  of  many  people.  Our  courts  are  run 
by human beings, not  by  a  god or goddess.  Judges need  not  be blind- 
folded; what  they  should  be  blind  to  is  perhaps the  key  question  for 
law.  And  judges  have  no  scale.  Far  from  having  a  scale,  they  must 
operate in  the  face  of  a  particular kind  of  social  heterogeneity: sharp 
and  often  intractable disagreements on  basic  principle. 

The  problem of  social  pluralism pervades  the  legal  system.  Some 
of  the  relevant  disagreements  are  explicitly  religious  in  character. 
Others might  be  described as  quasi-religious in  the  sense  that  they  in- 
volve  people's  deepest  and  most  defining commitments.  What  is  the 
appropriate conception  of  liberty  and  equality?  How  should  people 
educate their children?  Should government punish people on the  basis 
of deterrence only or should it consider retribution as well?  Is  the free 
speech  principle about  democracy or  instead  individual  autonomy? 

There  is  much dispute about whether well-functioning democracies 
should  try  to  resolve  such  disagreements, and  about  how  they  should 
do  so  if  they  do  try.4  Perhaps government should  seek  an  "overlap- 
ping  consensus"5 among  reasonable people,  thus  allowing  agreements 
to  be  made  among  Kantians,  utilitarians,  Aristotelians,  and  others. 
Perhaps  participants  in  a  liberal  democracy  can  agree  on  the  right 
even  if  they  disagree on  the  good.6  Thus  a  sympathetic observer de- 
scribes the  liberal "hope that  we  can  achieve  social  unity  in  a  democ- 
racy through shared commitment to  abstract principles."7 

3  Nomination  of Ruth  Bader  Ginsburg to  Be  Associate Justice  of  the  Supreme Court of  the 
United  States:  Hearings  Before  the  Senate  Judiciary  Comm.,  1o3d  Cong.,  Ist  Sess.  I80  (I993) 
(statement of  then-Judge Ruth  Bader  Ginsburg). 

4  Of course I  am referring here to JOHN RAWLS, POLITICAL LIBERALISM 

(1993)  and  the sur- 
rounding  debate.  For  instructive  discussion,  see  Joshua  Cohen,  Moral  Pluralism  and  Political 
Consensus, in THE IDEA OF  DEMOCRACY 270  (David Copp, Jean  Haampton & John Roemer eds., 
1993); Jean  Hampton,  The Moral Commitments of Liberalism, in  THE IDEA OF DEMOCRACY, 
cited  above,  at  292;  and  JOSEPH RAz, Facing  Diversity:  The  Case  of  Epistemic  Abstinence,  in 
ETHICS IN  THE  PUBLIC  DOMAIN 45  (I994). 

5 RAWLS, supra note 4,  at  133. 
6  See  id.  at  133-72. 
7  Joshua Cohen, A  More Democratic Liberalism, 92  MSCH. L.  REV. 1503, 

1546 

(1994)  (sum- 

marizing RAWLS,  cited  above  in  note  4). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I 9951 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I735 

This  is  a  promising approach, and  in  some  settings,  it  may  work. 
But  an investigation of  actual democracy, and of law  in  actual democ- 
racies,  raises  questions  about  this  view.  Democracies  - 
and  law  in 
democracies -  must deal with  people who  very  much disagree on  the 
right as  well  as  the  good.  Democracies - 
must  deal  with  people  who  tend  to  distrust  abstractions  altogether. 
Participants in law  are no exception.  Judges are certainly not ordinary 
citizens.  But  neither  are  they  philosophers.  Indeed,  participants  in 
law  may  be  unwilling  to  commit  themselves  to  large-scale theories of 
any kind, and they will  likely disagree with  one another if they seek to 
agree on  such  theories. 

and law  in  democracies 

Judges  also  have  to  decide  many  cases,  and  they  have  to  decide 
them  quickly.  Decisions  must  be  made  rapidly in  the  face  of  appar- 
ently  intractable social  disagreements on  a  wide  range of  first princi- 
ples.  These  disagreements will  be  reflected within  the  judiciary  and 
other adjudicative  institutions as  well  as  within  the  citizenry at  large. 
At  least  this  is  so  if  adjudicative  institutions  include,  as  they  should, 
some  of  the  range of  views  that  are included  in  society  generally. 

In  addition  to  facing  the  pressures of  time,  these  diverse  people 
must  find  a  way  to  continue  to  live  with  one  another.  They  should 
also  show  each  other a  high  degree of  mutual  respect and  reciprocity. 
Mutual  respect  may  well  entail  a  reluctance to  attack  one  another's 
most  basic  or  defining commitments, at  least  if  it  is  not  necessary to 
do  so  in  order to  decide  particular controversies.  Participants in  law, 
even  more than  in  democratic debate  generally, do  well  to  follow  this 
counsel. 

My  suggestion  in  this  Commentary is  that  well-functioning  legal 
systems often tend to  adopt a  special strategy for producing agreement 
amidst pluralism.  Participants in  legal controversies try to produce in- 
completely theorized agreements on  particular  outcomes.8  They  agree 

8  Consider the notion of overlapping consensus as set out in RAWLS,  cited above  in note 4,  at 
133-72.  The  idea  of  an  incompletely theorized convergence on  particulars is  related.  Both  ideas 
attempt  to  bring  about  stability  and  social  agreement  in  the  face  of  diverse  "comprehensive 
views."  But  the two  ideas are far from the same.  I  am most interested in the problem of  produc- 
ing agreement on particular outcomes and low-level principles (defined below at p.  I 740) to justify 
them, with  the thought that people who disagree on  general principles can often agree on individ- 
ual cases.  Rawls is interested in  a related but different possibility - 
that people who  disagree on 
comprehensive views  can  agree on  certain political abstractions and  use that  agreement for polit- 
ical  purposes.  See  id.  at  43-46.  Of  course this  is  also  true. 

What I  am  suggesting here shares with  Rawls's  project the  goal  of  producing social  stability 
and  a  degree of  mutuality among people who  differ on  fundamental matters.  But  a  goal  of  the 
incompletely theorized agreement is to obtain consensus on  a judgment among people who  do  not 
want  to  decide questions in  political philosophy and  who  (for example) are uncertain as  between 
political  liberalism and perfectionist liberalism, or  as  between  liberalism and  certain alternatives. 
Such people  may  want  to  decide  a  case  involving  tort law,  or  free speech, or equality,  by  refer- 
ence to principles that can be accepted by political and perfectionist liberals, and others as well  (if 
this  is  possible).  In  this  way,  we  might  conclude that judgments  in  law  and  politics  sometimes 
bear something like the same relation to political philosophy as do judgments in political philoso- 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I 736 

HARVARD  LAW  REVIEW 

[Vol.  I08:I733 

on  the  result and on  relatively narrow or low-level  explanations for it. 
They  need  not  agree  on  fundamental  principle.9  They  do  not  offer 
larger or  more abstract explanations than  are  necessary to  decide  the 
case.  When  they  disagree on  an  abstraction, they  move  to  a  level  of 
greater particularity.  The  distinctive  feature of  this  account  is  that  it 
emphasizes agreement on  (relative) particulars rather than on  (relative) 
abstractions.  This  is  an  important  source  of  social  stability  and  an 
important way  for diverse  people  to  demonstrate mutual  respect,10 in 
law  especially  but  also  in  liberal democracy as  a  whole. 

Consider some  examples.  People  may  believe  that  it  is  important 
to  protect  endangered species,  while  having  quite  diverse  theories  of 
why  this  is  so.  Some  may  stress  obligations  to  species  or  nature  as 
such; others may  point  to  the  role of  endangered species  in  producing 
ecological stability; still others may point to the possibility that obscure 
species  will  provide  medicines for human  beings.  When  (and  if)  peo- 
ple  who  agree  on  the  same  course  of  action  are  able  to  do  so  from 
different  foundations,  they  need  not  choose  among  foundations.  So 
too,  people  may  favor  a  rule  of  strict  liability  for  certain  torts  from 
diverse  starting  points,  with  some  people  rooting  their  judgments  in 
economic efficiency, others in distributive goals, and still others in  con- 
ceptions  of  basic  rights.  Similarly, people  may  invoke  many  different 
foundations  for  their  belief  that  the  law  should  protect  labor  unions 
against  certain kinds  of  employer coercion.  Some  may  emphasize  the 
potentially  democratic character of  unions; others may  think  that  un- 
ions  are necessary for industrial peace; others may  believe  that  unions 
protect basic  rights. 

Of  course particular issues, in  these as  in  other areas, are disputed 
as  well.  Complete  agreement is  unlikely  in  matters of  this  sort.  Dis- 

phy  to  questions in  metaphysics.  (On Rawls'  view,  see RAWLS, cited  above  in  note 4,  at  xix-xx.) 
Just  as  the  political philosopher may  attempt not  to  take  a  stand  on  metaphysical questions,  so 
the lawyer, the judge, or the political participant may urge outcomes that make it  unnecessary to 
solve  large questions in  political philosophy.  In  a  liberal society committed to  allowing people of 
different  fundamental  views  to  live  together  with  mutual  respect,  the  Rawlsian  strategy  may 
sometimes  founder on  confusion, limitations of  time  and  capacity, and  fears  that  political  liber- 
alism  is  itself  too  sectarian to  serve  as  a  defining political creed.  I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that 
the  Rawlsian  project is  unable  to  surmount these  concerns.  Certainly there must  be  constraints 
on  the  content of  incompletely theorized agreements, and  those  constraints take  the  form of  ab- 
stractions.  But I  do  mean to  suggest that participants in  liberal political culture often seek agree- 
ment  on  what  to  do  rather than  exactly how  to  think.  When they  reach these  agreements from 
diverse  starting points, they  can promote liberal goals in  a  way  that has  some distinctive  advan- 
tages.  I  do  not  attempt here to  sort out  all  of  the  relations between  the  idea  of  an  overlapping 
consensus  and  the  notions  I  have  in  mind; more  detailed  discussion  will  appear  in  SUNSTEIN, 
LEGAL  REASONING  AND  POLITICAL  CONFLICT,  cited  above  in  note  *. 

9  I  am  thus  emphasizing relative  rather than  absolute particularity.  See  infra  pp.  1739-41. 
It  is also possible that people may agree on abstraction while disagreeing on particulars, a kind of 
incompletely theorized agreement that  also  has  legal  uses.  See  infra  p.  I739. 

10 There  is  an  exception, having  to  do  with  certain kinds of  invidious  or  palpably  confused 

abstractions.  See  infra  p.  I747. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I9951 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I737 

agreement  on  foundations  may  produce  disagreement  on  particulars. 
What I  am emphasizing is that, when  closure cannot be based on  rela- 
tive  abstractions, the  legal  system  is  often  able  to  reach  a  degree  of 
closure by  focusing on  relative particulars.  Examples  of  this  kind  are 
exceptionally  common.  They  are  the  day-to-day  stuff  of  law. 

When the convergence on particular outcomes is  incompletely theo- 
rized, it  is  because  the  relevant actors are clear on  the  result without 
being clear, either in their own  minds or on paper, on the most general 
theory  that  accounts  for  it."1  Some  people  may  not  have  decided  on 
the  best  general theory; in  their individual  capacities,  they  may  think 
that  it  is  unnecessary to  choose among competing general theories, be- 
cause  whatever  theory is  best,  the  same  result follows.  It  is  common 
for a judge  to  believe that a certain outcome is  right because all  possi- 
ble  theoretical  positions  lead  to  it.  Alternatively,  a  particular judge 
may  believe  that  he  knows  which  theory is  best,  but  may  not  be  able 
to  say  so  in  an  opinion,  for  fear  of  being  outvoted,  or  because  other 
judges  on his court are uncertain whether he is  right and would  prefer 
to  leave  the  more abstract issues  for  another day. 

Often  judges  can  agree  on  an  opinion  or  rationale  offering  low- 
level  or mid-level principles and taking a  relatively narrow line.  They 
a 
may  agree  that  a  particular  rule  is  binding  and  makes  sense  - 
sixty-five  mile-per-hour speed limit,  a  requirement that  people  be  pro- 
vided  a  hearing before  losing  their  homes  -  without  agreeing on  or 
entirely  understanding any  set  of  purported foundations  for  their  be- 
reaffirming Roe  v.  Wade,12 pro- 
lief.  They  may  accept an  outcome - 
tecting  sexually  explicit  art  -  without  knowing  or  converging  on  an 
ultimate  ground  for  that  acceptance.  Reasons  are  almost  always  of- 
fered,13  and  in  this  sense  something in  the  way  of  abstraction accom- 
panies  the  outcome; reasons are  by  definition more  abstract than  the 
outcome  for which  they  account.  But  the  relevant actors seek  to  stay 
at the lowest  level  of  abstraction necessary for the decision of the  case. 
They  hope that the reasons that have been offered are compatible with 
an  array of  deeper possible reasons, and  they  refuse to  make  a  choice 

11  Interesting issues of  collective  choice lurk in  the  background here.  Important problems of 
cycling,  strategic  behavior,  and  path  dependence  may  arise  in  multimember  bodies  containing 
people  with  divergent  rationales, each  of  whom  wants  to  make  his  rationale part  of  law.  See 
generally  KENNETH  J.  ARRow, SOCIAL CHOICE  AND  INDIVIDUAL  VALUES  passim  (2d  ed.  I963) 
(analyzing  problems of  public  choice).  There  may  also  be  complex  bargaining  issues  as  some 
officials or judges  seek  to  implement a  broad theory as  part of  the  outcome, while  others seek  a 
narrow theory, and  still  others  are  undecided between  the  two.  These  important issues  are  be- 
yond  the  scope  of  the  present discussion, though it  would  be  most  illuminating to  have  a  better 
grasp, theoretically and empirically, of the sorts of bargaining games that occur when  officials and 
judges  decide  on  the  scope  of  the  theory  to  accompany  an  outcome.  Cf  DOUGLAS  G.  BAIRD, 
ROBERT  H.  GERTNER  & RANDAL  C.  PICKER,  GAME  THEORY  AND  THE  LAW 6-49  (1994)  (apply- 
ing  game  theory models  to  analyze how  players choose  among different legal  regimes). 

12  410  U.S.  113  (I973). 
13  For exceptions, see  the  discussion below  at  pp.  1754-60. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I 738 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. I08:I733 

among  those  deeper reasons if  it  is  not  necessary to  do  so.  This  phe- 
nomenon  raises questions about  many  prominent accounts of  judging, 
particularly that  of  Ronald Dworkin,  which  I  discuss  below.'4 

By  emphasizing incompletely theorized agreements, I  intend  partly 
to  describe  existing  practice.  These  agreements are  a  pervasive  phe- 
nomenon  in  Anglo-American  law  and,  in  particular,  in  judge-made 
law.  Indeed,  they  play  an  important function in  any  well-functioning 
democracy consisting  of  a  heterogeneous population.  The  persistence 
of  such  agreements offers a  challenge  to  people  who  think  that  areas 
of  law  actually  reflect  some  general  theory,  involving  (for  example) 
Kantian  or  utilitarian understandings.'5 

I  want,  however,  to  make  some  normative  claims  as  well.  These 
claims  are connected with  the distinctive  morality of judging  and  per- 
haps  the  distinctive  morality of  politics  in  a  pluralistic  society.  It  is 
customary  to  lament  an  outcome  that  has  not  been  completely  theo- 
rized, on  the ground that any such outcome has been inadequately jus- 
tified;  but  there  are  special  advantages  to  incompletely  theorized 
agreements  in  law  (and  elsewhere).  Such  agreements  are  especially 
well  suited  to  the  institutional  limits  of  the  judiciary,  which  is  com- 
posed  in  significant part of  multimember bodies,  consisting  in  turn of 
highly  diverse  people  who  must  render many  decisions,  live  together, 
avoid error to the extent possible, and show each other mutual respect. 
The  virtues of  incompletely theorized agreements extend as  well  to  so- 
cial  life,  to  workplace  and  familial  life,  and  even  to  democratic  poli- 
tics.  I  will  note  these  possibilities  without  discussing  them  in  detail 
here. 

Of  course I  do  not  suggest that  there is  no  place  in  society  or  law 
for ambitious theories.  Such theories are an important part of  the aca- 
demic study of law,  which can influence legal and political institutions. 
Certainly such  theories are legitimately a  part of  democratic delibera- 
tion.  To  reveal practices as  confused or  unjust,  or  to  decide  whether 
practices are confused or unjust, it  may  be  necessary to  think  at  high 
levels  of  abstraction.  Indeed, judges might well  raise the level  of  theo- 
retical ambition if  this  is  necessary to  decide  a  case,  or  if  a  high-level 
theory can  be  shown  to  be  a  good  one  and  they  can  be  persuaded to 
and 
agree  to  it.  But  participants in  adjudicative  institutions  are  - 
very  cautious  before taking  this  step. 
should  be  - 

14  See  infra  pp.  1757-60. 
15  See,  e.g.,  RONALD DWORKIN, LAW'S EMPIRE 240-50  (I986)  (arguing that  tort law  requires 
inquiry into  abstract "justice"); RiCHARD A.  POSNER, ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF LAW 23  (4th  ed. 
(arguing that the common law  actually promotes economic efficiency).  Of course, advocates 
I992) 
of  a  deep  theory  might  urge  that  incompletely theorized agreements, taken  as  a  class,  tend  to 
reflect a  certain theory even  if  the  theory has  not  been  adopted self-consciously, and  that  those 
decisions  that  are  inconsistent with  the  theory should  be  abandoned. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I739 

I.  AGREEMENTS  WITHOUT  THEORY 

A.  In  General 

Incompletely theorized agreements play a pervasive role in law  and 
society.  It  is  rare for a  person, and  especially for a  group, to  theorize 
that is,  to accept both a highly abstract the- 
any subject completely - 
ory  and  a  series  of  steps  that  relate  the  theory  to  a  concrete  conclu- 
sion.  In  fact,  people often  reach incompletely theorized agreements on 
a  general principle.  Such agreements are incompletely theorized in  the 
sense  that  people  who  accept  the  principle need  not  agree on  what  it 
entails  in  particular cases.  People  know  that  murder  is  wrong,  but 
they  disagree about abortion.  They  favor racial equality, but  they  are 
divided  on  affirmative action.  Hence  there is  a  familiar phenomenon 
of  a  comfortable and even  emphatic agreement on  a  general principle, 
accompanied by  sharp disagreement about  particular cases.'6 

This  sort of agreement is incompletely theorized in  the sense that it 
is  incompletely specified -  a  familiar phenomenon with  constitutional 
provisions'7  and  regulatory standards  in  administrative  law.  Incom- 
pletely  specified  agreements  have  distinctive  social  uses.  They  may 
permit  acceptance  of  a  general  aspiration  when  people  are  unclear 
about  what  the  aspiration means, and  in  this  sense, they can  maintain 
a  measure  of  both  stability  and  flexibility  over  time.  At  the  same 
time, they can conceal the fact of large-scale social disagreement about 
particular cases. 

There  is  a  second  and  quite  different  kind  of  incompletely  theo- 
rized  agreement.  People  may  agree  on  a  mid-level  principle  but  dis- 
agree  both  about  the  more  general  theory  that  accounts  for  it  and 
about  outcomes  in  particular cases.  They  may  believe  that  govern- 
ment  cannot  discriminate on  the  basis  of  race,  without  settling  on  a 
large-scale  theory  of  equality,  and  without  agreeing  whether  govern- 
ment may enact affirmative action programs or segregate prisons when 
racial  tensions  are  severe.  The  connections  are  left  unclear,  either  in 
people's  minds or in  authoritative public documents, between  the mid- 
level  principle  and  general  theory; the  connection  is  equally  unclear 
between  the  mid-level  principle  and  concrete  cases.  So  too,  people 
may  think  that  government  may  not  regulate  speech  unless  it  can 
show  a  clear and present danger, but fail  to  settle whether this princi- 
ple  is  founded  in  utilitarian  or  Kantian  considerations,  and  disagree 
about whether the principle allows government to regulate a particular 
speech  by  members of  the  Ku  Klux  Klan. 

16 For a  valuable discussion, see Henry S. Richardson, Specifying Norms as  a  Way to Resolve 

Concrete  Ethical  Problems, 

I9  PHIL.  &  PUB.  AFF.  279,  306  (i990). 

17 Thus,  such terms as "equality" and "freedom" are "essentially contested" in  the  sense made 
famous  by  W.B.  Gallie,  Essentially  Contested  Concepts,  56  PRoc.  ARISTOTELIAN SOC'Y I67 
(I955-56). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I740 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  I08:I733 

My  special  interest here  is  in  a  third  kind  of  phenomenon  - 

in- 
completely  theorized agreements on  particular outcomes,  accompanied 
by  agreements  on  the  low-level  principles  that  account  for  them. 
These  terms  contain  some  ambiguities.  There  is  no  algorithm  by 
which  to distinguish between a high-level theory and one  that operates 
at  an  intermediate or  low  level.  We  might  consider  Kantianism  and 
utilitarianism  as  conspicuous  examples  of  high-level  theories  and  see 
legal  illustrations  in  the  many  (academic) efforts  to  understand  such 
areas as  tort law,  contract law,  free speech, and  the  law  of  equality to 
be  undergirded by  highly  abstract theories of  the  right or  the  good.'8 
By  contrast, we  might  think  of  low-level  principles as  including  most 
the general class of princi- 
of the ordinary material of legal doctrine - 
ples  and  justifications that  are not  said  to  derive  from  any  particular 
large  theories of  the  right or  the  good,  that  have  ambiguous  relations 
to  large  theories,  and  that  are  compatible  with  more  than  one  such 
theory.'9 

By  the term "particular outcome," I  mean the judgment about  who 
wins  and  who  loses  a  case.  By  the  term "low-level principles," I  refer 
to  something relative, not  absolute; a  principle is  low-level  only  when 
compared to  more abstract alternatives.  I  also  mean  the  terms "theo- 
ries" and  "abstractions" (which  I  use  interchangeably) in  a  relative 
sense: the  notions "low-level," "high-level," and "abstract" are best  un- 
derstood  as  comparative,  like  the  terms  "big" and  "unusual."  The 
"clear and  present  danger" test  is  abstract  when  compared  with  the 
judgment  that  members of  the  Nazi  Party may  march in  Skokie,  Illi- 
nois,20  but  the  test  is  relatively  particular when  compared  with  the 
constitutional  abstraction "freedom of  speech."  The  idea  of  "freedom 
of  speech" is relatively abstract when  measured against the  notion that 
campaign  finance  laws  are  acceptable,  but  the  same  idea  is  less  ab- 
stract than  the  grounds that  justify  free speech,  such  as  the  principle 
of  autonomy.21 The  notion of  a  completely theorized judgment  can  be 
understood in  the  abstract: it  refers to  a judgment  on  a  particular set 
of  facts  combined with  all  relevant vertical and  horizontal judgments, 
as in  a judgment in  a free speech case accompanied by an understand- 
ing  of  all  other  free  speech  cases,  or  perhaps of  all  cases,  and  of  all 
principles,  at  all  levels  of  generality,  that  explain  or  justify  that 
judgment. 

What I  am  emphasizing here is  that  when  people diverge on  some 
(relatively) high-level  proposition, they  might  be  able  to  agree  if  they 

18 See,  e.g.,  Thomas  Scanlon, A  Theory of  Freedom of Expression,  i  PHIL.  & PUB.  AFF. 204 
(i986);  CHARLES FRIED,  CONTRACT As  PROMISE 7-8 

(I972);  DWORKIN, supra note  I5,  at  407-I0 
(I98I). 

19  See  JOSEPH RAZ,  On  the  Autonomy of  Legal Reasoning,  in  ETHICS IN  THE  PUBLIC Do- 

MAIN, supra  note  4,  at  3I0,  314-24 

(1994) 
20  See  Collin  v.  Smith,  578  F.2d  II97, 
21  See  Scanlon,  supra  note 

i8,  at  2I5-20. 

(discussing  doctrine  and  the  autonomy of  law). 
I202-03 

(7th  Cir.  I978). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I74I 

lower  the  level  of  abstraction.  People  are sometimes able  to  converge 
on  a  point of  less  generality than the point at which  agreement is diffi- 
cult  or impossible.  In  law,  the  point of  agreement is  often  highly  par- 
in  the  sense  that  it 
ticularized  - 
involves  a  specific outcome  and  a  set  of  reasons that  typically  do  not 
venture  far  from the  case  at  hand. 

absolutely  as  well  as  relatively  - 

As  I  have  said,  reasons  are,  by  their  very  nature,  more  abstract 
than  the  outcome  for  which  they  account.  In  analogical  thinking,  a 
judge  cannot go from one particular to  another; it is  necessary to  iden- 
tify  a  principle or a  reason to  unify or separate the particulars.  To the 
extent that  law  prizes reason-giving, it contains an impulse toward  ab- 
straction.  Full  particularity is  rare.22 What  I  am  emphasizing  is  the 
lawyer's  impulse  to  offer  reasons  on  which  people  can  unite  from 
widely  diverse  foundations. 

Perhaps  the  participants  in  law  endorse  no  high-level  theory,  or 
perhaps they believe that no such theory is yet  available.  Perhaps they 
find  theoretical  disputes  irrelevant,  confusing,  or  annoying.  Perhaps 
they  think  that  it  is  unnecessary to  select  a  theory, because  a  certain 
outcome  follows  whatever  theory  they  choose.  Perhaps  they  disagree 
with  one another as they enter into high-level debates.  What is critical 
is  that  they  agree  on  how  a  case  must  come  out  and  on  a  low-level 
justification. 

The  argument  emphatically  applies  to  legal  rules,  whether  set 
down  by  judges,  legislators,  or  administrators.  Legal  rules  are  typi- 
cally  incompletely theorized in  the  sense that  they  can  be  accepted  by 
people  who  disagree on  many general issues.  People may  agree that  a 
sixty-five mile-per-hour speed limit  makes sense, and that  it  applies to 
defendant Jones, without having much of a theory about criminal pun- 
ishment, and without  making judgments about the  domain of  utilitari- 
anism  and  the  scope  of  paternalism.  A  key  social function  of  rules is 
to  allow  people  to  agree  on  the  meaning,  authority,  and  even  the 
soundness  of  a  governing legal  provision  in  the  face  of  disagreements 
about  much  else.23  Much  the  same  can  be  said  about  other  devices 
found  in  the  legal  culture, including  standards, factors,  and  emphati- 
cally  analogical  reasoning.24 Indeed,  all  of  the  lawyer's  conventional 

22  See  infra  section II.C. 
23 See  JOSEPH RAZ, THE  MORALITY OF  FREEDOM 58  (I986)  ("[T]he practice [of  proceeding 
through the  mediation of  rules] allows  the creation of  a  pluralistic culture.  For it  enables  people 
to  unite in  support of  some  'low  or medium level'  generalizations despite profound disagreements 
concerning their ultimate foundations, which some seek in religion, others in Marxism or in Liber- 
alism,  etc.'). 

24  I  discuss  the  latter in  Cass  R  Sunstein, On Analogical Reasoning,  io6  HARV.  L.  REV. 74I 

passim (I 993). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I 742 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  I08:1733 

tools  can  allow  the  achievement of  incompletely theorized agreements 
on  particular outcomes,  though  in  interestingly different ways.25 

It  should now  be  clear that I  am especially concerned with  the  use 
full  accounts of  the  foun- 
of  ambitious thinking to produce "depth" - 
dations  of  a  decision, in  the  form of  attempts to  find ever deeper rea- 
sons  behind  the  outcome.  Incompletely  theorized  agreements  do  not 
offer  such  accounts.  But  such  agreements also  fail  along  the  dimen- 
that  is,  they  do  not  try  to  rationalize the  law  by 
sion  of  "width" - 
showing  how  an  outcome  in  one  case  fits  coherently  with  particular 
outcomes in the full range of other cases.  Judges, of course, attempt to 
produce local coherence, especially through reasoning by  analogy.  But 
they  do  not  try for  global  coherence. 

B.  How  People  Converge 

It  seems clear that people may converge on a  correct outcome even 
though  they  do  not  have  a  full  account  for  their  judgments.  Jones 
may  know  that  dropped  objects  fall,  that  bee  stings  hurt,  and  that 
snow  melts,  without  knowing  exactly  why  these  facts  are true.  Much 
the same is true for law  and morality.  Johnson may know  that slavery 
is  wrong,  that  government  may  not  stop  political  protests,  and  that 
every  person should have just  one  vote,  without  knowing  exactly  why 
these  things are so.  Judge Wilson may  know  that  under the  Constitu- 
tion,  discrimination  against  the  handicapped  is  generally  permitted, 
and  that  discrimination against  women  is  generally  banned,  without 
having  an  account of  why  the  Constitution is  so  understood.  We may 
thus  offer  an  epistemological  point:  people  can  know  that  X  is  true 
without  entirely  knowing  why  X  is  true.  This  is  very  often  so  for 
particular conclusions about  law. 

There  is  a  political  point  as  well.  People  can  agree on  individual 
judgments  even  if  they  disagree  on  general  theory.  Diverse  judges 
may  agree  that  Roe  v.  Wade26 should  not  be  overruled,  though  the 
reasons  that  lead  each  of  them  to  that  conclusion  sharply  diverge. 
Perhaps  the  judges  have  different  large-scale  theories  and  can  agree 
only  on  a  low-level  principle.  Perhaps  some  of  the  judges  have  not 
developed  ambitious  accounts  of  the  relevant  area  of  the  law  at  all. 
Thus  some  people  emphasize  that  the  Court  should  respect  its  own 
precedents; others think that Roe  was  rightly decided as a  way  of  pro- 
tecting  women's  equality; others  think  that  the  case  was  rightly  de- 
cided  as  a  way  of  protecting privacy; others  think  that  the  case  has 
everything  to  do  with  state  neutrality  toward  religion; others  think 
that  restrictions on  abortion are unlikely to  protect fetuses, and  so  the 

25  I emphasize "can" rather than "will." Analogies are frequently disputed, and people often 

disagree on the meaning of a standard ("unreasonable risk," "discrimination," and so forth). 

26  4I0  U.S.  II3 

S. Ct. 279I, 

2804 

(1973).  On the refusal to overrule Roe,  see Planned Parenthood v. Casey, II2 
(I992). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I743 

case  rightly  reflects the  fact  that  any  regulation of  abortion would  be 
ineffective  in  promoting its  own  purposes.  We  can  find  incompletely 
theorized political agreements on particular outcomes in many areas of 
law  and politics -  on  both sides of the  affirmative action controversy, 
both  sides  of  the  dispute  over  the  death  penalty,  and  in  all  facets  of 
the  debate  over  health  care reform. 

C.  Rules  and  Analogies 

There  are  two  especially  important methods  by  which  law  might 
resolve  disputes  without  obtaining  agreement on  first principles: rules 
and  analogies.  Both  of  these  methods  attempt  to  promote  a  major 
goal of a heterogeneous society: to make it possible to obtain agreement 
where  agreement is  necessary,  and  to  make  it  unnecessary  to  obtain 
agreement where agreement is  impossible. 

For purposes of  law,  reliance on  rules might  be  incompletely theo- 
rized in  three different ways.  People  might  agree that  rules are  bind- 
ing  without  having  a  full  or  agreed-upon account  of  why  this  is  so. 
They  can  often  agree  on  what  rules  mean  even  when  they  agree  on 
very  little  else.27  They  can  even  agree  that  certain  rules  are  good 
without  agreeing  on  exactly  why  they  are  good.  And  in  the  face  of 
persistent  disagreement or  uncertainty about  what  morality  generally 
requires, people  can  sometimes reason about particular cases  by  refer- 
ence  to  analogies.  They  point  to  cases  in  which  their judgments  are 
firm,  and  proceed  from  those  firm  judgments  to  the  more  difficult 
ones.  From  different  foundations,  they  may  be  able  to  agree  on  the 
plausibility  of  an  analogical  claim  because  they  share  a  judgment 
about  a  governing  low-level  principle  in  the  face  of  disagreement 
about  the  abstractions underlying that  principle. 

We might consider, in  this  regard, Justice Stephen Breyer's discus- 
sion  of  one  of  the  key  compromises reached by  the  seven  members of 
the  United  States  Sentencing  Commission.28  As  Justice  Breyer  de- 
scribes it,  a  central issue  was  how  to  proceed in  the  face  of  disparate 
theoretical  commitments.  Some  people  asked  the  Commission  to  fol- 
an  ap- 
low  an  approach  to  punishment  based  on  "just  deserts" - 
proach  that  would  rank  criminal  conduct  in  terms  of  severity.  But 
different commissioners had different views  about how  different crimes 
should be  ranked, and a  rational system was  unlikely to  follow  from a 
collaborative  ranking  effort.  Other  people  urged  the  Commission  to 
use  a model of deterrence.  There was,  however, no  empirical evidence 
to  link  detailed  variations  in  punishment  to  prevention  of  crime. 

27  Of course, substantive disagreements may break out during interpretation.  See  FREDERICK 
(I99I);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Problems with  Rules,  83 

SCHAUER, PLAYING BY  THE  RULES  207-28 
CAL. L.  REv.  (forthcoming July  I995). 

28  See  Stephen G.  Breyer, The Federal Sentencing Guidelines and  the Key Compromises upon 

Which They Rest,  I7  HOFSTRA L.  REv.  I,  I5-I8 

(I988). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I 744 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. I08:I733 

Though Justice Breyer does not stress the point, it  seems clear that the 
seven  members of  the  Commission were  unlikely  to  agree  that  deter- 
rence  provides  a  full  account  of  the  aims  of  criminal sentencing.29 

In  these circumstances, what  route did  the  Commission follow?  In 
fact,  the  Commission  adopted  no  general view  about  the  appropriate 
aims  of  criminal sentencing.  Instead,  the  Commission adopted  a  rule 
one  founded  on  precedent: "It decided  to  base  the  Guidelines  pri- 
- 
marily upon  typical, or average, actual past practice."30 The  Commis- 
sion  reached  an  incompletely  theorized  agreement  on  the  value  of 
starting (and usually ending) with  past  averages.  Hence  unusual judi- 
cial  sentences would  be  filtered out through adoption of  typical or av- 
erage  practices.  Consciously  articulated  explanations,  involving  low- 
level  reasons,  were  used  to  support  particular  departures  from  the 
past.  Justice Breyer saw  this  effort as  a  necessary means of  obtaining 
agreement  and  rationality  within  a  multimember body  charged  with 
avoiding  unjustifiably wide  variations  in  sentencing.31 

The  example  suggests a  quite  general point.  Through  both  analo- 
gies  and rules, it  is  often possible to  achieve convergence on  particular 
disputes  without  resolving  large-scale issues  of  the  right  or  the  good. 
For judges  and  officials at  least,  this  is  an  important virtue. 

The  fact that we  can obtain an agreement of  this sort -  about the 
usefulness  and  meaning of  a  rule or the  existence of  a  sound  analogy 
is  no  guarantee of  a  good  outcome,  whatever  may  be  our  criteria 
- 
for deciding whether an outcome is good.  The  fact that there is  agree- 
ment  about  a  rule  does  not  mean  that  the  rule is  desirable.  Perhaps 
the  rule  is  bad,  or  perhaps the  judgments  that  go  into  its  interpreta- 
tion  are  bad.  The  resolution of  the  Sentencing  Commission  deserves 
approval  only  if  average  practices were  not  pervasively  unjust.  Per- 
haps  the  Sentencing  Commission  incorporated judgments  that  were 
based  on  ignorance, confusion, or prejudice.32 Perhaps a  more deeply 
theorized approach would  have  produced better guidelines.33 

Some  of  the  same  things  may  be  said  about  analogies.  People  in 
positions  of  authority may  agree that  a  ban  on  same-sex  marriages is 
analogous  to  a  ban  on  marriages between  uncles  and  nieces.  But  the 
analogy  may  be  misconceived  because  there  are  relevant  differences, 
because  the  similarities are far from decisive,  or because the  principle 
that  accounts for the judgment of  similarity cannot be  sustained.  The 
fact  that  people  agree  that  case  A  is  analogous  to  case  B  does  not 

29  See  id.  at  I7. 
30  Id. 
31  See  id.  at  i8;  supra p.  I733. 
32  For arguments to this effect, see Albert W. Alschuler, The Failure of Sentencing Guidelines: 
(i99i);  Daniel  J.  Freed,  Federal 
A  Plea for  Less  Aggregation, 58  U.  CHI.  L.  REV. 90I,  905-07 
Sentencing  in  the  Wake of  Guidelines: Unacceptable Limits  on  the  Discretion  of Sentencers,  IOI 
YALE  L.J.  i68i,  1703-05 

(I992). 

33  I  do  not  discuss  the  choice  between  rules and  rulelessness here. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

'9951 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I745 

mean  that  case  A  or  case  B  is  rightly decided.  Problems with  analo- 
gies and  low-level  principles might lead us to  be more ambitious.  Par- 
ticipants in  law  may  well  be  pushed in  the  direction of  general theory 
precisely  be- 
- 
cause  low-level  reasoning offers an  inadequate and  incompletely theo- 
rized  account  of  relevant similarities or  relevant differences. 

and  toward  broader  and  more  ambitious  claims  - 

All  this  should  be  sufficient  to  show  that  the  virtues  of  incom- 
pletely  theorized outcomes -  and the  virtues of  decisions by  rule and 
are  partial.  Those  virtues  should  not  be  exaggerated, 
by  analogy  - 
and  sometimes  participants  will  have  to  raise  the  theoretical  stakes. 
But  no  system  of  law  is  likely  to  be  either just  or  efficient  if  it  dis- 
penses  with  incompletely theorized agreements.  In  fact, it  is  not  likely 
even  to  be  feasible. 

II. 

JUSTIFICATIONS  AND  INSTITUTIONS 

What  might  be  said  on  behalf  of  incompletely  theorized  agree- 
ments,  or  incompletely  theorized  judgments,  about  particular  cases? 
As  I  have  indicated, incompletely theorized agreements may  be  unjust 
or otherwise wrong.  Indeed, we  are accustomed to  thinking of  incom- 
plete  theorization  as  reflective  of  some  important  problem  or  defect. 
When people theorize by  raising the  level  of  abstraction, they do  so  to 
reveal  bias,  or  confusion,  or  inconsistency.  Surely  participants  in  a 
legal  system  should  not  abandon this  effort. 

There  is  a  good deal  of  truth in  these usual  thoughts, but  they  are 
not  the  whole  story.  On  the  contrary, incompletely  theorized  judg- 
ments  are an  important and  valuable  part of  both  private  and  public 
life.34  My  principal  concern  is  how  judges  on  a  multimember  body 
should  justify  their  opinions  in  public; the  argument therefore has  a 
great  deal  to  do  with  the  problem  of  collective  choice.  But  some  of 
the  relevant  points  bear  on  other  issues  as  well.  They  have  implica- 
tions  for  the  question  of  how  an  individual  judge  not  faced  with  the 
problem  of  producing  a  majority  opinion  - 
a  judge  on  a  district 
court,  for  example  -  might  write; they  bear  also  on  the  question  of 
how  a  single  judge,  whether  or  not  a  member  of  a  collective  body, 
might  think  in  private  as  well  as  write for the  public; and  they  relate 
to  appropriate  methods  of  both  thought  and  justification  wholly 
outside  of  the  adjudicative  setting.  I  will  say  more about  these  issues 
below. 

34  I  have discussed some of these points in the specific context of analogical thinking. See 
Sunstein, supra note 24.  I try here to broaden and generalize the discussion and also to correct 
some ambiguities and errors in that discussion. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I746 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. I08:I733 

A.  The Case for  Incomplete Theorization 

I.  Multimember Institutions.  - 

I  begin with  the  special  problem 
of  public  justification  faced  by  a  multimember  body.  The  first  and 
most  obvious  point  is  that  incompletely theorized agreements are well 
containing social disa- 
suited to  a  world -  especially a  legal world  - 
greement  on  large-scale  issues.  By  definition,  such  agreements  have 
the  large advantage  of  allowing  a  convergence on  particular outcomes 
by  people  unable  to  reach anything like  an  accord on  general princi- 
ples.  This  advantage  is  associated  not  only  with  the  simple  need  to 
decide cases but also with  social stability, which  could not  exist if  fun- 
damental  disagreements broke  out  in  every  case  of  public  or  private 
dispute.35 

Second,  incompletely theorized agreements can  promote two  goals 
of  a  liberal democracy and  a  liberal legal  system: to  enable  people  to 
live  together,36 and  to  permit them  to  show  each  other  a  measure of 
reciprocity and mutual respect.37 The  use  of  rules or low-level  princi- 
ples allows judges on multimember bodies and hence citizens generally 
to  find commonality -  and a  common way  of  life  -  without  produc- 
ing  unnecessary  antagonism.  Perhaps  more  important,  incompletely 
theorized agreements allow  people to show  each other a high degree of 
mutual respect, civility, or reciprocity.  Ordinary people frequently dis- 
the Middle East,  pornography, 
agree in  some deep way  on  an issue - 
and  sometimes  they  agree not  to  discuss  that  issue 
gay  marriages - 
much, as  a  way  of deferring to each other's strong convictions  (even if 
they  do  not  at  all  respect the  particular conviction  that  is  at  stake).38 
If  reciprocity and  mutual  respect are desirable, it  follows  that judges, 
perhaps  even  more  than  ordinary people,  should  not  challenge  a  liti- 
gant's  or  one  another's  deepest  and  most  defining  commitments,  at 

35 The institution of the concurring opinion shows that judges sometimes reject a colleague's 
low-level justification, perhaps because they accept the result but would prefer a  different low- 
level justification, perhaps because they would prefer a  lower-level or higher-level justification. 
As concurring opinions proliferate, we may begin to reach full particularity in the sense of an 
agreement on an outcome without agreement on a low-level rationale. See, e.g., Furman v. Geor- 
gia, 408  U.S. 238,  240  (Douglas, J., concurring); id.  at  257 (Brennan, J., concurring); id.  at 306 
(Stewart, J., concurring); id.  at 3IO (White, J., concurring); id.  at 314  (Marshall, J. concurring); 
infra PP. I754-57.  This phenomenon is  revealing insofar as it  demonstrates the possibility of 
agreement on an outcome unaccompanied by agreement on any set of reasons. But judges strug- 
gle very hard to avoid full particularity, and they seek incompletely theorized agreements as a 
way of providing an explanation and a degree of guidance despite their differences. 

36  This aspect of liberalism is emphasized in CHARLES  E. LARMORE,  PATTERNS  OF  MORAL 

COMPLEXITY 42-47 

(I987). 

37 See  RAWLS, supra  note 4,  at  I6-17  ("[T]he idea of  reciprocity lies between the idea of 
impartiality, which is altruistic[,] ...  and the idea of mutual advantage understood as everyone's 
being advantaged with respect to each person's present or expected future situation as things 
are."). 

38 Cf  Stephen Holmes,  Gag Rules  or  the  Politics  of  Omission,  in  CONSTITUTIONALISM  AND 
DEMOCRACY I9 passim (Jon Elster & Rune Slagstad eds., i988) (discussing rules designed to pre- 
vent discussion of issues that paralyze political participants). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I747 

least  if  those  commitments are reasonable and  if  there  is  no  need  for 
them to do  so.  Thus,  it would  be better if judges  intending to  reaffirm 
Roe  v.  Wade could  do  so  without  challenging the  belief  that  the  fetus 
is  a  human  being,39 or  if  judges  seeking  to  invalidate  the  death  pen- 
alty  could  do  so  without  saying that  the  punishment of  death  is  inva- 
lid  because  of  its  sheer brutality.40 

Institutional  arguments  in  law,  especially  those  involving  judicial 
restraint, are typically designed to  bracket fundamental questions  and 
remove them  from the  realm of  the judiciary.41  The  allocation of  cer- 
tain  roles  has  the  important  function  of  allowing  outcomes  to  be 
reached  without  forcing courts  to  make  decisions  on  fundamental  is- 
sues.42  Those  issues  are  resolved  by  reference to  institutional  compe- 
tence,  not  on  their merits.43 

To be sure, some fundamental commitments might appropriately be 
challenged  in  the  legal  system  or  within  other  multimember  bodies. 
Some  such commitments are ruled off-limits by  the  authoritative legal 
materials.  Many provisions involving  basic rights have this function.44 
Of  course, it  is  not  always  disrespectful to  disagree with  someone in  a 
fundamental  way;  on  the  contrary,  such  disagreements  may  reflect 
profound  respect.  For  example,  objections  to  judgments  based  on 
prejudice may reflect respect for the person at the  same time that  they 
attempt  to  overcome  the  judgments  at  issue.  When  defining commit- 
ments  are based on demonstrable errors of fact or logic, it  is  appropri- 
ate  to  contest  them.  The  same  is  true  when  those  commitments  are 
rooted in  a  rejection of the basic dignity of  all human beings, or when 
it  is  necessary to  undertake the contest to  resolve a  genuine problem.45 
But  many cases can be  resolved in an incompletely theorized way,  and 
that  is  all  I  am  suggesting here. 

2.  Multimember Institutions  and Individual  Judges.  - 

I  turn now 
to  reasons that  call  for  incompletely theorized agreements whether  or 

39  This is the goal of the equal protection argument. See CASS R. SUNSTEIN, THE  PARTIAL 

CONSTITUTION 259-6I,  272-85 

(I993). 

40  This  is  the  goal of  the argument that the death penalty is  invalid  because it  is  arbitrary in 
its  application.  See  Callins  v.  Collins,  II4  S.  Ct.  II27, 
(I994)  (Blackmun, J.,  dissenting 
from denial  of  certiorari); Godfrey v.  Georgia, 446  U.S.  420,  437-40  (I980)  (Marshall, J.,  concur- 
ring  in  the  judgment). 

II29-30 

41  See,  e.g., Harris v.  McRae, 448  U.S.  297, 326 (i98o)  ("It is  not the  mission of  this court or 
any other to decide whether the balance of  competing interests reflected in  the Hyde  Amendment 
is  wise  social  policy.'). 

42  See DON  HERZOG, HAPPY SLAVES II2  (i989)  (?[Jludges must simply ignore a host of politi- 

cally  charged facts."). 

43  This  is  part  of  the  legal  process  tradition.  See  William  N.  Eskridge,  Jr.,  &  Philip  P. 
Frickey, The Making of  The  Legal Process, I07  HARV.  L.  REV.  203I,  2037-38  (I994).  The  merits 
are  thus  excluded  as  a  reason  for  action.  For  a  general discussion  of  exclusionary reasons,  see 
JOSEPH RAz, PRACTICAL REASON AND NORMS  73-76 (2d  ed. I990). 

44  See, e.g., U.S. CONST.  amend. XIII. 
45 Cf  RAWLS, supra  note  4,  at  4  (discussing reasonable pluralism); see  also  Hampton,  supra 

note  4, at  292-3I2 

(responding to Rawls). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I748 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  I08:1733 

not  we  are dealing with  a  multimember body.  The  first consideration 
here  is  that  any  simple  general theory  of  a  large  area  of  the  law  - 
is  likely  to  be  too  crude to  fit with 
free speech, contracts, property - 
the best understandings of the multiple values that are at  stake in  that 
area.  Monistic  theories of  free speech or property rights, for example, 
fail  to  accommodate the  range of  values  that  speech  and property im- 
plicate.  Human  goods  are  plural  and  diverse,  and  they  cannot  be 
ranked  along  any  unitary scale  without  doing  violence  to  our  under- 
standing of  the qualitative differences among those very goods.46 Peo- 
ple  value  things  not  just  in  terms of  weight  but  also  in  qualitatively 
different ways.  In  the  area of  free speech,  a  simple  top-down  theory 
is  likely  to  run 
- 
afoul  of  powerful judgments  about  particular cases.  For  this  reason, 
monistic  theories are  usually  inadequate.47 

stressing, for  example,  autonomy or  democracy - 

its  point  or  points  - 

Of  course, a  "top-down" approach might  reject monism  and  point 
to  plural values.48  But  any  such  approach is  likely  to  owe  its  genesis 
to  a  range of  particular cases, 
and  its  proof  - 
and  considered  judgments  about  particular  cases,  on  which  it  can 
build.  Top-down  approaches based  on  plural  values  may  seem  con- 
vincing,  but  incompletely  theorized  judgments  are  well  suited  to  a 
moral  universe  that  is  diverse  and  pluralistic,  not  only  in  the  sense 
that people disagree, but also in  the sense that each of  us is attuned to 
pluralism when  we  are thinking  well  about  any  area of  law.49 

Second,  incompletely  theorized agreements serve  the  crucial  func- 
tion of  reducing the political cost of enduring disagreements.  If judges 
disavow  large-scale theories, then  losers in  particular cases  lose  much 
less.  They  lose  a  decision  but  not  the  world.  They  may  win  on  an- 
other occasion.  Their own  theory has  not been  rejected or ruled inad- 
is 
the  authoritative  rationale 
missible.  When 
disconnected from abstract theories of  the  good or the  right, the losers 
can  submit  to  legal  obligations,  even  if  reluctantly,  without  being 
forced  to  renounce  their  deepest  ideals.  To  be  sure,  some  theories 
should be  rejected or ruled inadmissible; this is  sometimes the  point of 
authoritative legal  materials.  But  it  is  an  advantage,  from the  stand- 

for  the  result 

46  See  ELIZABETH ANDERSON,  VALUE  IN  ETHICS  AND  ECONOMICS 55-59  (1993);  Amartya 
Sen, Plural  Utility,  8I  PRoC. ARISTOTELIAN SOC'Y  193,  193-210  (1981);  Cass  R. Sunstein, Incom- 
mensurability and  Valuation in  Law,  92  MICH.  L.  REV. 779,  795-8I2 

47  See  T.M.  Scanlon, Jr., Freedom of Expression and Categories of Expression, 40  U.  PITT. L. 
(rejecting autonomy theory  as  a  full  account).  Analogical  reasoning  is 
REV.  519,  5I9-20 
especially desirable here.  This  way  of  thinking allows judges  and lawyers to  build  doctrine with 
close reference to  particular cases and thus with close attention to the plurality of values  that may 
well  arise.  This  plurality will  confound "top-down" theories that attempt, for example, to  under- 
stand  speech  only  in  terms of  democracy, or  property only  in  terms of  economic efficiency. 

48  See,  e.g.,  AMARTYA SEN,  COMMODITIES AND  CAPABILITIES 33-37  (I985);  Sen,  supra  note 

(1994). 

(1979) 

46,  at  199-204. 

49  See  JOSEPH RAz, The Relevance of Coherence, in  ETHICS IN  THE  PUBLIC DOMAIN, supra 
note 4,  at  298-303  [hereinafter RAz, Relewnce  of Coherence] (discussing pluralism and coherence). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I749 

point  of  freedom  and  stability,  for  a  legal  system  to  be  able  to  tell 
most  losers  -  many  of  whom  are  operating  from  foundations  that 
have  something  to  offer, or  that  cannot  be  ruled out  a  priori - 
that 
their  own  deepest  convictions  may  play  a  role elsewhere in  the  law. 
The  third  point  is  that  incompletely theorized agreements may  be 
valuable  when  what  is  sought is  moral evolution over  time.  Consider 
the  area of  constitutional equality,  where  considerable change  has  oc- 
curred in  the  past  and  is  likely  to  occur  in  the  future.  A  completely 
at  least  if  it  takes  rule-like form  -  would  be 
theorized judgment  - 
unable to accommodate changes in facts or values.50 Incompletely the- 
orized  agreements  are  a  key  to  debates  over  constitutional  equality, 
which  raise issues  about whether gender, sexual orientation, age,  disa- 
bility,  and  other  characteristics are  analogous  to  race.  Incompletely 
theorized agreements have the important advantage of allowing a large 
degree  of  openness  to  new  facts  and  perspectives.  At  one  point,  we 
might  think  that  homosexual  relations  are  akin  to  incest;  at  another 
point,  we  might  find  the  analogy  bizarre.  A  completely  theorized 
judgment  would,  of  course, have  many  virtues  if  it  were  correct.  But 
at  any  particular  moment  in  time,  this  is  an  unlikely  prospect  for 
human  beings,  including judges,  in  constitutional law  or  elsewhere.51 
Fourth,  incompletely  theorized  agreements  may  be  the  best  ap- 
proach  available  for  people  with  limited  time  and  capacities.  The 
search for full  theorization may be  simply too  difficult for participants 
in law  to complete, and so too for others attempting to  reason through 
difficult  problems.  A  single  judge  faces  this  problem  as  much  as  a 
member of  a multimember panel.  In this respect, the principle of  stare 
decisis  is  crucial: attention  to  precedent is  liberating, not  merely  con- 
fining, since  it  is  far easier for judges  to  decide  cases  if  they  can  take 
much  law  as  settled.  The  rule of  precedent thus  assists  in  the  process 
of obtaining agreements among people who  disagree on first principles. 
Indeed,  precedents can lower the level  of  theorization by making more 
foundational  views  irrelevant or  even  inappropriate52 and  by  binding 
judges  to  outcomes that  they  would  like  to  reject.53 In  any  event,  in- 
completely theorized agreements have the advantage, for ordinary law- 
yers  and  judges,  of  humility  and  modesty: they  allow  past  judgments 
to  be  treated as  given  and make it  unnecessary to  create the law  anew 
in  each  case. 

50 I  am assuming here that complete theorization results in fixed rules rather than principles 
whose application can change over time. An agreement on an abstraction would not create fixity 
if the abstraction were indeterminate or capable of new meanings in new contexts. 

51  Rawls says that, in all cases, the "struggle for reflective equilibrium continues indefinitely." 

RAWLS,  supra note 4, at 97. 

52  See Planned Parenthood v.  Casey, II2  S.  Ct 
avoid new judgment on merits of abortion right). 

279I, 

2806-II 

(I992) 

(using stare decisis to 

53  See  Antonin Scalia, The Rule of Law as a Law of Rules,  56 U. CHi. L. REV. II75, 

II77-80 

(I989) 

(discussing virtues of rules). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I750 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. 108:1733 

Fifth,  and  finally,  incompletely  theorized  agreements  are  well 
adapted  to  a  system  that  should  or  must  take  precedents  as  fixed 
points.  This  is  a  large advantage  over more ambitious methods,  since 
ambitious thinkers, in order to  reach horizontal and vertical coherence, 
will  probably be  forced to  disregard many  decided  cases.  In  light  of 
the  sheer number of  adjudicative  officials, law  cannot  speak  with  one 
voice; full coherence in principle is unlikely in  the extreme."  The  area 
of contract law  is unlikely to cohere with  the field of tort law,  or prop- 
erty law; contract law  is itself likely to contain multiple and sometimes 
inconsistent  strands.  Multiple  and  sometimes inconsistent  strands  are 
a  natural  outgrowth  of  incompletely theorized agreements, which  are 
themselves  a  way  of  minimizing the  extent  and  depth  of  conffict.  To 
be  sure, the existence of  such agreements may  increase conffict by  vir- 
tue  of  inconsistency. 

It  is  important,  then,  that  analogical  thinkers  and  rule-followers 
usually  take  precedents  as  given  even  if  they  disagree  with  those 
precedents as  a  matter of  first principle.  The  fact  that  precedents are 
fixed points helps  to  bring about incompletely theorized agreements as 
well,  by  constraining the  areas of  reasonable disagreement.  The  result 
is  a degree of  stability and predictability that are important virtues for 
law. 

We  can  find  many  examples  in  ordinary  life.  Parents'  practices 
with  their  children  may  not  fully  cohere.  Precedents with  respect  to 
bedtime, eating, homework, and much else  are unlikely to  be  suscepti- 
ble  to  systematization under  a  single  principle.  Of  course parents  do 
of  course  a  child  may  justly  feel  ag- 
not  seek  to  be  inconsistent  - 
grieved if  his  sibling  is  allowed  to  watch  more hours of  television  for 
no  good reason -  but full coherence would be a lot  to ask.  The  prob- 
lem  of  reaching full  consistency is  much more severe in  law,  where  so 
many  people  have  decided  so  many  things,  and  where  disagreements 
on  large principles lurk in  the background.  We need not  say this  with 
regret. 

None  of  these  points  suggests  that  incompletely  theorized  agree- 
ments  always  deserve celebration.  The  virtues of  such  agreements are 
partial.  If an agreement is more fully theorized, it may provide greater 
notice  to  affected parties, at  least  if  the  fuller theorization yields  rule- 
like judgments about a  wide  range of  cases.55 Moreover, fuller theori- 
in the form of wider and deeper inquiry into the grounds for 
zation  - 
legal  judgment  -  may  be  valuable  or  even  necessary  to  prevent  in- 
consistency,  bias,  or  self-interest.  We should  be  wary  of  judicial  out- 

54  The point counts against Dworkin's Hercules metaphor, see  DWORKIN, 

supra  note I5,  at 
239-40,  and  also  against  efforts to  find  an  analogy  between  legal  reasoning and  the  search  for 
reflective equilibrium. 

55 See  Scalia, supra  note  53,  at  II77-80; 

cf  Sunstein, supra  note 27  (criticizing extravagant 

enthusiasm for rules). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I75I 

comes  based on  grounds that  have  not  been  stated  publicly.  If  judges 
on  a  panel  have  actually  agreed on  a  general theory, and  if  they  are 
truly  committed  to  it,  they  should  say  so  (even  if,  for  reasons I  have 
suggested, they should usually be reluctant to commit).  Judges and the 
general  community  will  learn  much  more  if  they  are  able  to  discuss 
the  true motivating  grounds for outcomes.  All  these  are valid  consid- 
erations,  and  nothing  I  am  saying  here denies  their importance. 

B.  Judges,  Theory, and  the  Rule  of Law 

There  is  an  association  between  the  effort  to  attain  incompletely 
theorized agreements and  the  rule of  law  ideal.  Insofar as  our system 
prizes rule by law  rather than rule by individual human beings, it tries 
to constrain judgments before particular decisions are made.  Indeed,  a 
prime purpose of  the rule of law  is to  rule off limits certain deep ideas 
of the right or the good, at least in the sense that those ideas ought not 
to  be  invoked  by  officials occupying  particular social  roles.56 Among 
the  forbidden  or  presumptively  forbidden  ideas  are,  often,  high-level 
views  that  are  taken  as  too  hubristic or  sectarian for judges  precisely 
because  they  are  so  high-level.  The  presumption  against  high-level 
theories is  an aspect of the ideal of the rule of law  to the extent that it 
is  an  effort  to  limit  the  exercise of  judicial  discretion at  the  point  of 
application. 

In  this  way,  we  might begin  to  make  distinctions between  the  role 
of  high  theory  in  the  courtroom and  the  role  of  high  theory  in  the 
political  branches; these  distinctions  are  central  to  the  claims  I  am 
making  here.  In  democratic arenas, there is  no  taboo,  presumptive or 
otherwise,  against  invoking  high-level  theories  of  the  good  or  the 
right.57  Such  theories  have  played  a  role  in  many  social  movements 
with  defining  effects  on  American  constitutionalism,  including  the 
Civil  War,  the  New  Deal,  the  women's  movement,  the  civil  rights 
movement,  and the environmental movement.58 Many of  the  most  ab- 

56  See  HERZOG, supra  note  42,  at  II0-47 

(connecting the  law-politics  distinction  with  the 

need  to  distinguish between  the  sphere of  adjudication and  the  sphere of  legislation). 

57  I  am putting to one side the questions raised by "comprehensive views."  See  RAWLS, supra 

note 4,  at 13-I4, 

I75. 

58  See BRUCE ACKERMAN, WE THE  PEOPLE 44-8o  (i99i). 
It might be responded that there 
are many cases in which high principle was  invoked judicially - 
consider, for example, the fairly 
dramatic and  rapid shift  in  the  treatment of  sex  equality.  See  GEOFFREY R.  STONE,  Louis  M. 
SEIDMAN,  CASS R.  SUNSTEIN  &  MARK V.  TUSHNET,  CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 676-7I8  (2d ed. 
In  cases  of  this  sort,  the  Court  does  use  principles of  a  relatively  high-level,  even  if  it 
I99I). 
thinks analogically.  High-level arguments can certainly be found in some important constitutional 
cases,  including,  for  example,  DeShaney  v.  Winnebago County  Dep't  of  Social  Servs.,  489  U.S. 
in  which  the  Court accepted a  large-scale view  of  the  state  as  "passive" rather than 
I89 
"affirmative." See  id.  at  I95-97.  Note,  however, that  the  Court, in  invoking  theories, is  usually 
likely to be following democratic trends rather than initiating new ones, and indeed, in the area of 
sex discrimination, the Court was  building self-consciously on democratic developments.  See,  e.g., 
Frontiero v.  Richardson, 4II  U.S.  677,  687-88 
(I973).  It  is  notable, too,  that the  Court was  also 

(I989), 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I752 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. I08:I733 

stract arguments of  high  principle have  come  from participants in  de- 
liberative  democracy -  James  Madison,  Thomas  Jefferson, Abraham 
Lincoln,  Franklin  Delano  Roosevelt,  Martin  Luther  King,  Jr.,  and 
Rachel Carson.59 To be sure, incompletely theorized agreements play  a 
key  role  in  democratic arenas too; consider laws  that  are  supportable 
by  reference to  diverse  foundations,  such  as  those  protecting  endan- 
gered  species  or  granting  unions  a  right  to  organize.  But  high-level 
theories are  an  indispensable part  of  democratic politics. 

By  contrast,  use  of  large-scale theories  by  courts  is  usually  prob- 
lematic  and  understood as  such,  within  the  judiciary  (as  exemplified 
by judicial practice) if not within law  schools.  The  skepticism is partly 
a  result of  the  simple  fact  that judges  who  invoke  large-scale theories 
may  have  to  require large-scale social  reforms, and  courts are usually 
ineffective  at  implementing  such  reforms on  their  own.60  An  impor- 
tant part of  the problem lies in  the fact  that courts, in  common law  or 
constitutional  cases,  must  decide  on  the  legitimacy  of  rules  that  are 
aspects of  complex  systems.  In  invalidating or changing a  single  rule, 
courts may produce unfortunate systemic effects that are not  visible  to 
them  at  the  time  of  decision  and  that  may  be  impossible for  them  to 
correct thereafter.6'  Legislatures are in  a  much  better position on  this 
score. 

For those who  believe that the Warren Court provides an enduring 
model for American constitutionalism, this cautionary note may  be  in- 
adequate; perhaps courts can take important steps in producing justice 
where  there is  now  injustice,  and  perhaps a  degree of  theoretical ab- 
straction is  necessary for them to perform this  role.  Even  if  this is  so, 
constitutional law  is  only  a  small  part of  adjudication, not  the  whole 
picture, and  in  any  case,  a  degree of  social reform in  the  name  of  the 
Constitution might  be  produced through judgments  that  are not  com- 
pletely  theorized.62  Moreover,  constitutional  courts  are  unlikely  to 
want  to  produce  large-scale  social  change;  the  mode  of  selecting 

reluctant to develop a theory to account for its new approach to sex equality, but relied instead on 
a  set of  relevant factors.  See  id.  at  682-87.  (I am  grateful to  Susan Moller Okin  for raising this 
issue.) 

59  Carson is  probably the  most  contentious example on  this  list,  but  her  book  was  in  many 
ways  the  foundation  of  the  environmental  movement.  See  RACHEL  CARSON,  SILENT  SPRING 
277-97 

(I962);  Averting a  Death  Foretold,  NEWSWEEK, Nov.  28,  I994,  at  72,  72-73. 

60  See  GERALD  N.  ROSENBERG,  THE  HOLLOW  HOPE:  CAN  COURTS  BRING  ABOUT  SOCIAL 

CHANGE?,  5-7,  336-38,  342-43 

(I99I) 

(discussing problems in judge-led  reform). 

I76-78, 

61  Examples are offered in R.  SHEP MELNICK, REGULATION  AND  THE COURTS: THE  CASE OF 

(1983),  and  DONALD L.  HOROWITZ, THE COURTS 
THE  CLEAN  AIR  ACT II0-I2, 
AND SOCIAL POLICY 260-73  (1977).  The  point is  described from the  theoretical point  of  view  in 
(1978), and 
Lon L. Fuller, The Forms and Limits of Adjudication, 92  HARV. L. REv. 353, 393-405 
JOSEPH  RAz, The Inner Logic of the Law, in  ETHICS  IN  THE  PUBLIC  DOMAIN,  cited above in  note 
4,  at  222,  222-25. 

62 See  Sunstein, supra note  24,  at  767-69,  780-82  (claiming that analogy and low-level  princi- 

I90-92 

ples  need  not  be  conservative). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

1753 

judges,  and  American history itself,  suggest  that  courts will  rarely at- 
tempt  to  replicate the  Warren Court's role.  And judges  who  use  such 
theories may  well  blunder.  Judges are not  trained as  political  philoso- 
phers,  and  in  many  cases,  use  of  abstractions not  developed  by  close 
reference to  particular problems has  led  to  major mistakes.63 

Even  more fundamentally, judges  lack  a  democratic pedigree, and 
it  is  in  the  absence  of  such  a  pedigree that  the  system  of  precedent, 
analogy,  and  incompletely theorized agreement has  such  an  important 
place.  The  right to  a  democratic system is  one  of  the  rights to  which 
people  are entitled,  and  in  such  a  system, judicial  invocation  of  large 
theories to  support large decisions against democratic processes should 
be  a  rare  event.64  To  be  sure,  judges  have  a  duty  to  interpret  the 
Constitution, and that duty  authorizes them to  invoke  relatively large- 
scale  principles, seen  as  part  and  parcel of  the  Constitution  as  demo- 
cratically  ratified.  Many  people  think  that  judicial  activity  is  best 
characterized by  reference to  use  of  such principles,65 and  it  would  be 
wrong  to  deny  that  there  are occasions  on  which  this  practice occurs 
and  is  legitimate. 

To identify those occasions, it  would  be  necessary to  develop  a  full 
theory of  legal  interpretation.  For present purposes, I  urge something 
more modest.  Most judicial  activity does  not involve  constitutional in- 
terpretation, and  the  ordinary work of  common law  decision  and  stat- 
Indeed, 
utory 
constitutional  argument is  itself  based  largely  on  low-level  principles, 
not  on  high  theory, except  on  those  rare occasions  when  more  ambi- 
tious  thinking  becomes  necessary to  resolve  a  case,  or  when  the  case 
for  the  ambitious theory is  so  insistent that  a  range of  judges  do  and 
should  converge  on  it.66 

low-level  principles. 

interpretation 

calls 

for 

At  this  point,  it  should  be  remarked that  incompletely  theorized 
agreements are not  necessarily conservative, and  it  would  therefore be 

63  Consider the  large-scale reference to  the  passive  state  in  DeShaney  v.  Winnebago County 
Dep't  of  Social Servs., 489 U.S.  I89,  I95-97  (I989), a view  that cannot withstand analysis in  light 
of  the  role  of  the  state  in  protecting property rights, contract rights,  and  rights  of  plaintiffs  in 
certain settings.  See  David  P.  Currie, Positive  and  Negative Constitutional Rights,  53 U.  CHI. L. 
REv.  864,  872-80,  886-87  (I986); David  A.  Strauss, Due  Process,  Government Inaction,  and  Pri- 
vate  Wrongs, I989  SUP.  CT.  REV. 53,  72-76. 

64  Of  course  the  point  must  be  qualified by  reference to  the  democratic failures of  existing 
majoritarian arrangements. For  variations  on  this  theme,  see  JOHN  H.  ELY,  DEMOCRACY AND 
DISTRUST  I05-24 

(I980),  and  CASS R.  SUNSTEIN, THE  PARTIAL CONSTITUTION I33-53 

(I993). 

65  This  is  the  vision  of  judicial  review  in  ACKERMAN, cited  above  in  note  58,  at  4,  38-39, 
284.  Note  that it differs dramatically from the understanding in DWORKIN, cited above  in 
I3I-32, 
note  I5,  at  355-99,  in  the sense that Ackerman insists that the large-scale principles have  sources 
in  actual  judgments  of  "we the  people."  There  is,  however,  a  commonality between  Ackerman 
and  Dworkin  in  the  sense  that both  see  the  use  of  such  principles as  a  large part of  the  Court's 
work.  It  is  along  that  dimension that  I  am  doubting both  of  their accounts. 

66  See  infra p.  I766 (discussing the phenomenon of contested views  becoming uncontested and 

vice  versa). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1754 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. I08:1733 

wrong  to  identify  enthusiasm  for  such  agreements  with  a  belief  in 
Burkeanism  or  traditionalism for law.67  Many  incompletely  theorized 
agreements are highly  critical of  existing  social  practices; consider the 
judgment  that  sex  discrimination  is  unacceptable,  a  judgment  that 
may  rest on  diverse  theoretical foundations but  at  the  same  time  lead 
to  sharp  challenges  to  many  current  social  and  legal  practices. 
Whether  incompletely  theorized agreements produce  approval  or  dis- 
approval of  existing practice depends on  their content, not  on  the  fact 
of  their  incomplete  theorization.68 Of  course, high-level  theories  need 
not  be critical of  current practices; many such  theories are designed  to 
defend  them.69 

C.  Full  Particularity? 

Reason-giving  is  usually  prized  in  law,  as  of  course  it  should  be. 
Without reasons, there is  no  assurance that  decisions are not  arbitrary 
or  irrational, and  people  will  be  less  able  to  plan  their  affairs. 

In  a  few  areas of  law,  however,  institutions are permitted to  oper- 
ate  with  full  particularity.  People  converge  on  the  result,  but  they 
need  offer  no  reasons for  their decision.70 With  full  particularity, the 
judgment  is  not  merely  incompletely  theorized; it  is  not  theorized  at 
all.  In  denying certiorari, for example, the  Supreme Court is  silent; in 
issuing  verdicts, juries  do  not  give  reasons; college  admissions  offices 
produce  results  but  rarely justifications.  Each  decision  applies  to  the 
case  at  hand  and  to  that  case  alone.71 Participants may  actually have 
reasons but  refuse to  give  them; or they may lack  reasons in  the  sense 
that  they  are unable  to  articulate what  accounts  for their decision; or 
each  of  them, on  a  multimember institution, may  have  reasons but  be 
unable to  agree with  one  another about them, and hence they leave  an 
outcome  officially  unexplained.  In  any  of  these  cases,  this  approach 

67 A form of Burkeanism is defended in ANTHONY T.  KRONMAN, THE LOST LAWYER 19-52 
(1993). Much of what Kronman says about practical reason is convincing, see id. at 53-1o8,  but 
one may accept what he says, or much of it, without accepting his form of traditionalism. 

68 See  Sunstein, supra note  24, at  767-69,  780-82  (discussing conservatism and  analogy).  Jo- 
seph Raz defends analogy as responsive to the possible problems of "partial reform" and hence as 
conservative in JOSEPH  RAz, Law and  Value in  Adjudication,  in  THE AUTHORITY OF LAW I8o, 
200-o6  (i979),  but  if  the  judgments  of  principle  that  underlie claims  of  analogy  are  critical  of 
existing  practice,  there  may  be  nothing  conservative  about  analogy.  See,  e.g.,  Andrew  Koppel- 
man,  Note,  The Miscegenation Analogy: Sodomy Law as  Sex  Discrimination,  98  YALE L.J.  145, 
147  (I988)  (arguing that sodomy laws  are invalid  by  analogy to  the invalidation of  miscegenation 
statutes  in  Loving  v.  Virginia, 388  U.S.  I  (I967)). 

69 Henry  Sidgwick  so  understood  utilitarianism, broadly  speaking.  See  HENRY SIDGWICK, 

THE METHODS OF ETHICS 475-77  (Hackett Publishing  1981) (7th ed.  1907).  Richard Posner uses 
economics  to  defend  much  of  the  common  law.  See  POSNER, supra  note  15,  at  23-25, 
31-32, 
251-64. 

70 I draw here on the illuminating discussion of  full particularity in  Frederick Schauer, Giving 

Reasons,  47  STAN. L.  REV. (forthcoming 1995). 

71 See  id. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I755 

offers full  particularity because, by  their very nature, reasons are more 
abstract  than  the  outcomes  that  they  justify.  Once  offered  publicly, 
reasons  may  therefore  apply  to  cases  that  the  court,  in  justifying  a 
particular decision, does  not  have  before it.72  This  is  why  reason-giv- 
ing  promotes planning.  Perhaps the  most  famous  (or infamous) illus- 
tration  of  full  particularity comes  from Justice  Stewart: 

I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I under- 
stand to  be embraced within that shorthand description [of hard-core 
pornography]; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. 
But I know it when I see it, and the motion picture involved in this case 
is not that.73 
All  well-functioning  legal  systems  value  the  enterprise of  reason- 
giving.  But  there  is  a  good  reason to  be  wary  of  reason-giving: rea- 
sons  may  be  both  over-  and  under-inclusive.  In  this  way,  reasons are 
like  rules,  which  are  also  over-  and  under-inclusive  if  measured  by 
reference  to  their  justifications.74  Whenever  a  court  offers  reasons, 
there is  a  risk of future regret -  not simply because the court may be 
confined  in  a  subsequent  case  and  thus  have  to  avoid  inconsistency, 
but  because  the  reasons offered in  case  A  may  turn out,  on  reflection, 
to  generate  a  standard,  a  principle,  or  a  rule  that  collides  with  the 
court's  considered judgment  about  case  B.  The  constraint  produced 
by  the  reason  may  limit  discretion and  promote predictability, but  it 
may  also  produce  a  bad  result. 

The  distinction  between  holding  and  dictum  helps  reduce  this 
problem.  Indeed, the distinction squarely addresses the problem of  ex- 
cessively  theorized judgments,  and  it  helps  to  ensure  that  legal  deci- 
sions  are  incompletely theorized.  If  we  understand the  holding  to  be 
the  narrowest  possible  basis  for  the  decision,  a  subsequent  court  is 
able  to  offer sufficiently narrow reasons for  the  outcome in  the  previ- 
that  is,  reasons that  ensure that the  outcome in  the  previ- 
ous  case  - 
ous  case  does  not  apply  to  a  case  that  is  genuinely  different.  In 
initially  giving  a  reason, court one  may  be  unaware of  possible  appli- 
cations  that  will  falsify  that  reason because of  its  imprecision and  ex- 
cessive  generality.  But  court  two,  able  to  offer  some  narrower  and 
better-fitting explanation for the  outcome, can  eliminate  the  difficulty. 
It  can  label  the  excessive  generality "dicta." 

There  is  another  difficulty  with  reason-giving.  One  might  some- 
times  know  something without  knowing  the  reasons for it.  For exam- 

72  Consider John Dewey's rendition of "the old story of the layman who was appointed to a 
position in  India where he would have to  pass in  his official capacity on various matters in 
controversies between natives. Upon consulting a legal friend, he was told to use his common- 
sense and announce his decisions firmly; in the majority of cases his natural decision as to what 
was fair and reasonable would suffice. But, his friend added: 'Never try to give reasons, for they 
will usually be wrong.'" John Dewey, Logical Method and Law,  IO CORNELL L.Q. 17,  17 (I924). 

73 Jacobellis v.  Ohio, 378 U.S. 184, I97  (I964) (Stewart, J., concurring). 
74 See  SCHAUER, supra  note  27,  at 3-34. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I756 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  I08:I733 

ple,  one  may  know  that  this  is  Martin's  face,  and  no  other  face, 
without  knowing,  exactly,  why  one  knows  that  fact.  Or  one  might 
know  that  a  certain  act  would  be  wrong,  without  knowing,  exactly, 
why  it  would  be  wrong.  It  is  certainly possible  to  know  that  some- 
thing  is  true  without  knowing  why  it  is  true. 

Is  there an  analogy in  law?  No  simple answer would  make  sense. 
As  I  have  suggested,  a  special  quality  of  most  legal  systems  is  a  pre- 
sumptive  requirement of  reasons for legal outcomes.  This  requirement 
makes  it  hard  to  prize  a  capacity  to  know  what  the  law  is  without 
knowing  why  it  is  as  it  is,  or  how  a  case  should  come  out  without 
knowing  why  it  should come  out  that  way.  On  the  other hand,  some 
people think that many of our judgments about similarity and dissimi- 
larity -  a key  to legal reasoning -  do not  rest on reasons but instead 
simply  constitute  our  descriptive  and  normative  worlds.75  Conceiva-. 
bly,  there is  an  aspect  of  socialization into  law  that  enables  people  to 
see  that  case  A  is  "like" case  B,  and  not  at  all  "like" case  C,  without 
always  having  much  of  an  account  of  why  this  is  so. 

More  concretely, it  is  possible  that  experienced judges,  like  exper- 
ienced lawyers, develop a faculty -  best described as wisdom,  percep- 
that allows them to reach decisions very well  and 
tion, or judgment  - 
very  quickly.  This  is  a  distinctive  faculty.  It  seems  to  be  associated 
with  the  ready  and  sympathetic  apprehension of  a  wide  range  of  di- 
verse  particulars and  with  an  appreciation of  the  appropriate weight 
to be  given  to each.76 Certainly, we  can imagine a class of people who 
have  a  wonderful  capacity  to  tell  whether  one  case  is  relevantly  like 
another, or  to  decide  who  should  win  cases,  but  who  lack  much  of  a 
capacity  to  explain  what  underlies their  ultimate  judgments,  or  their 
convictions  about relevant similarity and difference.  They  are not  the- 
orists at all.  But  they have  a "good ear," unlike some others who  have 
a  "tin ear" for law. 

Perhaps it  would  ultimately be  possible for such people (or at  least 
outside observers) to  explain what  underlies these good apprehensions, 
but  this  may  not  be  so.  It  is  important not  to  mystify  these  issues. 
What  is  asserted  to  be  a  capacity  for  perception  may  in  fact  be  a 
product  of  bias  or  confusion,  and  reason-giving  helps  diminish  this 
risk.  The  faculty  of  wisdom,  perception,  or  judgment  probably 

75  See  Mark Johnson, Some Constraints on Embodied Analogical Understanding, in  ANALOGI- 
cAL REASONING 25,  39 (David  H.  Helman ed., I988) ("[A]nalogies cannot be understood as pro- 
positional or conceptual mechanisms for reflecting on already-determinate experiences; rather, we 
can actually speak of them as constitutive  of our experience, because they are partially constitu- 
tive of our understanding, our mode of experiencing our world. Analogy is  a  basic means by 
which form, pattern, and connection emerge in our understanding and are then articulated in our 
reflective cognition and in our language."). 

76  See  KRONMAN,  supra note 67, at 53-62  (describing this skill as "statesmanship"); 

JON  ELSTER,  SOUR  GRAPES:  STUDIES  IN  THE  SUBVERSION  OF  RATIONALITY 
I6-I7 
ing the existence and importance of this skill in professions other than law). 

(I983) 

see  also 
(discuss- 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

'9951 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I757 

amounts  to  a  capacity to  think  very quickly  of  a  resolution that  takes 
account  of  everything that  matters, including a  wide  array of  compet- 
ing  considerations, and  that  coheres well  with  the  rest of  our  particu- 
lar  and  general  judgments.  Compare  this  striking  description  of 
President  Franklin Delano  Roosevelt: 

Frances Perkins later described the President's idea .  .  .  as a "flash of 
almost clairvoyant knowledge and understanding." He would have one 
of these flashes every now and then, she observed, much like those that 
musicians get when "they see or hear the structure of an entire symphony 
or opera." He couldn't always hold on to it or verbalize it, but when it 
came, he suddenly understood how all kinds of disparate things fit to- 
gether....  Roosevelt made up for the defects of an undisciplined mind 
with a  profound ability to integrate a  vast multitude of  details into a 
larger pattern that gave shape and direction to the stream of events.77 
When someone is  thought to  be  wise  about particulars in  law,  it  is 
because she is able to see how  to resolve a case without doing violence 
to  other  judgments  at  the  horizontal and  vertical  levels.  She  is  thus 
able  to  decide  cases,  and  to  decide  who  wins  and  who  loses,  while 
minimally endangering other valued  goods and  goals.  She  may  not  be 
able  to  explain  what  underlies her  decisions  (though  we  should  hope 
that  she  can).  Something  of  this  sort  underlies the  conviction  that  a 
person is "judicious," and it  helps explain why  full-scale theorization is 
so  rare  in  law.  Of  course,  someone  generally  described  as  judicious 
might  be  wrong  much  of  the  time,  and  more  ambitious  theory  might 
be  introduced to  show  where  the  errors lie. 

m.  HERCULES  AND  THEORY 
A.  An  Ambitious Alternative 

Enthusiasm  for  incompletely  theorized  agreements  meets  with 
many  adversaries.  An  especially  distinguished  example  is  Ronald 
Dworkin,  who  urges, at  least  as  an  ideal,  a  high  degree of  theoretical 
self-consciousness  in  adjudication.78 Dworkin  argues  that  when  law- 
yers  disagree  about  what  the  law  is,  they  are  disagreeing  about  "the 
best  constructive  interpretation of  the  community's  legal  practice."79 
Dworkin  claims  that  interpretation in  law  consists  of  different efforts 
to  make  a  governing  text  "the best  it  can  be."80 This  is  Dworkin's 
conception  of  law  as  integrity. 

Dworkin's  account  appears to  require judges  to  develop  high-level 
theories,  and  it  does  not  (to  say  the  least)  favor  theoretical  modesty. 

77  DoRis  K.  GOODWIN,  No  ORDINARY  TIME  193  (1994). 
78  I discuss some of these points in  Sunstein, cited above in  note 24, at  784-87,  and I  draw on 
that  discussion here.  My  current goal  is  to  generalize some of  the  points  made in  a  very  narrow 
context. 

79  DWORKIN,  supra  note  I5,  at  2 2 5. 
80 Id.  at  229. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I758 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. 108:1733 

There  is  no  presumption against  abstraction.  In  his  hands,  the  rele- 
vant  theories are large and  abstract; they  sound  like  political  philoso- 
phy  or moral theory.8'  These  theories are derived from or brought to 
bear on particular problems.  But  this is not  how  real lawyers and real 
judges  proceed.  If  they  can,  they  avoid  broad and  abstract questions. 
Let  us  distinguish here among four situations: the  individual judge 
thinking  through a  case  on  his  own  and  sitting  on  a  single-judge dis- 
trict  court;  the  individual  judge  writing  for  a  single-judge  district 
court; the  individual  judge  thinking through a  case  privately  but  also 
sitting  on  a  multimember court; and  the  individual  judge  writing  or 
participating in  an opinion to be joined by members of a multimember 
institution.  The  constraints in  the  four situations  are different.  In  all 
of  them,  the  judge  would  probably prefer to  decide  a  case  knowing 
that the outcome and supporting rationale can be justified by  reference 
to  a  range of  diverse  and  more general theories.  If  so,  it  is  unneces- 
sary  for  the  judge  to  choose  among  them;  if  so,  the  judge  may  put 
aside the more theoretical debates, knowing, for example, that whether 
he  is a  Kantian or a  Benthamite -  whether he cares about fairness or 
someone who  has assaulted another must pay compensa- 
deterrence - 
tion  for  the  wrong  done. 

Now  it  may  be  that  some  individual  judges  would  like  to  think 
things  through  very  deeply  in  order  to  be  sure  that  they  are  right. 
There  is  certainly  nothing  wrong  with  an  aspiration  of  this  sort, 
though  limits  of  time  and  capacity  may  make  the  aspiration unrealis- 
tic,  and the system of  precedent will  complicate matters.  But  even  the 
individual judge  sitting on  a single-judge court may be  reluctant to  set 
on  the  theory  that  the 
forth  his  preferred abstractions  in  public  - 
judicial  role calls  for the  avoidance of  dicta,  understood here as  state- 
ments  about  the  law  that  are  not  necessary to  the  decision.  Perhaps 
the  outcome  can  be  justified  on  narrower grounds  that  involve  more 
modest  and  more  reliable principles and  that  are  less  likely  to  create 
problems for  unforeseeable future cases. 

The  point  is  even  clearer  for  the  participant  on  a  multimember 
panel.  To  some  extent,  the  avoidance  of  more  abstract or  theoretical 
claims  stems  from  purely  strategic  or  pragmatic  considerations,  as 

81  See, e.g., id.  at 403-04  (discussing tort law and equal protection). Dworkin writes about 

constitutional interpretation: 

The Constitution is foundational of other law, so Hercules' interpretation of the document 
as a whole, and of its abstract clauses, must be foundational as well....  [.lt  must be a 
justification drawn from the most philosophical reaches of political theory ....  In constitu- 
tional theory philosophy is closer to the surface of the argument and, if the theory is good, 
explicit in it. 

Id. at 380.  These are points that I am denying here. In fact, Dworkin's account of the judicial 
role says very little about the various fact-finding and theory-building weaknesses of judges, who 
are after all unelected, and about the judges' own knowledge of their weaknesses, even though 
much of judge-made law is based on that knowledge. This seems to me a major gap in Dwor- 
kin's view. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

1759 

when  individual judges on a multimember body have  a highly abstract 
theory but  are unable  to  persuade their colleagues  to  accept  it.82  But 
often, the avoidance is not strategic in this way  but stems instead from 
the  fact  that  highly  abstract  questions  can  be  too  hard,  large,  and 
open-ended  for  legal  actors  to  handle.  Members  of  a  multimember 
panel  may  especially  fear  that  any  responses  will  go  wrong  when 
tested  against concrete cases not  before the court, will  be  too  sectarian 
and  hubristic,  and  will  take  too  long  to  offer,  because  they  are  too 
deeply  theorized.  On  multimember bodies,  efforts to  answer  such  ab- 
stract  questions  can  prevent  people  who  disagree  on  large  principles 
from  reaching  consensus  on  particular outcomes  when,  in  fact,  those 
outcomes, and low-level  explanations, could command agreement from 
a  variety  of  perspectives. 

Because  of  his  enthusiasm for abstractions, Hercules -  Dworkin's 
could  not  really participate  in  ordi- 
patient  and  resourceful judge  - 
nary judicial  deliberations.  He  would  probably be  seen  as  a  usurper, 
even  an  oddball.  On  a  single  judge  court,  he  would  suffer  from  the 
vice  of  hubris.  On  a  multimember panel,  he  would  lack  some  of  the 
crucial virtues  of  a  participant in  legal  deliberation.  These  virtues  in- 
clude  collegiality  and  civility,  which  incline  judges  toward  the  lowest 
level  of  abstraction necessary to  decide  a  case.83 

Dworkin  anticipates  an  objection  of  this  kind.  He  notes  that  it 
might  be  paralyzing for judges  to  seek  a  general theory for each  area 
of  law,  and  he  acknowledges  that  Hercules  is  more  methodical  than 
any  real-world  judge  can  be.84  But  Hercules,  in  Dworkin's  view, 
"shows  us  the  hidden  structure of  [ordinary] judgments  and  so  lays 
these  open  to  study  and  criticism."85 Of  course,  Hercules  aims  at  a 
"comprehensive theory" of each area of law,  while  ordinary judges,  un- 
able  to  consider  all  lines  of  inquiry, must  seek  a  theory  that  is  "par- 

82  If  the  judge  has  thought  the  relevant  issues  through in  an  ambitious  way  and  made  the 
moral judgments that are raised by the issue (to the extent that they are legally relevant), we  may 
have  more  assurance that  the  process of  adjudication is  reliable, in  the  sense  that  it  is  likely  to 
lead to results that  are just.  What I  am emphasizing is that the judge  might sign an opinion that 
contains  a  more modest  account. 

83  I  should say that I  do  not know  to what  extent this counts as a criticism of  Dworkin,  since 
Dworkin  presents Hercules  as  a  thought experiment, and  it  is  unclear to  what  extent  Hercules' 
approach is  supposed to  be  an  ideal  for real-world judges.  To  my  knowledge,  Dworkin  has  not 
discussed  the  question  of  appropriate levels  of  abstraction in  legal  justification.  But  see  supra 
note  8I  (noting  Dworkin's  suggestion  that,  in  constitutional  law,  the  relevant  justification  is 
"drawn from the  most  philosophical reaches of  political  theory"). 

84  See  DWORKIN, supra  note  I5,  at  264-65;  see  also  id.  at  380I8I 

(referring to  the  need  "to 
gain  the  votes  of  other  justices  and  to  make  their  joint  decision  sufficiently  acceptable  to  the 
community so  that it can continue to  act in the spirit of  a community of  principle at the constitu- 
tional  level"). 

85 Id.  at  265. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I760 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. I08:I733 

tial."  But  Hercules'  "judgments of  fit and  political morality are made 
on  the  same  material and  have  the  same  character as  theirs."86 

It is these points that I am denying here.  The  decisions of ordinary 
judges  are based on  different material and  have  a  different character. 
They  are less  deeply  theorized not  only  because of  limits  of  time  and 
capacity,  but  also  because  of  the  distinctive  morality of  judging  in  a 
pluralistic society.  I  will  qualify  this  claim  below.87  But  for  the  mo- 
ment,  I  suggest  that  the  ordinary judge  is  no  Hercules  with  less  time 
on  his  hands,  but  a  different sort of  figure altogether. 

B.  Conceptual Ascent? 

Borrowing  from  Henry  Sidgwick's  suggestions  about  method  in 
ethics,88 advocates  of  ambitious thinking might  respond in  the  follow- 
ing  way.  There  is  often  good  reason  for judges  to  raise  the  level  of 
abstraction and  ultimately to  resort to  large-scale theory.  As  a  practi- 
cal  matter, discrete judgments  about  particular cases  will  often  prove 
inadequate.89  Sometimes,  people  do  not  have  clear  intuitions  about 
how  cases  should  come  out.  Sometimes, seemingly  similar cases  pro- 
voke  different reactions, and  it  is  necessary to  raise the  level  of  theo- 
retical  ambition  to  explain  whether  those  different  reactions  are 
justified or to  show  that the  seemingly similar cases are different after 
all.  Sometimes,  different  people  simply  disagree.  By  looking  at 
broader principles, we  may  be  able  to  mediate  the  disagreement.  In 
any  case,  there  is  a  problem of  explaining  our  considered judgments 
to  make sure that  they  are not just  an  acci- 
about  particular cases  - 
and  at  some  point,  the  law  may  well  want  to  offer  that 
dent90 - 
explanation. 

Ambitious  thinkers  might  therefore urge  that  low-level  principles 
may  conflict  with  one  another  or  be  demonstrably  wrong.  In  these 
circumstances, judges  might  well  resort to  higher  theory.  When  our 
modest judge  joins  an  opinion that  is  incompletely theorized, he  must 
rely  on  a  reason or  a  principle that  justifies one  outcome  rather than 
another.  Perhaps  the  principle  is  wrong  because  it  fails  to  fit  with 
other cases, or because it  is  not defensible as  a  matter of  political  mo- 
rality.91 A distinguished judge will  seek to add a good deal in the way 
of  both  width  and  depth  by  exploring other  cases  and  by  deepening 
the  theoretical ambition of his  analysis.  He  will  therefore experience a 
kind of  conceptual ascent in  which  the more or less isolated and  small 

86  Id. 
87  See  infra  pp.  1765-66. 
88  See  SIDGWICK, supra  note  69,  at  96-IO4. 
89  See  id.  at  IOO. 
90 "[T]he resulting code  seems  an  accidental aggregate of  precepts, which  stands  in  need  of 

some  rational synthesis."  Id.  at  102. 

91  See  DWORKIN, supra  note  15,  at  251-54  (discussing 

local  priority). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I76I 

low-level  principle is  finally made part of  a  more general theory.  Per- 
haps  this  would  be  a  paralyzing task,  and perhaps our judge  need  not 
often  attempt it.  But  it is  an appropriate model for understanding law 
and  an  appropriate aspiration for  evaluating  legal  practice. 

The  conceptual  ascent  is  especially  desirable in  light  of  the  likeli- 
hood that incompletely theorized agreements will  contain large pockets 
of  injustice  and  inconsistency.  Unambitious principles and  high  levels 
of  particularity may  ensure that  the  similarly situated  are  not  treated 
similarly.  Or perhaps some  areas of  the  law  will  make  internal sense, 
but  because  the  categories  with  sense  are  small,  they  may  run  into 
each  other if  they are compared.  We may have  a  coherent category of 
law  involving  sex  equality  and  a  coherent  category  involving  racial 
equality,  but  these  categories  may  have  a  strange  relation  to  each 
other  or  to  the  categories involving  sexual  orientation and  the  handi- 
capped.  Various subcategories of  tort  law  may  make  sense,  but  they 
may  not  fit together, or they may  not  cohere with  the  law  of  contract. 
We might  conclude that judges  should think  of  incompletely theorized 
agreements as  an  early step  toward something both  wider  and  deeper. 
Many  academic understandings of  law  undertake the  task  of  develop- 
ing  that  wider  and  deeper conception.92 

There is  some truth in  this response.  Very probably, moral reason- 
ers  should  try  to  achieve  vertical  and  horizontal consistency,  not  just 
the  local pockets of  coherence offered by  incompletely theorized agree- 
ments.  In  democratic processes, it  is  appropriate and  sometimes indis- 
pensable  to  challenge  existing  practice  in  abstract  terms.  But  the 
response ignores some  of  the  distinctive  characteristics of  the  arena in 
which  real-world judges  must  do  their work.  Some of  these  limits  in- 
volve  bounded rationality and  thus what  should happen in  a  world  in 
which  people face various constraints; others involve  appropriate judi- 
cial  (and in  some  ways  political) morality and  mutual  interaction in  a 
world  in  which  judges  are  mere  actors  in  a  complex  system  and  in 
which  people legitimately disagree on  first principles.  In  light  of  these 
limits,  incompletely  theorized  agreements  have  the  many  virtues  de- 
scribed above,  including  the  facilitation of  convergence,  the  reduction 
of  costs of  disagreement,93 and  the demonstration of  humility and  mu- 
tual  respect.  As  I  have  noted,  incompletely theorized agreements are 
especially well  adapted to  a  system that must  take  precedents as  fixed 
points;  lawyers  could  not  try  to  reach  full  integrity  without  severely 
compromising the  system of  precedent.  Usually,  local  coherence is  the 
most  to  which  lawyers may  aspire.94 Just  as  legislation cannot  be  un- 

92  See,  e.g.,  DWORKIN, supra  note  I5,  at  276-3I2 

(discussing the  law  of  tort);  POSNER, supra 

93 See  AMY  GUTMANN & DENNIS  THOMPSON, DEMOCRACY AND  DISAGREEMENT (forthcom- 

note  I5,  passim. 

ing  I995). 

94  See  RAz,  Relevance of  Coherence, supra  note  49,  at  298-303. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I762 

HARVARD LAWREVIEW 

[Vol.  I08:I733 

derstood as  if  it  came  from a  single  mind,  so  precedents, compiled  by 
many  people  responding to  different problems in  many  different peri- 
ods,  will  not  reflect a  single  authorial voice. 

There  are  many  lurking questions  here.  What  are  the  criteria for 
evaluating moral or political judgments?  What is  the relation between 
provisional or considered judgments about particulars and correspond- 
ing  judgments  about  abstractions?9  Some  people  write  as  if  abstract 
theoretical judgments,  or  abstract theories, have  a  kind  of  reality and 
hardness that  particular judgments lack,  or as if  abstract theories pro- 
vide  the  answers  to  examination questions  that  particular judgments, 
tested  against  the  theories,  may  pass  or  fail.  On  this  view,  theories 
may  be  treated  as  searchlights  that  illuminate  particular judgments 
and show  them for what  they really are.96 But  we  might think instead 
that there is  no  special magic in  theories or abstractions, and  that  the- 
ories  are  simply  the  (humanly  constructed)  means  by  which  people 
make sense of  their ethical and political worlds.  The  abstract deserves 
no  priority  over  the  particular:  neither  is  foundational;  neither  is 
harder or more real.  A  (poor or crude) abstract theory may  simply  be 
a  confused  way  of  trying to  make  sense  of  our  considered judgments 
about particular cases, which  may be much better than the theory.  Of 
course, particular judgments  may  be  confused  too.97 

C.  Legitimacy 

Dworkin's  conception of  law  as  integrity offers a  theory of  what  it 
means  for  law  to  be  legitimate.  Hercules  can  produce  vertical  and 
horizontal  consistency  among  judgments  of  principle  in  law.  Do  in- 
completely  theorized  agreements comport  with  any  plausible  concep- 
tion  of  legitimacy?  We  have  seen  that  a  legal  system  pervaded  by 
such  agreements need  not  yield  anything  like  full  coherence. Perhaps 
this  is  a  decisive  defect. 

A  complete  response would  require a  detailed discussion of  one  of 
the  largest  issues  of  political  morality; for  the  moment,  a  few  brief 
remarks must  suffice.  In  fact,  the  idea  of  integrity, insofar  as  it  is  a 
judicial  product,  is  unlikely  to  provide  a  convincing  theory  of  legiti- 
macy.  Indeed, it  seems plausible to  say that  integrity, as Dworkin  de- 

95 In Rawls' understanding of the search for reflective equilibrium, we consult "our considered 
convictions at all levels of generality; no one level, say that of abstract principle or that of partic- 
ular judgments in particular cases, is viewed as foundational. They all may have an initial credi- 
bility."  RAWLS, supra  note  4,  at  8  n.8. 

96  See,  e.g., BRUCE A. ACKERMAN, PRIVATE PROPERTY AND THE  CONSTITUTION 

(I977) 
(comparing "Scientific Policymakers" with "Ordinary Observers"); POSNER,  supra note  I5,  at 
23-24  (arguing that economic theory often underlies opinions that appear to be based on other 
grounds). 

97 For illuminating remarks on  abstractions, see RAWLS, cited above in  note 4,  at  44-46. 
Rawls thinks that we turn to abstractions "when we are torn within ourselves." Id. at 44.  This is 
undoubtedly true, but sometimes we turn instead to particulars when we are so torn. 

I5-20 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I763 

scribes it,  is  neither necessary nor sufficient for legitimacy, judicial  or 
otherwise.  Legitimacy stems not simply from principled consistency on 
the  part  of  adjudicators (or someone else)  but  from  a  justifiable  exer- 
cise  of  public  force.  That  theory  should  be  founded  in  a  theory  of 
authority98 and  hence  (if  we  are  democrats)  in  suitably  constrained 
democratic  considerations.  In  this  light,  Dworkin's  conception  of  in- 
tegrity offers an excessively court-centered conception of  legitimacy.  It 
sees  legitimacy not  as an exercise of  legitimate authority, or as  an  out- 
come  of  well-functioning democratic procedures, but  instead  as  a  pro- 
cess  of  distinction-making  undertaken  by  judges.99  Even  if  done 
exceptionally well,  distinction-making by principled judges  is an inade- 
quate  source of  legitimacy. 

Of  course, principled consistency should  not  be  disparaged,  and  a 
regime of  principle, as  Dworkin  understands it,  has  many  advantages 
over  imaginable  alternatives.  Problems  of  legitimacy  may  arise  pre- 
cisely  because of  the  absence of  such consistency.  But  a  theory of  ad- 
judicative  legitimacy  should  be  part  of  a  theory  of  just  institutions, 
and  an  approach focused solely or principally on  adjudication will  not 
provide  any  such  theory.  By  contrast, those  who  stress  incompletely 
theorized agreements insist  that  adjudication is  part  of  a  complex  set 
of  authoritative institutional arrangements, most prominently including 
democratic  arenas.  They  attempt  to  design  their  theory  of  judicial 
conduct  as  an  aspect of  a  far broader set  of  understandings about  ap- 
propriate  institutional  arrangements and  about  institutions  in  which 
the  (suitably constrained) public  can  deliberate about  its  judgments. 

Above  all,  they  see  the American system as one  of  deliberative de- 
mocracy  in  which  judges  play  a  partial  role.100 For  reasons  of  both 
policy  and  principle,  the  development  of  large-scale  theories  of  the 
right  and  the  good  is  most  fundamentally  a  democratic  task,  not  a 
judicial  one.10'  These  are brief and inadequate remarks, but they tend 
to  suggest the  ingredients of  an  account of  legitimacy of  which  incom- 
pletely  theorized agreements would  be  a  part. 

Full  integrity, moreover, consists of much more than a legal system 
of  numerous, hierarchically arranged courts  can  be  expected  to  offer. 
Judges  generally should  and  will  reason from  cases  with  which  they 

98 See RAz, supra note 23,  at  2I-69  (offering a theory of authority). 
99 There is some anbiguity in Dworkin's treatment, since integrity is a political virtue, not 
simply a legal one. I am not sure of the intended relation between political integrity and integrity 
in law.  See DWORKIN, supra note I5,  at I86-2I9.  Hence I am not sure of Dworkin's views on 
the general question of political legitimacy. 

100 See, e.g., JOSEPH M.  BESSETTE, THE MILD VOICE oF  REASON: DELIBERATIVE DEMOC- 
RACY AND AMERiCAN NATIONAL GOVERNMENT I6-17  (1994) (discussing political deliberation and 
the  separation of  powers). 

101 ACKERMAN, cited  above  in  note  58,  at  86-99,  takes  the  same  basic  position  but  sees  the 
judicial  role  as  the  "synthesis" of  constitutional  moments.  I  am  rejecting  the  latter  claim  and 
saying  that,  with  some  exceptions, courts do  and  should  avoid  large-scale synthesis. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I764 

HARVARD LAWREVIEW 

[Vol.  08:I733 

disagree -  because of  the  need  for predictability and  stability in  law, 
because of  the  need to  avoid judicial  hubris, and  because similarly sit- 
uated  people  should  be  treated similarly.'02 But  across the  broad  ex- 
panse  of  the  law,  the  resulting judgments  are unlikely fully  to  cohere. 

IV. 

INCOMPLETELY  THEORIZED  AGREEMENTS  OVER  TIME 

Incompletely  theorized  agreements  have  virtues,  but  as  I  have 
noted,  their  virtues  are  partial.  Stability,  for  example,  is  brought 
about by  such agreements, and stability is  usually desirable, but a  sys- 
tem  that  is  stable  and  unjust  should  probably  be  made  less  stable. 
Agreement is  important, but  disagreement is  important too,  for it  can 
be  a  creative  force in  revealing error and  injustice.  In  this  final  sec- 
tion,  I  offer  some  qualifications to  what  has  been  said  thus  far.  In 
brief: some  cases  cannot  be  decided  at  all  without  introducing a  fair 
amount in  the way  of  theoretical ambition.  Moreover, some cases can- 
not  be  decided  well  without  increasing the  level  of  theoretical  ambi- 
tion.  If  a  good  abstraction is  available,  and  if  diverse judges  can  be 
persuaded  that  the  abstraction  is  good,  there  should  be  no  taboo 
against  its  judicial  acceptance.  The  claims  on  behalf  of  incompletely 
theorized agreements are presumptive rather than  conclusive. 

A.  Change 

Thus  far, the discussion has offered a  static description of  the legal 
process -  a  description in  which  judges  are deciding what  to  do  at  a 
certain  time.  Of  course, low-level  principles are  developed  over  long 
periods,  and  a  dynamic  picture  shows  something  different  and  more 
complex.  First,  the  understanding of  these  low-level  principles  may 
shift  and  perhaps deepen.  At  one  point, libel  of  a  public figure might 
seem  analogous  to  libel  of  a  private  figure  and  therefore  be  unpro- 
tected;  at  another  point,  it  might  seem  more  analogous  to  political 
speech and therefore be protected.  In this process, courts may move  to 
higher  levels  of  abstraction. 

102 A challenge to this view can be found in Joseph Raz's illuminating discussion of coherence, 
but in my view, Raz concludes too quickly that "speaking with one voice" is not an independent 
ideal, and I think that he rejects too quickly the view that judges should reason from cases with 
which they disagree as a matter of morality. See RAz, Relevance of Coherence, supra note 49, at 
297-98. Raz emphasizes the problems created when judges reason from cases that embody bad 
moral judgments. The answer to Raz's claim is institutional. Judges should reason from previ- 
ously decided cases not because it is good to sacrifice good moral values, but because the judge's 
conception of good moral values is  not always reliable, and because keeping (local) faith with 
precedent is a way of disciplining the judges, promoting predictability, and ensuring a  form of 
equality. Of course, the extent to which a particular judge should keep faith with a past decision 
(which she believes wrong) cannot be decided in  the abstract. What I  am suggesting is  that 
decisions that the judge believes wrong may not in fact be wrong, and that the obligation to 
reason from past cases makes best sense if it is seen as questioning the (ordinary) judge's ability 
to make this judgment well. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I765 

Second,  a  characteristic role of  observers of  the  legal  process is  to 
try  to  systematize  cases  in  order  to  see  how  to  make  best  sense  of 
them,  to  show  that  there is  bias and  inconsistency, or to  show  that  no 
sense  can  be  made  of  them  at  all.  In  any  process of  systematization, 
more  abstraction  will  be  introduced.  Observers  may  try  to  invoke 
some  higher-level idea  of  the  good  or  the  right  in  order to  show  the 
deep  structure of  the  case  law,  or  to  move  it  in  particular directions, 
or  to  reveal  important,  even  fatal  inconsistencies.  A  demonstration 
that  the law  makes deep sense might be a  source of  comfort and  occa- 
sional  reform.  A  demonstration that  the  law  makes  no  sense,  or  re- 
flects  an  ad  hoc  compromise  among  competing  principles,  might 
produce discomfort and  large-scale change. 

Third,  the  law  sometimes  reflects more  ambitious  thinking  on  the 
part  of  judges  or  reacts to  these  more  ambitious  efforts  by  outsiders. 
The  law  of  antitrust,  for  example,  is  now  based  in  large  part  on  a 
principle  of  economic  efficiency.103  This  development  occurred 
through the  gradual incorporation of  economic thinking into  the  cases, 
beginning  with  the  judicial  suggestion,  following  academic  observa- 
tion,  that  some important cases "actually" or "implicitly" were founded 
on economics, and continuing until economics appeared to offer a large 
ordering role.'04  Some especially ambitious or  creative judges  will  in- 
voke  theories too.  Some  of  our  great judges  were  principally nonthe- 
oretical thinkers -  Harlan, Friendly, Cardozo -  but some of them 
Holmes,  Brandeis, Marshall -  had at least ingredients of  a  large-scale 
vision  of  the  legal  order.  They  used  analogies,  to  be  sure,  but  often 
with  reference to a  relatively high-level theory about some area of law. 
Many  areas of  law  now  show  the  influence of  Holmes,  Brandeis,  and 
Marshall, in  part because courts, whether or not  they deploy low-level 
principles, have  adopted  aspects of  the  relevant  theory.105 

It  is  very  rare for any  area of  law  to  be  highly theorized.  Most  of 
the  time,  people  starting from  divergent  points  can  accept  (or reject) 
relevant outcomes.  But  I  do  not  mean to  say  that  it  would  always  be 
bad  for theories to  be  introduced, nor do  I  deny  that  small-scale, low- 
level  principles can  become part of  something more ambitious.  A  de- 
scriptive point first: it  is  important to  note that, after a  period of  time, 
the  use  of  low-level  principles may  well  result  in  a  more  completely 
theorized  system  of  law.  The  process  of  low-level  judging  can  yield 
greater abstraction, or  a  highly  refined and  coherent set  of  principles. 

103 See, e.g., Continental T.V., Inc. v. GTE Sylvania Inc., 433 U.S. 36, 56-59 (I977). 
104  See,  e.g., James C. Miller III  & Paul Pautler, Predation: The Changing View in  Economics 
(I985)  (discussing the prominent role that eco- 

and  the  Law,  28  J. LAW  & ECON. 495,  495-502 
nomic analysis and scholarly reseaxch have played in shaping antitrust predation law). 

105 The best example may be the law of free speech. See  Whitney v. California, 274 U.S. 357, 
372,  375-78  (I927)  (Brandeis, J.,  concurring); Abrams v.  United  States, 250  U.S.  6I6,  624,  63o-3I 
(I9I9)  (Holmes, J., dissenting). Note, however, that even here, no unitary theory of free speech is 
offered, and nothing very much like a philosophical account appears in the relevant opinions. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I766 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. I08:733 

In  the  areas of  free speech  and  discrimination, some  such  process has 
occurred, resulting  in  occasionally  ambitious  claims,  even  if  it  would 
be  far  too  much  to  say  that  full  theorization  or  coherence  can  be 
found.106 

An  especially interesting phenomenon occurs when  a once-contesta- 
ble  analogy  becomes part of  the  uncontested background for  ordinary 
or  when  the  uncontested  background  is  drawn  into 
legal  work  - 
sharp question,  sometimes via  analogies.  Thus,  for example,  the  view 
that  bans  on  racial  intermarriage are  "like" segregation  laws  is  now 
taken largely for granted; it is  part of  the way  that lawyers order their 
conceptual world.  So  too, perhaps, with  the  view  that  sex  discrimina- 
a  view  that  would  have  been  un- 
tion  is  "like" race discrimination - 
thinkable in  Supreme Court opinions as late  as,  say,  I965.  Ordinarily, 
the  slippage  from  the  uncontested  to  the  contested  occurs  in  law 
through encounters with  particular cases  that  reveal gaps  or  problems 
with  the conventional view.107 In American law,  views  that once  were 
sometimes become 
or not  even  as  views  at  all  - 
taken  as  natural - 
dislodged  in  this  way.  The  original attack  on  the  monarchical legacy 
took  this  form;'08 so  too  did  the  attack on  racial hierarchy; so  too  did 
the New  Deal,  which  depended on  an insistence that common law  cat- 
egories were  far from natural and prepolitical but  instead were  a  con- 
the  contested  can  become 
scious  social  choice.109  Eventually, 
uncontroversial as new categories emerge and harden through repeated 
encounters with  particular cases. 

Now  turn to  the  question of  what  judges  should  do.  I  have  urged 
that  there are reasons for judges  to  offer the  least  ambitious argument 
necessary to  resolve cases, in  the hope  that different people from their 
diverse  standpoints can  converge on  that  argument, and  with  the  be- 
lief  that  abstractions  may  prove  troublesome  for  later  cases.  But  if 
judges  can  agree  on  an  abstraction,  and  if  the  abstraction  can  be 
shown  to  be  a  good  one,  judicial  acceptance  of  that  abstraction may 
hardly  be  troubling  but,  on  the  contrary,  an  occasion  for  celebra- 

106  See,  e.g., City of  Cleburne v.  Cleburne Living  Ctr., Inc., 473  U.S.  432,  439-47  (I985)  (fail- 

ing to offer a  full theory of equality); New York Times Co. v.  Sullivan, 376  U.S.  254,  270-83 
(I964)  (failing to offer a full theory of free speech). 
107  See,  e.g., Reed v. Reed, 404  U.S.  7I,  76-77  (I97I) 

(challenging preexisting acceptance of sex 
discrimination); New  York Times,  376  U.S.  at  268-69  (finding libel law subject to  the  First 
Amendment); Brown  v.  Board of  Educ., 347 U.S.  483,  495  (I954)  (overruling Plessy v.  Ferguson, 
I63  U.S.  537  (I896)). 

108  Gordon Wood's description of this development traces the shift from the earlier view: "So 
distinctive and so separated was the aristocracy from ordinary folk that many still thought the 
two groups represented two orders of being..  ..  Ordinary people were thought to be different 
physically, and because of varying diets and living conditions, no doubt in many cases they were 
different. People often assumed that a handsome child, though apparently a commoner, had to be 
some gentleman's bastard offspring." GORDON S. WOOD, THE  RADICALISM  OF  THE  AMERICAN 
REVOLUTION  27  (I992). 

109  See  SUNSTEIN,  supra note  64,  at  40-67. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

1995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I767 

tion.110  Who  could object  to judicial  adoption of  what  is  by  hypothe- 
sis  a  good  theory?  If  agreement is  possible  on  a  good  abstraction,  a 
legal  system  will  have  done  its  job  especially  well;  consider,  as  pos- 
sibilities,  antitrust or  equal  protection law.  But  any  abstractions will 
likely  have  been developed through the  generalization and  clarification 
of  incompletely  theorized  outcomes,  accomplished  by  constant  refer- 
ence  to  concrete cases  against which  the  theory is  measured.  At  least 
part  of  the  test  of  the  theory  - 
if  it  is  a  theory  of  law  meant  for 
is  how  well  it  accounts for the  cases  and  for con- 
judicial  adoption - 
sidered judgments  about  the  cases,  though  of  course judicial  mistakes 
are possible,  and  these  may  be  corrected by  the  theory, subject  to  the 
constraints of  stare decisis. 

I  am  thus  declining  to  endorse what  might  be  called  a  strong ver- 
sion  of  the  argument offered here: a  claim that  incompletely theorized 
agreements are always  the  appropriate approach to law  and  that  more 
ambitious theory is  always  illegitimate in  law.  What I  am  urging is  a 
more modest  point,  keyed  to  the  institutional characteristics of  judges 
in  any  legal  system we  are likely  to  have.  Judges  should  adopt  a  pre- 
sumption  rather than  a  taboo against high-level  theorization.  Usually, 
they  should  invoke  the  lowest  levels  of  theoretical ambition  necessary 
to  decide the case.  In  many contexts, they will  not  be  able to  think  of 
a  good  theory.  In  many  cases,  they  will  not  be  able  to  agree on  any 
theory.  The  effort  to  reach  agreement  on  relative  abstractions  may 
make it  hard for judges or other people to live  and work together, and 
unnecessary contests over  theory can  suggest an  absence of  respect for 
the  deepest  and  most  defining commitments of  other  people."' 

It  may  even  happen  that  an  area  of  judge-made  law  will  become 
less  theorized over  time.  A  once-acceptable general theory may  come 
to  seem  inadequate,  and  confrontations  with  particular  cases  may 
show  its  inadequacy and make it  unravel.  The  Supreme Court's deci- 
sions  in  the  Lochner  era  were  relatively  well-theorized,  in  the  sense 
that  they were founded on a recognizable general theory of  the permis- 
sible  role of  the  state.112 The  general theory was  not  replaced with  a 
new  one  all  of  a  sudden, or even  at  all; instead, it  came apart through 
particular cases that attacked the periphery and then the  core."13  This 
is  a  familiar phenomenon, as  the  process of  case-by-case decision  tests 

110  Consider, for example, Alexander Meiklejohn's suggestion that New  York 7Tmes Co. v.  Sul- 
livan was "an occasion for dancing in the streets," as reported in Harry Kalven, Jr., The New 
York Times Case: A Note  on  "The Central Meaning of the First Amendment," I964  SuP. CT. REV. 
I9I, 

22I  n.125. 

111 There  are intrapersonal parallels.  In  our ethical lives  as  individuals, each  of  us  may  avoid 
choice  among  theories if  we  do  not  need  to  choose  in  order to  decide  what  to  do  in  particular 
cases.  But  the  interpersonal case  is  perhaps more vivid. 

112 See  STONE, SEIDMAN, SUNSTEIN & TUSHNET, supra  note  58,  at  787-807. 
113  See  West Coast  Hotel  Co.  v.  Parrish, 300  U.S.  379,  391-93 

(I937);  Nebbia  v.  New  York, 

291  U.S.  502,  535-39 

(I934). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I768 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol. I08:I733 

any  general theory and  exposes  its  limits.  Over  time,  an  area  of  law 
may  become  more  theorized  or  less  so;  over  long  periods  of  time,  it 
may  go  from one  to  the  other, and  back  again. 

If  all  this  is  right, we  ought  not  to  think  of  incompletely theorized 
agreements  on  particulars  as  a  kind  of  unfortunate  second-best, 
adopted  for a  world  in  which  people disagree, are confused or biased, 
and  have  limited  time.  The  alleged  first-best -  Hercules,  or  the  (ex- 
calls  for an 
hausted?) judge  who  has  reached reflective equilibrium - 
extra-human conception of  law.  It  is  extra-human because it  is  so  ob- 
viously  unsuited to the real world.  To say the least, it is hard to know 
whether  a  top-down  or  highly  theorized  approach  is  appropriate for 
morality.  But  often, at least, it is easy to know  that such  an  approach 
is  inappropriate for law.  The  institutional features of  the  legal  system. 
require an  ac- 
- 
count of law  that is highly sensitive to the characteristics of the  system 
in  which  it  is  situated.  Among  those  characteristics are  confusion  or 
uncertainty  about  general  theory,  deep  disputes  about  the  right  and 
the  good,  and  a  pressing  need  to  make  a  wide  range  of  particular 
decisions. 

a  human  institution  with  distinctive  constraints - 

B.  Disagreement 

What of disagreement?  The  discussion thus far has focused mostly 
on  the  need  to  obtain agreement or convergence.  This  is  only  part of 
the  picture.  In  law,  as  in  politics,  disagreement can  be  a  productive 
revealing error, showing gaps, moving  discussion 
and creative force - 
in  appropriate directions.  The  American political  order has  placed  a 
high premium on "government by discussion,"114 and when  the process 
is  working well,  this is  true for the judiciary as well  as for other insti- 
tutions.  Progress in politics and even  law  is  often fueled by failures of 
convergence and by sharp disagreement on both the particular and the 
general. 

It  should  be  unnecessary  to  emphasize  that  legal  disagreements 
may  have many legitimate sources.  Two of these sources are especially 
important.  First,  people may  share general commitments but  disagree 
on  particular outcomes.  This  is no less pervasive  a  social phenomenon 
than  its  converse,  which  I  have  stressed here.  People  may  think,  for 
example,  that  it  is  wrong  to  take  innocent  life,  but  disagree  about 
whether the  Constitution protects the  right to  have  an  abortion.  They 
may think that everyone has a right to be free from invidious discrimi- 
nation,  but  disagree  about  the  legitimacy  of  affirmative  action.  It  is 
common  to  find  agreement on  the  general alongside  disagreement  on 
the  particular. 

114  SAMUEL H.  BEER, To  MAKE A NATION: THE  REDISCOVERY OF AMERICAN FEDERALISM 74 

('993). 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I769 

Second,  people's  disagreements on  general principles may  produce 
disagreements  over  low-level  propositions  as  well.  People  who  think 
that  an  autonomy  principle accounts  for  freedom  of  speech  may  also 
think that the government cannot regulate truthful, nondeceptive  com- 
mercial  advertising  -  whereas  people  who  think  that  freedom  of 
speech is a democratic idea may have no interest in commercial adver- 
tising  at  all.  People  who  think  that  tort  law  is  founded  on  Kantian 
understandings may think that strict liability is required, whereas utili- 
tarians may disagree.  Academic theorizing about law  can  have  a  salu- 
tary  function  in  part because  it  tests  low-level  principles by  reference 
to  more ambitious claims.  Disagreements can  be  productive by  virtue 
of  this  process of  testing. 

It  is  important,  then,  to  emphasize  that  disagreements  are  some- 
times  desirable  and  that  incompletely  theorized  agreements  may  be 
nothing  to  celebrate.  If  everyone  having  a  reasonable  general  view 
converges on a particular (by hypothesis reasonable) judgment, nothing 
is  amiss.  This  is  the  basic  phenomenon to  which  I  am  calling  atten- 
tion  here.  But  if  an  agreement  is  incompletely  theorized,  there  is  a 
risk that  everyone who  participates in  the  agreement is  mistaken,  and 
hence  that  the  outcome  is  mistaken  too.  There  is  also  a  risk  that 
someone who  is reasonable has not participated and that if that person 
were  included,  the  agreement would  break down.  Incompletely  theo- 
rized  agreements  should  therefore  be  subject  to  scrutiny  over  time. 
Nor  is social consensus, or something approaching consensus, a consid- 
eration that outweighs everything else.  Usually, it would  be much bet- 
ter  to  have  a  just  outcome,  rejected by  many  people,  than  an  unjust 
outcome  with  which  most  or  even  almost  all  agree.  Consensus  or 
agreement is  important largely because of  its connection with  stability, 
itself  a  valuable  but  far  from overriding social  goal. 

Of  course,  it  would  be  foolish  to  say  that  no  general  theory  can 
produce agreement, even  more foolish to  deny that  some  general theo- 
ries deserve general support, and most foolish of  all to  say that  incom- 
pletely  theorized  agreements warrant  respect  whatever  their  content. 
What  seems  plausible  is  something  more  modest:  except  in  unusual 
situations,  and  for  multiple  reasons,  general  theories  are  an  unlikely 
foundation  for judge-made  law,  and  caution  and  humility  about  gen- 
eral theory are appropriate for judges,  at  least  when  multiple  theories 
can  lead  in  the  same  direction.  This  more modest  set  of  claims  helps 
us  to  see  that  incompletely  theorized  agreements  are  important  phe- 
nomena  with  their own  special virtues.  Such  agreements are the  law- 
yer's  distinctive  solution  to  the  problem of  social  pluralism. 

C.  Principle,  Politics,  Law 

Henry Hart and Albert Sacks of course defended the view,  influen- 
tial  for  the  last  generation, that  courts engage  in  principled reasoning 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I770 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  I08:I733 

and  elaboration of  basic  social  commitments,  while  the  political  pro- 
cess involves  an  ad  hoc set of judgments often producing unprincipled 
compromises.115 This  view  finds its  most  extreme statement in  Dwor- 
kin's  Hercules  metaphor, which  sees  constitutional  courts  as  "the fo- 
rum  of  principle."116 But  as  description,  this  view  is  historically 
myopic.  Courts  do  offer  reasons  and  principles,  but  those  principles 
tend  to  be  modest  and  low-level.  By  contrast, high  principle has  had 
its  most  important  and  most  defining  moments  inside  the  political 
branches  of  government,  not  within  courtrooms.  The  founding,  the 
Civil  War, the New  Deal,  and other periods of  social reform17 -  pro- 
sug- 
gressivism, the  civil  rights movement, the women's  movement  - 
gest that the key forum of principle in American government has  been 
democratic rather than  adjudicative. 

The  question  might  therefore be  asked  whether it  would  be  possi- 
ble  to  reverse the  Hart  and  Sacks formulation, and  to  propose instead 
that  high  principle plays  an  appropriately large role in  the  democratic 
arena  while  low-level  principles  are  the  more  appropriate and  usual 
stuff of adjudication.  Any such view  would  be too simple, but there is 
a  good  deal  of  truth to  it.  Of  course, high  principle does  not  charac- 
terize ordinary politics, but high principle has  had an  important defin- 
ing  role in  American political life,  and  in  any  case, the  principles that 
mark  American constitutionalism owe  their  origins  to  political  rather 
than legal developments.  There are important exceptions, when  courts 
make  or  refer to  arguments of  high  principle,118 but  ordinarily those 
exceptions consist of  vindications of (certain readings of) constitutional 
judgments made by previous generations.  As  I  have  suggested, the  ar- 
gument  on  behalf  of  incompletely  theorized  agreements  is  therefore 
part of  a  theory of  authority and of just  institutions, rooted in  a  claim 
that  fundamental principles are  best  developed  politically  rather than 
judicially. 

115 See HENRY  M. HART,  JR.  & ALBERT M.  SACKS, THE  LEGAL PROCESS: BASIC PROBLEMS 
IN  THE MAKING AND APPLICATION OF LAW 643-46 (William N. Eskridge, Jr. & Philip P. Frickey 
eds., 1994). 

116  RONALD  DWORKIN, The Forum of Principle,  in  A  MATTER OF  PRINCIPLE 33, 69-7I 

(I985); 

see  also  supra  note  8I.  Note  in  this regard that Dworkin's  discussion of  "passivism" in  constitu- 
tional  law,  see  DWORKIN, supra  note  I5,  at  369-79,  does  not  deal  with  the  need  for  devices  to 
limit the power of judicial review in light of the judges'  likely biases and institutional weaknesses, 
and  it  fails  to  see  the  possibility that,  because of  those  weaknesses,  there is  a  gap  between  the 
actual  meaning of  the  Constitution and judicial  pronouncements about that  meaning.  See  id.  at 
370;  cf  Lawrence  G.  Sager,  Fair  Measure: The  Legal  Status  of  Underenforced Constitutional 
(discussing that  gap).  The  presumption in  favor 
Norms,  9I  HARV.  L.  REv.  12I2, 
of  theoretical modesty  is  one  way  of  disciplining judicial  power  in  light  of  judicial  weaknesses. 

1213-28 

(1978) 

117  See  ACKERMAN, supra  note  58,  at  40-56. 
118 Brown  v.  Board of  Education, 347  U.S.  483,  495  (1954), is,  of  course, the  most  important 

example. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I 995] 

INCOMPLETELY THEORIZED AGREEMENTS 

I77I 

CONCLUSION:  THE  LIMITS  OF  THEORY 

A  key  task  for a  legal  system  is  to  enable  people  who  disagree on 
first  principles  to  converge  on  outcomes  in  particular cases.  Incom- 
pletely  theorized  agreements  help  to  produce  judgments  on  relative 
particulars amidst  conflict on  relative  abstractions. 

Notwithstanding  these points, the impulse to theorize should not be 
disparaged.  In  some  areas of  law,  we  cannot  think  very  well  without 
embarking on  a  kind of  conceptual ascent from the  incompletely theo- 
rized  outcome,  and  the  conceptual  ascent  will  require  us  to  say 
broader and deeper things.  It is sometimes desirable to think about an 
issue  very  deeply;  this  is  certainly  true  for  academic  observers,  and 
also for people in politics, in  which  abstractions and aspirations play  a 
crucial  role.  But  judges  must  decide  many  cases  quickly;  they  have 
limited  time  and  capacities.  They  must  also  work  with  each  other, 
and contests over the  right and the  good can make it hard for them  to 
do  so.  Like  ordinary people,  judges  should  obey  a  norm  of  mutual 
respect,  or  of  reciprocity, and  this  norm  can  incline  judges  to  avoid 
large-scale  contests,  at  least  when  they  involve  people's  deepest  or 
most  defining commitments. 

These  considerations might be  made part of  a  role-specific account 
an  account  of  public  reason  designed  specifically 
of  public  reason  - 
for  participants in  adjudication.  But  it  would  not  be  surprising if  at 
least  some  of  these  points  turned  out  to  connect  with  some  of  the 
broader aspirations of  a  well-functioning deliberative democracy.  Like 
judges,  ordinary  people  have  limited  time  and  capacities;  they  too 
must  live  with  one  another.  At  least  as  much  as  judges,  they  should 
discuss  their  disputes  in  ways  that  entail  mutual  respect,  and  thus 
avoid  unnecessary controversies over  fundamental commitments. 

I  have  emphasized  that  general theory  - 

involving  broad  claims 
about the  right and the  good -  plays an appropriate role in the  polit- 
ical  sphere.  In  law,  I  have  argued that there is,  and should  be,  a  pre- 
sumptive taboo against making broad and general claims; there is,  and 
should  be,  no  such  taboo  in  the  world  of  public  reason.  But  citizens 
and  representatives, like  judges,  must  make  decisions  about  concrete 
controversies in  the face of  sharp or even  intractable disagreements on 
first  principles.  Entirely outside  of  law,  and  in  the  world  of  ordinary 
democratic discussion,  incompletely theorized agreements play  an  im- 
portant  role. 

There is, however, an important exception to the general claim that 
I  have made throughout this essay.  In order for participants in law  (or 
democracy) to  accept that  general claim, they  must accept at  least  one 
general theory: the theory that I  have attempted to  defend.  This  is  the 
theory  that  tells  them  to  favor  incompletely  theorized  agreements. 
That  theory  probably  cannot  itself  be  accepted  without  reference  to 
general  theoretical  considerations,  and  its  acceptance  or  rejection 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

I772 

HARVARD LAW REVIEW 

[Vol.  I08:I733 

should  not  be  incompletely  theorized.  Many  people  claim  that  law 
should  reflect a  high-level  theory  of  the  right  or  the  good,  and  they 
will  not  be  satisfied  with  incompletely  theorized  agreements.119 The 
choice  between  the  two  approaches will  turn  on  issues  that  are  both 
high-level  and  quite  controversial. 

This  is  an  important  matter.  But  it  is  notable  that  the  belief  in 
incompletely  theorized  agreements,  while  tacit,  is  quite  widespread. 
The  best  evidence  is  the  legal  culture itself  Such  agreements are  the 
usual  stuff  of  law,  and  participants in  the  legal  culture are suspicious 
of  much  in  the  way  of  theoretical  ambition.  There  are  reasons  for 
their  suspicion.  What  I  have  tried  to  do  here  is  to  spell  out  those 
reasons and  to  connect  them  to  some  of  the  most  notable  characteris- 
tics  of  thinking  in  law. 

119 Recall, however, that the grounds for such agreements are diverse, and that it is possible to 
In  this  sense,  an  incompletely theo- 

accept  some  while  rejecting others.  See  supra pp.  1745-51. 
rized judgment  in  support of  incompletely theorized agreements is  certainly imaginable. 

This content downloaded from 80.189.123.75 on Mon, 23 Jun 2014 10:20:45 AM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

