University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1995 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Constitutional Anomaly in the Czech Republic, A Special Reports 
Constitutional Anomaly in the Czech Republic, A Special Reports 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Constitutional Anomaly in the Czech Republic, A Special Reports," 4 East European 
Constitutional Review 50 (1995). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

EAST  EUROPEAN  CONSTITUTIONAL  REVIEW

The dubious status of  the Charter  of Rights  and Freedoms

A Constitutional Anomaly  in the Czech  Republic?
Cass R. Sunstein

On  May  1, 1995,  Prime  Minister  Vaclav  Klaus,
the remarkable  leader  of the Czech Republic,  vis-
ited  the University  of Chicago.  His  visit became
the occasion for an intriguing discussion of the sta-
tus of constitutional rights in the Czech Republic.
The bare  facts  are  these. In  1991,  the  Federal
Assembly  of  the  Czech  and  Slovak  Federal
Republic passed the Constitutional Act Instituting
the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  and
Freedoms. This Charter  was  written with consid-
erable  help  from  Western  Europeans  and
Americans.  It contains  an  ample  set  of rights and
freedoms,  including  freedom  of speech  and  reli-
gion, protection  against  abuse  of police  authority,
protection  against discrimination, and much more
in the way of civil rights and liberties. The Charter
also  includes  a  set of social  and  economic  guaran-
tees. Consider the following examples:
Article 28: Employees are entitled to fair remuneration
for work and to satisfactory working conditions.
Article 29:  Women,  adolescents, and handicapped per-
sons are entitled to  increased protection of their health at
work and to special working conditions. Adolescents and
handicapped persons are entitled to special protection in
labor relations and to assistance in vocational training.
Article 31: Citizens are entitled under public insurance
to free medical care and to medical aid under conditions
set by  law.
Article 30: Citizens are entitled to  material security in
old age and during incapacitation for work, as well as in
the case of loss of their provider. Everybody who  suffers
from  material need  is  entitled to  such  assistance as  is
essentialfor securing his or her basic living conditions.
Article 35: Everybody has the right to live in afavorable
living environment.
Article 32: Parents who are raising children are entitled
to assistance from the state.

Article 26(3):Everybody  has  the  right  to  acquire the
means of his  or her livelihood by  work.  The State shall
provide appropriate material security to  those  citizens
who are unable without their fault to exercise this right.
Shortly  after  the  enactment  of  this  Charter,
the conflict  between  the two republics  threw the
status  of  the  Charter  into  great  doubt.  But  the
Charter  had  a  continuing  effect  on  Czech  and
Slovak constitutionalism.  The Constitution of the
Slovak  Republic  was  passed  on  September  1,
1992,  and it expressly  included  the Charter, with
deliberate modifications,  in its text. On December
16,  1992, the new  Czech  Constitution was enact-
ed.  It did  not, however, contain  an  explicit set  of
provisions  guaranteeing  fundamental  rights  and
freedoms.  Unlike  the  Slovak  Constitution,  it did
not include  the Charter  in  its text. Instead  it con-
tained  two very short, relevant articles:
Article  3:  The  Charter of Fundamental Rights  and
Freedoms forms  a part of the  constitutional order of the
Czech Republic.
Article 4:  The fundamental rights and freedoms  shall
enjoy the protection of the judicial power.

To  say the least,  these  are  unusual provisions.
A  lawyer,  a  political  scientist,  or  a  citizen  of the
Czech  Republic  should  at  this  stage  raise  two
questions:  What  is  the  precise  status  of  the
Charter  in  the  current  Czech  Republic?  And
what  was  the  genesis  of these  puzzling  articles?
The first question seems  easier to answer than the
second.  Articles  3  and  4  appear  to  give  the
Charter  the  same  status  as  anything  else  in  the
Czech  Constitution.  Something  that  is  "a part  of
the constitutional  order"  seems, at least to an  out-
sider, to -be a  part of the Constitution. In any  case
some  such  conclusion  seems  very  important  to
reach,  since  if  the  Charter  is  not  part  of  the

HeinOnline  -- 4 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 50 1995

SPRING  1995

Constitution  of  the  Czech  Republic,  there  is  no
bill of rights in that republic-no  protection of free
speech,  freedom  of religion,  fairness  in  the crimi-
nal justice  system,  or  anything  else.  It  therefore
seems  easy  to conclude  that the Charter  has been
made  part of the Czech  Constitution.

But  we  should  not jump  to  conclusions,  for
the problematic  genesis  of Articles  3  and  4  raises
many  relevant  questions.  Some  people  in  the
Czech Republic claim that these Articles were not
voluntarily  adopted  by  the  Czechs  at  all,  and
were  not a  product of any  deliberative judgment
from  the  leaders  and  citizens  of  the  Czech
Republic.  On  their view, these  articles  were  pro-
duced  by a form  of compulsion  from  the Council
of  Europe  and  from  West  European  intermed-
dlers,  and  in  particular  from  Brussels  and
Strassburg.  This  appears  to  be  right, but  it  may
not be  the whole story. Some  observers claim that
Articles  3  and  4-and the  specific  contents  of the
Charter-had  something  to  do  with  pressures
from,  among  others,  communists  and  former
Communists,  who  wanted  social  and  economic
guarantees  to receive  constitutional status.

I  do not  claim  that  either  of these  accounts  is
entirely  true. In  fact  I  do  not  know exactly  what
lay behind Article 3 and 4.. But it now seems clear
that  the  odd  genesis  of  both  the  Charter  and
Articles  3  and 4 has made  their legal  status  highly
questionable.  Are  they  or  are  they  not  a  serious
part of the Czech  Constitution? Are they enforce-
able  in the  Constitutional  Court?  Are  they bind-
ing on the prime minister and the Parliament?  Do
the prime  minister  and  other officials  take  them
to  be  binding?  What  is  the  current  status  of the

Charter and  its many parts? Do the social  and eco-
nomic guarantees have the same status as  political
and  civil  rights?  Might  uncertainty  about  the
guarantees  create  similar  uncertainty  for  the
rights?  These  are  very  important  questions.  But
they are not easy  questions to answer.

We  might  draw  three  general  conclusions
from  all this.  First: The leaders and citizens  of the
new Czech  Republic  have not yet had a sustained
discussion of what sorts of rights and liberties  they
want  in  their  Constitution.  Such  a  discussion
should  probably  occur  before  very  long,  so  as  to
create  more  security  for rights than  Article  3  and
4 may now provide.

Second:  Sometimes  the problematic origins  of
a constitutional  provision  will give  that provision
dubious  legitimacy.  When  leaders  are  aware  of
those  problematic  origins,  a  constitutional  provi-
sion may not mean  much.

Third:  In some  parts  of some  postcommunist
nations,  the  real-world  consequences  of constitu-
tional provisions  remain  unclear. Under  commu-
nism,  constitutional  guarantees  were  not  worth
the paper on which they were written; leaders felt
free  to  ignore  them  if the  situation  so  required.
There  is  no  doubt that  many leaders in  postcom-
munist  nations,  including  Prime  Minister  Klaus,
have  done  remarkable  things  under  difficult  cir-
cumstances,  displayed brilliance and  courage,  and
improved  prospects  for their people.  But in  some
postcommunist  nations, it is far from  certain that
leaders  will  deem  themselves  bound  by  constitu-
tional  provisions  that  they  find  inconvenient  or
that they dislike,  because of their dubious  origins
or because  of their consequences.

HeinOnline  -- 4 E. Eur. Const. Rev. 51 1995

