University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1995 

Cass R. Sunstein 

What the Civil Rights Movement Was and Wasn't 
What the Civil Rights Movement Was and Wasn't 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "What the Civil Rights Movement Was and Wasn't," 1995 University of Illinois Law 
Review 191 (1995). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

WHAT  THE  CIVIL  RIGHTS
MOVEMENT  WAS  AND  WASN'T
(WITH  NOTES  ON  MARTIN  LUTHER
KING,  JR. AND  MALCOLM  X)t

Cass R.  Sunstein*

In this David C. Baum  Memorial Lecture on  Civil Liberties
and Civil Rights, Professor Sunstein begins  by  noting that par-
ticipants in the civil rights movement  were often  backward look-
ing and even  conservative, invoking commitments from  the  na-
tion's past and arguing against reliance on  the judiciary and the
Supreme  Court. They  stressed above all two  time-honored lib-
eral principles: freedom from  desperate conditions and  opposi-
tion to  caste. It is  wrong to say (as many  now do) that the move-
ment  was founded  on  a  principle of  race  neutrality, and also
wrong to say  (as some now  do) that  the  movement  was opposed
to  "categories" or  "binary oppositions." Professor Sunstein then
raises important issues  of character by  exploring the  works  of
Martin Luther King, Jr., and Malcolm X.  He concludes by  dis-
cussing the  risks of dehumanization and brutality in movements
committed to  significant social change.

We're  all  black  to  the  white  man,  but  we're  a  thousand  and  one
different  colors.  Turn  around,  look  at  each  -other!

-Malcolm  X 1

Less  and  less  do  we  transform  private  troubles  into  public  issues.
There  is  no  willingness  to  take  risks,  no  setting  of  dangerous
goals.  The  time  has  come  for  a  reassertion  of  the  personal.

-Tom  Hayden,  19622

t  This  article was  originally presented  on  April  18,  1994,  as  the  second  1993-94
lecture of  the David C. Baum Memorial Lectures on Civil Liberties and Civil Rights at the
University of Illinois College of  Law.

*  Karl N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Chi-
cago. A.B.  1975, J.D. 1978, Harvard University. The  author would  like to  thank Ray  Austin  and
Thomas  Brown for their research assistance, and the faculty and students of the College of Law
-for their hospitality and for  their extremely  valuable reactions.

1.  MALCOLM  X.  THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY  OF  MALCOLM  X  201 

(1964) 

[hereinafter

AUTOBIOGRAPHY].

2. 

JAMES  MILLER.  DEMOCRACY 

IS  IN  THE  STREETS  101  (1987).

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  1995

On  a  theoretical  level,  you  can  say  that  we  believed  in  wanting  to
make  history  and  achieve  civil  rights.  But  there  was  something
else.  . . . The  whole  emotion  of  defining  not  only  yourself,  but
also  your  life  by  risking  your  life,  and  testing  whether  you're
willing  to die  for  your  beliefs,  was  the powerful  motive,  I  believe.
-Tom  Hayden,  1987'

I  have  a  dream  that  one  day,  down  in  Alabama,  with  its  vicious
racists,  with  its  governor  having  his  lips  dripping  with  the  words
of interposition  and  nullification,  that  one  day,  right  there  in  Al-
abama,  little  black  boys  and  black  girls  will  be  able  to join  hands
with  little  white  boys  and  white  girls  as  sisters  and  brothers.

-Martin  Luther  King,  Jr.4

What  claims  were  made  by  those  involved  in  the  civil  rights  move-
ment  of the  1960s?  What  sorts  of changes  were  sought  for  society  and
particularly  for  law?  And  what  are  the  implications  of  the  civil  rights
movement  for  the  issues  that  face  us  today?  In  this  essay,  I  will  ex-
plore  a  few  aspects  of  this  very  large  and  controversial  topic.

This  is  a  somewhat  unusual  subject  for  a  lawyer;  but  the  topic  is
far  from  irrelevant  to  law.  Some  people  think  that  the  American  con-
stitutional  tradition  has  been  punctuated  by  a  range  of  constitutional
moments. 5  Whether  or  not  this  is  so,  the  civil  rights  movement  of the
1960s  unquestionably  helped  transform  our  understandings  of consti-
tutional  principles,  including  most  prominently  rights  to  free  speech
and  equal  protection  of the  laws.  The  political  and  moral  claims  of the
movement  helped  spur  legislation'  that  continues  to  raise  foundational
issues  about  our  constitutional  order.7

that 

think 

Few  people 

the  civil  rights  movement  actually
amended  the  constitution,8  and  very  possibly  the  best  view  is  that  so-
cial  movements  of  this  kind  have  no  bearing  on  constitutional  mean-
ing.  But  if we  are  simply  describing  our  practices,  it  seems  clear  that
disputes  about  the  appropriate  characterization-and  evaluation-of
the  movement  play  a  continuing  role  in  public  debate  and  even  consti-
tutional  law.  It  is  therefore  plausible  to  say  that  a  discussion  of  the
civil  rights  movement  is  not  only  of  interest  in  its  own  right.  It  also
connects  to  our  understanding  of  our  constitutional  heritage.

3.  Id.  at  59.
4.  MARTIN  LUTHER  KING.  A  TESTAMENT  OF  HOPE:  THE  ESSENTIAL  WRITINGS  OF  MARTIN

LUTHER  KING.  JR.  219  (James  M.  Washington  ed.,  1986)  [hereinafter  TESTAMENT  OF  HOPE].

5.  See  I  BRUCE  A. ACKERMAN.  WE  THE  PEOPLE:  FOUNDATIONS  (1991).
6.  1 refer  especially  to  the Civil  Rights  Act  of  1964,  Pub.  L.  No.  88-352,  78  Stat.  243,  and
to  the Voting  Rights  Act  of  1965,  Pub.  L.  No. 89-110,  79  Stat.  437  (codified  as  amended  at  42
U.S.C.  §§  1971,  1973-1973bb-1  (1988)).  See  GERALD  ROSENBERG,  THE  HOLLOW  HOPE  (1991).
7.  See,  e.g.,  RICHARD  A. EPSTEIN.  FORBIDDEN  GROUNDS:  THE  CASE  AGAINST  EMPLOYMENT

DISCRIMINATION  LAWS  (1992);  LANI  GUINIER,  THE  TYRANNY  OF  THE  MAJORITY  (1994).

8.  Though  Ackerman  does  make  a suggestion  of  this sort. ACKERMAN,  supra note  5, at  196.

No.  I1]

CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT

There  are  of  course  great  hazards  in  describing  so  large  and  di-
verse  a  movement,  with  so  many  different  defining  strands,  in  a  short
compass.  What  I will  say  is  shamelessly  selective  and  impressionistic.
As  my  principal  texts,  I  use  the  writings  of  Martin  Luther  King,  Jr.,
the  writings  of  Malcolm  X,  and  the  founding  document  of  the  Stu-
dents  for  a  Democratic  Society  (SDS),  the  Port  Huron  Statement.9
My  goal  is  mostly  descriptive,  though  not surprisingly  my  own  evalua-
tions  will  appear  from  time  to  time.

I.  WHAT  THE  CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT  WAS  FOR

A.  Deviation Between  Practice and Ideal

Perhaps  surprisingly,  a  careful  reading  of the  basic  documents  of
the  civil  rights  movement  shows  that  much  of the  movement  was  con-
servative  and  backward  looking.  At least  in  its earliest  stages,  and  to a
significant  extent 
its  defining  aspirations  came  from
America's  own  stated  ideals.  Often  participants  in  the  movement  at-
tempted  to  identify  those  ideals  and  to  insist  that  the  nation  should
live  up  to  them.  In  this  way  the  movement  had  an  important  Burkean
caste,  looking  to  the  past  to  help  define  the appropriate  content  of the
future.

thereafter, 

For  the most  part,  participants  in  the movement  made  little  effort
to  find  basic  commitments  in  places  external  to  the  American  culture,
or  to  challenge  the  American  culture  itself. They  described  racial  ine-
quality  as  an  anomalous  institution  entirely  inconsistent  with  the  basic
thrust  of  American  ideals  and  practices.  (This  came  to  be  one  of  the
most  visible  divisions  between  Martin  Luther  King,  Jr.,  and  Malcolm
X,  with  the  latter  repudiating  American  ideals  as  fundamentally  in-
fected  with  racism. 10)  In  this way,  the  civil  rights  movement  borrowed
a  conventional  lawyer's  strategy:  to  invoke  a  widely  shared  and  time-
honored  ideal  and  to  show  that  the  practice  at  issue  did  not  comport
with  that  ideal.

For  example,  the  Port  Huron  Statement  insisted  that  "[t]he  dec-
laration  'all  men  are  created  equal  .
. .' rang  hollow  before  the facts  of
Negro  life in  the  South  and  the  big  cities  of the  North.""  The student
authors  emphasized  "the  hypocrisy  of American  ideals."' 2  Martin  Lu-
ther  King,  Jr.,  challenged  the same  thing  in  similar  words,  saying  "All
we  say  to  America  is-Be  true  to  what  you  said  on  paper."' 3

9.  See  MILLER,  supra  note  2,  app.  Miller's  book  is  an  illuminating  discussion  of the SDS.
10.  See  AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  supra note  1, at  273-81.
11.  MILLER,  supra note  1, at  330.
12. 
13. 

Id.
Id. at  282.

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  1995

King's  speeches  frequently  looked  backward  for  the  nation's  core
commitments.  Thus  he  wrote  in  the  "I  have  a  dream"  speech  that  his
"is  a  dream  deeply  rooted  in  the  American  dream  that  one  day  this
nation  will  rise  up and  live  out the  true  meaning  of its  creed-we  hold
these  truths  to  be self-evident,  that  all  men  are created  equal." '14  Thus
he  suggested  that  "[o]ne  day  the  South  will  know  that  when  these
disinherited  children  of  God  sat  down  at  lunch  counters,  they  were  in
reality  standing  up  for  what  is  best  in  the  American  dream."15  Thus
King  self-consciously  invoked  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  em-
phasizing  that  "[n]ever  has  a  sociopolitical  document  proclaimed
sacredness  of  human
more  profoundly 
personality." 16

eloquently 

I have  given  simply a  few  illustrations  of  a  pervasive  claim  in  the
civil  rights  movement.  As  I  have  suggested,  the  basic  objection-that
racial  inequality  was  inconsistent  with  American  ideals-was  a  defin-
ing  feature  of  the  movement.  As  the  movement  became  more  radical,
some  of  its  members  urged  that  racial  inequality  was  an  ineradicable
part of American  practice,  rather  than  an  isolated  anomaly.  Black  na-
tionalism  was  a  response  to  this  claim. 7

and 

the 

B.  Freedom from  Desperate Conditions

Participants  in  the  civil  rights  movement  stressed  two  substantive
strands  of liberal  thought.  Both  of these  are  important  aspects  of  lib-
eralism.  The first  involves freedom from desperate conditions; the  sec-
ond  involves  opposition to  caste.

American  political  thought  has  never  been  egalitarian.  It  has  re-
jected  equality  of  income  and  wealth  as  both  unnecessary  and
counterproductive."8  But  the  belief  in  freedom  from  desperate  condi-
tions-not  an  egalitarian  ideal-has long  roots  in  the American  politi-
cal  tradition.  This  form  of  freedom  was  supported  by  both  James
Madison 9  and  Thomas  Jefferson.20  It  received  one  of  its  most  cele-
brated  endorsements  in  the. 1944  State  of the  Union  address  by  Presi-
dent  Franklin  Roosevelt.  Roosevelt  urged  a  "second  Bill  of  Rights,"
including  "the  right  to  earn  enough  to  provide  adequate  food  and
clothing  and  recreation,"  "the  right  of  every  family  to  a  decent
home,"  "the  right  to  adequate  medical  care  and  the  opportunity  to

14.  TESTAMENT  OF  HOPE,  supra note  4,  at  219.
15.  THE  WISDOM  OF  MARTIN  LUTHER  KING.  JR. 
16.  TESTAMENT  OF  HOPE,  supra note  4,  at  119.
17.  See  Gary  Peller,  Race Consciousness, 1990  DUKE  L.J.  758.
18.  See  THE  FEDERALIST  No.  10  (James  Madison).
19. 
eds.,  1983).

II  (Alex  Ayres  ed.,  1993).

JAMES  MADISON,  14  THE  PAPERS  OF  JAMES  MADISON  197-98  (Robert  A.  Rutland  et  al.,

20.  THOMAS  JEFFERSON.  8  THE  PAPERS  OF  THOMAS  JEFFERSON  681-83  (Julian  P.  Boyd  ed.,

1953).

No.  I1]

CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT

achieve  and  enjoy  good  health," 
education."21

and  "the 

right 

to  a  good

In  these  circumstances,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  commitment  to
freedom  from  desperate  conditions  was  a  creation  of  the  civil  rights
movement  or  of the  1960s.  But  ideas  of this  sort  did  reemerge,  and  in
dramatic  fashion.  Such  ideas  were  spurred  by  Michael  Harrington's
extremely  influential  book,  The  Other  America.2  Answering  John
Kenneth  Galbraith's  The  Affluent  Society,23  Harrington  contended
that  in  fact  many  Americans  lived  in  desperate  conditions.  Though
this  "other  America"  was  often  invisible,  it  included,  according  to
Harrington,  millions  of poor  people.  The  book  helped  contribute  to  the
''war  on  poverty"  inaugurated  by  President  Johnson.

An  emphasis  on  desperate  conditions  was  a  crucial  part  of  the
civil  rights  movement,  and  it  helped  define  its  basic  goals.  Thus  the
Port  Huron  Statement  suggested,  "A  program  against  poverty  must
be just  as  sweeping  as  the  nature  of the problem  itself.  It  must  not  be
just  palliative,  but  directed  to  the  abolition  of  the  structural  circum-
stances  of  poverty.  . . . [E]xisting  institutions  should  be  expanded  so
the  welfare  state  cares  for  everyone's  welfare  according  to  need.""
King  wrote  in  the  same  vein  that  "[t]he  time  has  come  for  us  to  civi-
lize  ourselves  by  the  total,  direct  and  immediate  abolition  of  pov-
erty." '25  A  particular  concern  was  joblessness,  and  hence  King  said,
"Let  us  do  one  simple,  direct  thing-let  us  end  unemployment  totally
and  immediately."2

More  concretely,  King  proposed  a  bill  of rights  for  the  disadvan-
taged,  including  equal  opportunity  and  a  right  to  training.  His  state-
ment  of  overall  objectives  included  "[e]conomic  security,  decent  sani-
tary  housing,  and  quality  education  for  every  American. ' 7  King
urged  that  "[a]  Bill  of  Rights  for  the  Disadvantaged  could  mark  the
rise  of a  new  era,  in  which  the  full  resources  of  the  society  would  be
used  to  attack  the  tenacious  poverty  which  so  paradoxically  exists  in
the  midst  of  plenty."'2 8

Most  dramatically,  King  proposed  toward  the  end  of  his  life  a
"poor  people's  march,"  designed  to  dramatize  the  plight  of  the disad-
vantaged.  He  wrote,

21.  Franklin  Roosevelt,  Message  to  the  Congress  on  the State  of the  Union  (Jan.  11,  1944),
reprinted in  13  PUBLIC  PAPERS  AND  ADDRESSES  OF  FRANKLIN  D. ROOSEVELT  32,  41  (Samuel  I.
Rosenman  ed.,  1950).

22.  MICHAEL  HARRINGTON.  THE  OTHER  AMERICA  (1962).
23.  JOHN  K. GALBRAITH.  THE  AFFLUENT  SOCIETY  (1960).
24.  MILLER,  supra  note  2,  at  365.
25.  THE  WISDOM  OF  MARTIN  LUTHER  KING,  JR.,  supra  note  15, at  181.
26. 
27. 
28. 

Id.  at  224.
Id.  at  180.
Id.  at  22.

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  1995

There  are  millions  of  poor  people  in  this  country  who  have  very
little,  or  even  nothing,  to  lose.  If  they  can  be  helped  to  take  ac-
tion  together,  they  will  do  so  with  a  freedom  and  a  power  that
will  be  a  new  and  unsettling  force  in  our  complacent  national
life.  Beginning  in  the  new  year,  we  will  be recruiting  three  thou-
sand  of  the  poorest  citizens  from  ten  different  urban  and  rural
areas  to  initiate  and  lead  a  sustained,  massive,  direct-action
movement  in  Washington.  . . . [W]e  will  move  on  to  Washing-
ton,  determined  to  stay  there  until  the  legislative  and  executive
branches  of  the  government  take  serious  and  adequate  action  on
jobs  and  incomes.  . . . The  many  people  who  will  come  and  join
this  three  thousand,  from  all  groups  in  the  country's  life,  will
play  a  supportive  role,  deciding  to  be  poor  for  a  time  along  with
the  dispossessed  who  are  asking  for  their  right  to  jobs  or  in-
come-jobs,  income,  the  demolition  of slums,  and  the  rebuilding
by  the  people  who  live  there  of  new  communities  in  their  place;
in  fact,  a  new  economic  deal  for  the  poor. 9

This  endorsement  of  "a  new  economic  deal"  was  the  practical  effort
that  followed  the  commitment  to  freedom  from  desperate  conditions.

C.  Opposition to  Caste

An  important  feature  of  the  civil  rights  movement  might  be  de-
scribed  as  an  anticaste  principle.30  This  principle  finds  its  origins  in
the  original  constitutional  rejection  of  the  monarchical  legacy3'  and
the  explicit  constitutional  ban  on  titles  of nobility.32  The  principle  was
fueled  by  the  Civil  War  Amendments  and  the  New  Deal.  The  objec-
tion  to  caste  entails  an  effort  to  eliminate,  in  places  large  and  small,
the  caste  system  rooted  in  race.  We  might  say  that  we  have  a  caste
system  when  a  highly  visible  but  morally  irrelevant  characteristic  is
associated  with  second-class  citizenship,  in  the  form  of systematic  dis-
parities  in  well-being  along  the  most  important  dimensions  of  social
welfare.  Consider  in  this  regard  the  Port  Huron  Statement,  which  be-
gins  its  discussion  of  discrimination  with  the  claim,  "Our  America  is
still  white." 33  The  authors  supported  this  claim  with  reference  to
sharp  disparities  between  blacks  and  whites  with  respect  to  literacy,
salary,  work,  unemployment,  housing,  education,  and  voting.34

29.  TESTAMENT  OF  HOPE,  supra note  4,  at  651.
30.  For  related  discussion,  see  CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN,  THE  PARTIAL  CONSTITUTION  291-318
(1993);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  The  Anticaste Principle, 92  MICH.  L. REV.  2410  (1994)  [hereinafter
Sunstein,  The  Anticaste  Principle].

31.  See  GORDON  S. WOOD, THE  RADICALISM  OF  THE  AMERICAN  REVOLUTION  11-109

(1992).

32.  US. CONST.  art.  1,  §  10.
33.  MILLER,  supra note  2,  at  352.
34. 

Id.

No.  I1]

CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT

Second-class  citizenship  was  a  continuing  theme  in  the  writing
and  speeches  of  Malcolm  X.  Indeed,  Malcolm  X  stressed  this  idea  in
urging  self-help  remedies,  which  he  thought  necessary  to overcome  de-
pendent  status:

The  American  black  man  should  be  focussing  his  every  ef-
fort  toward  building  his  own  businesses,  and  decent  homes  for
himself.  As  other  ethnic  groups  have  done,  let  the  black  people,
wherever  possible,  however  possible,  patronize  their  own  kind,
hire  their  own  kind,  and  start  in  those  ways  to  build  up  the  black
race's  ability  to  do  for  itself.  That's  the  only  way  the  American
black  man  is  ever  going  to  get  respect.  One  thing  the  white  man
never  can  give  the  black  man  is  self-respect!"6

In  fact,  an  important  feature  of  any  caste  system  involves  corro-
sive  effects  on the self-respect  of its victims;  and  self-respect  was  a  key
issue  in  the  civil  rights  movement  of  the  1960s.  The  interest  in  racial
integration-central,  of course,  to  King-had  a  great  deal  to  do  with
such  effects.  For  King,  racial  segregation  was  unacceptable  because  it
was  a  daily  reminder  of  a  perceived  inferiority.  "Any  law  that  de-
grades  human  personality  is  unjust.  All  segregation  laws  are  unjust
because  segregation  distorts  the  soul  and  damages  the  personality.  It
gives  the  segregator  a  false  sense  of  superiority  and  the  segregated  a
false  sense  of  inferiority."3 "  Part  of the  problem  with  segregation  was
that  it  denied  self-respect:  "Segregation  scars  the  soul  of both  the  seg-
regator  and  the  segregated.  The  segregator  looks  upon  the  segregated
as  a  thing  to  be  used,  not  a  person  to  be  respected. ' 37

Ironically,  interest  in  black  nationalism  stemmed  from  similar
concerns,  with  a  perception  that  improved  caste  status  could  not  be
achieved  in  America.38  Malcolm  X  favored  racial  separation  on  these
grounds:

[A]s  long  as  our  people  here  in  America  are  dependent  upon  the
white  man,  we  will  always  be  begging  him  for  jobs,  food,  cloth-
ing,  and  housing.  .
. The  Negro  here  in  America  has  been
treated  like  a  child.  A  child  stays  with  the  mother  until  the  time
of  birth!  When  the  time  of birth  arrives,  the child  must  be  sepa-
rated,  or it  will  destroy its  mother  and  itself  ....  The  child  cries
for  and  needs  its  own  world!39

.

Much  of  Malcolm  X's  attack  on  the  movement  for  integration  con-
sisted  of a  claim  that  blacks  did  not  need  to be  with  whites  in  order  to
succeed.  Malcolm  X  thus  wrote:

35.  AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  supra note  1, at  275.
36.  THE  WISDOM  OF  MARTIN  LUTHER  KING.  JR.,  supra  note  15,  at  198.
37. 
38.  See  Peller,  supra note  17,  at  770-80.
39.  AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  supra note  I,  at  246.

Id.

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  1995

Respect  as  human beings! That's  what  America's  black  masses
want.  That's  the  true  problem.  The  black  masses  want  not  to  be
shrunk  from  as  though  they  are  plague-ridden.  They  want  not  to
be  walled  up  in  slums,  in  the  ghettoes,  like  animals.  They  want
to  live  in  an  open,  free  society  where  they  can  walk  with  their
heads  up,  like  men  and  women!40

On  this  count  at  least,  King  spoke  similarly:  "The  Negro  must
boldly  throw  off  the  manacles  of  self-abnegation  and  say  to  himself
and  the  world:  'I  am  somebody.  I  am  a  person.  I  am  a  man  with
dignity  and  honor.  I  have  a  rich  and  noble  history,  however  painful
and  exploited  that  history  has  been.'"41

D.  Emphasis on  Citizenship and Nonjudicial Means for Seeking
Change

The  1960s  were  a  time  of  extraordinary  judge-led  developments,
with  the  Warren  Court  at  its  ascendancy.  But  it  should  be  recalled
that  the  civil  rights  movement  was  hardly  focussed  on  courts,  and  in
fact  the  notion  of "participatory  democracy"  enjoyed  a  large-scale  re-
vival  in  the  1960s.' 2  The  revival  has  had  continuing  effects  on  Ameri-
can  law.  The  Port  Huron  Statement  is  characterized  above  all  by  this
theme:  "[W]e  seek  the  establishment  of  a  democracy  of  individual
participation,  governed  by  two  central  aims:  that  the  individual  share
in  those  social  decisions  determining  the  quality  and  direction  of  his
life;  that  society  be  organized  to  encourage  independence  in  men  and
3 Thus  the  student  au-
provide  the  media  for  common  participation. '
thors  lamented  that  "almost  no  students  value  activity  as  citizens.""
They  urged  that  "politics  has  the  function  of  bringing  people  out  of
isolation  and  into  community."' 5  They  sought  a  political  life  based  on
the  principle  "that  decision-making  of  basic  social  consequence  be
carried  on  by  public  groupings"  and  "that  politics  be  seen  positively,
as  the  art  of  collectively  creating  an  acceptable  pattern  of  social
relations."' 6

Ideas  of  this  sort  played  a  substantial  role  in  the  civil  rights
movement.  In  its  early  stages  the  movement  had  been  highly  court-
centered,  above  all  in  Thurgood  Marshall's  attack  on  segregation
under  the  name  of  the  Constitution.' 7  But  the  Port  Huron  Statement

1

Id.  at  272.

40. 
41.  THE  WISDOM  OF  MARTIN  LUTHER  KING.  JR.,  supra note  15,  at  199-200.
42.  MILLER,  supra  note  2, is  a detailed  discussion.
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47.  See MARK  V.  TUSHNET.  MAKING  CIVIL  RIGHTS  LAW: THURGOOD  MARSHALL  AND  THE

Id. at  333.
Id.  at  334.
Id.  at  333.
Id.

SUPREME COURT.  1936-61  (1994).

No.  1]

CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT

urged  a  different  direction,  saying  that  "the  historic  Supreme  Court
decision  of  1954,  theoretically  desegregating  Southern  schools,  was
more  a  proclamation  than  a  harbinger  of  social  change-and  is  re-
flected  as  such  in  the  fraction  of  Southern  school  districts  which  have
desegregated,  with  Federal  officials  doing  little  to  spur  the  process."4 8
Hence  the  student  movement  relied  little  on  courts.

Rejecting 

the  judge-focussed  approach,  Martin  Luther  King
sharply  criticized  reliance  on  courts  alone,  suggesting  that  judicial  fo-
rums  bred  passivity:  "When  legal  contests  were  the sole  form  of activ-
ity,  the  ordinary  Negro  was  involved  as  a  passive  spectator.  His  inter-
ests  were  stirred,  but  his  energies  were  unemployed. 49  In  a  similar
vein,  King wrote  on  the  inadequacy  of decrees  standing  by  themselves:
"The  law  tends  to  declare  rights-it  does  not  deliver  them.  A  catalyst
is  needed  to breathe  life  experience  into  a judicial  decision  by  the  per-
sistent  exercise  of  the  rights  until  they  become  usual  and  ordinary  in
human  conduct." 50

King  also  placed  a  premium  on  citizenship.  To  be  sure,  he  was
not  a  participatory  democrat  of  the  SDS  variety;  he  saw  participation
as  instrumental  to  other  social  goals.  But  he  nonetheless  urged  wide-
spread  involvement  in  politics:

I  do  have  a  graduation  thought  to  pass  along  to  you.  Whatever
career  you  may  choose  for  yourself-doctor,  lawyer,  teacher-let
me  propose  an  avocation  to  be  pursued  along  with  it.  Become  a
dedicated  fighter  for  civil  rights.  Make  it  a  central  part  of  your
life.  . . .You  will  make  a  greater  person  of  yourself,  a  greater
nation  of  your  country,  and  a  finer  world  to  live  in. 51

Hence  King  emphasized  the  political  process  above  all:  "The  chief
weapon  in  our  fight  for  civil  rights  is  the vote.  I  can  foresee  the Negro
vote  becoming  the  decisive  vote  in  national  elections. 5 2  One  of  King's
most  powerful  early  speeches  is  titled:  "Give  Us  the  Ballot-We  Will
Transform  the  South."  The  speech  is  focussed  on  the  need  to supple-
ment  the  judicial  branch  with  democratic  forums:

So  far,  only  the  judicial  branch  of  the  government  has  evinced
this  quality  of  leadership. 
legislative
branches  of the  government  were  as  concerned  about  the  protec-
tion  of  our  citizenship  rights  as  the  federal  courts  have  been,
then  the  transition  from  a  segregated  to  an  integrated  society
would  be  infinitely  smoother.54

If  the  executive  and 

TESTAMENT  OF  HOPE,  supra  note  4,  at  566.

48.  MILLER,  Supra note  2,  at  353.
49. 
50.  Id. at  165.
51. 
52.  THE  WISDOM  OF  MARTIN  LUTHER  KING,  JR.,  supra note  15,  at  230.
53.  TESTAMENT  OF  HOPE,  supra  note  4,  at  197.
54. 

id.  at  198.

Id.  at  22.

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  1995

On  this  count,  King  and  Malcolm  X  were  closely  allied.  Malcolm

X  similarly  expressed  support  for  nonjudicial  arenas:

The  polls  are  one  place  where  every  black  man  could  fight  the
black  man's  cause  with dignity,  and  with  the  power  and  the tools
that  the  white  man  understands  and  respects,  and  fears,  and
cooperates  with ...

The  cornerstones  of  this  country's  operation  are  economic
and  political  strength  and  power.  The black  man  doesn't  have  the
economic  strength-and  it  will  take  time  for  him  to build  it.  But
right  now  the  American  black  man  has  the political  strength  and
power  to  change  his  destiny  overnight. 55

Similarly,  Malcolm  X  said,  "I  might  point  out  that  I  am  100  percent
for  any  effort  put  forth  by  Black  people  in  this  country  to  have  access
to  the  ballot."  He  urged-in  the  now  famous  phrase-that  people  use
"whatever  means  is  necessary  to  secure  those  rights."' 6

II.  WHAT  THE  CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT  WAS  NOT

In  this  section  I  deal  briefly  with  two  relatively  recent  "readings"
of  the  civil  rights  movement.  The  first  characterizes  the  movement  as
opposed  to  all  racial  classifications.  On  this  view,  a  target  of the  civil
rights  movement,  if its  principles  are  rightly  characterized,  is  affirma-
tive  action,  and  Martin  Luther  King  is  enlisted  as  an  opponent  of
race-conscious  approaches.  The  second  "reading,"  popular 
in  the
academy  in  general  if not  in  law  schools,  suggests  that  the  movement
should  be  taken  as  a  challenge  to  "categorical  thinking"  or  "binary
oppositions."  I  suggest  why  both  readings  seem  to  me  unfortunate.

A.  Colorblindness

King's  "I  have  a  dream"  speech  referred  to  the  possibility  that
"my  four  little  children  will  one  day  live  in  a  nation  where  they  will
not  be  judged  by  the  color  of  their  skin  but  by  the  content  of  their
character." 7  These  words  have  been  invoked  in  prominent  attacks  on
affirmative  action  policies.5B But  participants  in  the  civil  rights  move-
ment  were  emphatically  not  committed  to  a  norm  of  colorblindness.
Though  King  sometimes  spoke  in  these  terms,  he  was  speaking  not
abstractly  but  in  a  particular  context  at  a  particular  historical  mo-
ment,  and  he  meant  to  make  a  particular  historical  point,  one  very

55.  AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  supra  note  I,  at  313-15.
56.  MALCOLM  X.  FEBRUARY  1965:  THE  FINAL  SPEECHES  24  (Steve  Clark  ed.,  1992).
57.  TESTAMENT  OF  HOPE,  supra  note  4,  at  219.
58.  See,  e.g.,  William  Bradford  Reynolds,  Individualism vs.  Group Rights:  The  Legacy  of

Brown,  93  YALE  L.J. 995,  1000-05  (1984).

No.  1]

CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT

much  connected  to  issues  of  lower  caste  status.  He  was  certainly  not
speaking  to  the  issue  of  affirmative  action.  In  fact  King  was  urging  a
form  of  social  transformation  of  which  affirmative  action  is,  at  least
plausibly,  a  part."9  The  norm  that  he  urged  was  not  incompatible  with
affirmative  action  schemes  and  indeed  could  well  have  been  used  to
support  them.

In  fact,  King  never  spoke  directly  to  the  issue  of affirmative  ac-
tion,  although  some  of  his  statements  suggested  that  he  would  hardly
have  rejected  it  on  principle.  Thus  King  wrote:

It is  impossible  to  create  a  formula  for  the  future  which  does  not
take  into  account  that  our  society  has  been  doing  something  spe-
cial  against the  Negro  for  hundreds  of  years.  How  then  can  he
be  absorbed  into  the  mainstream  of  American  life  if  we  do  not
do  something  special  for him  now,  in  order  to  balance  the  equa-
tion  and  equip  him  to  compete  on  an  equal  basis? 60

I do  not  suggest  that  King  is  properly  characterized  as  a  proponent  of
affirmative  action  policies,  or  that  the  1960s  civil  rights  movement  is
necessarily  conceived  as  favoring  such  policies.  But  it  is  at  best  histor-
ical  to  suggest  that  King  opposed  such  policies,  or  that  his  statements
suggest  a  principle  of colorblindness  whatever  its  purposes  and  effects.

B.  Opposition to  Categorical Thinking

Many  people  in  the  academy  now  challenge  "categories,"  or
"categorical  thinking,"  or  "binary  oppositions," 1  and  it  seems  plausi-
ble  to  suggest  that  these  challenges  are  perceived,  in  many  quarters,
as  an  outgrowth  of the  civil  rights  movement  of the  1960s.  Generally,
it  is  said  that  "categorical  thinking"  is a  problem  and  that  it  is  impor-
tant  to  move  beyond  "binary  oppositions"  of various  sorts.  More  par-
ticularly,  it  is  said  that  the  opposition  between  black  and  white  treats
as  opposed  two  categories  that  are  interdependent  and  mutually  over-
lapping.  The  same,  it is  said,  is true  for  gender.  The  division  of human
beings  into  "two  kinds,"  male  and  female,  is  said  to  be  a  binary  oppo-
sition  that is  oppressive  because  it  is  too  simple.62  The general  and  the

59.  A  similar  point  is  made  in  STANLEY  FISH, THERE'S  No  SUCH  THING  AS FREE SPEECH:

AND  IT'S  A  GOOD  THING.  Too  60-79  (1994).

60.  THE  WISDOM  OF  MARTIN  LUTHER  KING,  JR.,  supra  note  15,  at  68.
61.  See,  e.g,  ZILLAH  R. EISENSTEIN.  THE  FEMALE  BODY  AND  THE  LAW  (1988);  Katharine
T.  Bartlett,  Feminist  Legal  Methods,  103  HARV.  L. REV.  829  (1990);  Dennis  Peterson,
Postmodernism/Feminism/Law,  77  CORNELL  L.  REV.  254  (1992);  Susan  Sage  Heinzelman,  Hard
Cases,  Easy  Cases  and  Weird  Cases:  Canon  Formation  in Law  and  Literature,  MOSAIC,  Spring
1988,  at  59,  63.  MARTHA  MINOW.  MAKING  ALL  THE  DIFFERENCE  (1990),  appears influenced  by
work  of  this  sort.

62.  See  JUDITH  BUTLER,  GENDER  TROUBLE:  FEMINISM  AND  THE  SUBVERSION  OF  IDENTITY

(1989).

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  1995

particular  claims  are  united  through  the  view  that  insisting  on  sharp
categorical  differences  is  perniciously  hierarchical."

In  the  context  of  both  race  and  sex,  the  challenge  to  sharp  cate-
gorical  differences  is  based  on  something  true  and  important.  People
are  not  simply  black  or  white;  as  a  matter  of genetic  fact,  they  have
complex  and  mixed  racial  and  ethnic  ancestries.  Consider  the  fact
that  the  plaintiff  in  Plessy  v. Ferguson"-Plessy himself-was  only
one-sixteenth  black.  There  is  a  separate  point.  Race  becomes  an  im-
portant  social  category  only  because  of what  society  deems  important.
For  young children,  racial  differences  do  not  "code"--do  not  have  the
same  meaning-in  the  way  they  do  for  adults  in  America.  At  least
some  of  the  same  points  might  be  made  for  gender,  though  the  issue
here  is  more  contentious.  Certainly  no  one  could  deny  that  there  are
men  and  women,  or  that  there  are  important  differences  between  men
and  women,  many  of  them  biological.  But  gender  makes  the  social
difference  that  it  does  in  part  because  of  social  and  legal  practices.65
But  we  may  grant  all  this  without  accepting  the  view  that  binary
oppositions  or  categories  are  themselves  problematic.  In  fact  thought
itself  proceeds 
through  categories.  We  cannot  make  distinc-
tions-between  justice  and  injustice,  equality  and  inequality-without
categories  or  binary  oppositions.  We  cannot  distinguish  between  cate-
gorical  thinking  and  its  opposite  (whatever  that  may  be)  without  ref-
erence  to categories.  The  problem  with  the challenge  to categories  and
binary  oppositions  is  that  the  challenge  loses  sight  of  the  moral  and
political  foundations  of the  attack  on  racial  inequality.  In  fact  it  loses
sight  of  the  civil  rights  movement's  point.  To  challenge  categorical
thinking  is  to  abandon  the  moral  foundations  of the  movement,  which
was  not  an  attack  on  categories  as  such,  but  on  particular  categories
that  were  pernicious  for  particular  reasons.  There  is  no  reason  to  sup-
pose  that  categories  are  themselves  the  problem,  or  that  we  could  or
should  proceed  without  them.  Thought  itself  depends  on  categories.
Indeed,  a  challenge  to  categorical  thinking  cannot  really  get  off  the
ground.

Ideas  of  the  sort  I  am  challenging  have  not  been  irrelevant  to
law.  Consider,  for  example,  Roberto  Unger's  attack on  "contexts"  and
his  advocacy  of "context-smashing,"  an  attack that  assumes  that  fixed
contexts  are  themselves  the  problem.66  It  seems  plausible  to  think  that

163  U.S.  537  (1896).

63.  See  EISENSTEIN,  supra  note  61.
64. 
65.  Some  adventurous  people  have  challenged  the  division  of  human  beings  into  "two
kinds."  See  BUTLER,  supra  note  62;  THOMAS  W.  LAQUEUR,  MAKING  SEX:  BODY  AND  GENDER
FROM  THE  GREEKS  TO  FREUD  (1990).

66.  See  ROBERTO  M.  UNGER,  FALSE  NECESSITY:  ANTI-NECESSITARIAN  SOCIAL  THEORY  IN
(PART  I  OF  POLITICS,  A  WORK  IN  CONSTRUCTIVE  SOCIAL
(1987);  ROBERTO  M.  UNGER,  THE  CRITICAL  LEGAL  STUDIES  MOVEMENT  109-11

THE  SERVICE  OF  RADICAL  DEMOCRACY 
THEORY) 

No.  1]

CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT

the  influence  of Unger's  work  is  connected  to  its  apparent  connection
with  the radical  movements  of the  1960s.  But  I  think  that  the  idea  of
"context-smashing"  as  such  makes  little  sense.  Some  contexts  are  of
course  unjust,  but  this  is  not  because  of their  status  as  contexts.  It  is
because  there  is  something  substantively  wrong  with  them.  The  civil
rights  movement  was  not  challenging  contexts,  or  fixity,  as  general
independent  evils.  It  was  taking  racial  inequality  as  a  particular  evil.

C.  Implications for  Law?

It  is  far  from  clear  that  the  civil  rights  movement  should  be
taken  to  have  implications  for  constitutional  law.  Perhaps  social  move-
ments  of  this  kind  bear  on  politics  but  not  on  law.  This  is  certainly  a
reasonable  view.  On  the  other  hand,  the  civil  rights  movement,  and
Martin  Luther  King  in  particular,  have  been  prominently  used  in  con-
stitutional  argument.  As  we  have  seen,  King's  "I  have  a  dream"
speech  has  been  used  to  give  moral  weight  to  the  constitutional  attack
on  affirmative  action.67  I  think  that  most  generally,  the  movement
suggests  a  particular  understanding  of  the  issue  of  racial  equality.  It
grows  directly  out  of the  attack  on  racial  caste.  I  offer  a  few  words  on
that  understanding  here.  My  goal  is  to  offer  a  generalization,  or  a
reading,  of what  participants  in  the  civil  rights  movement  of the  1960s
were  attacking.

The  motivating  idea  behind  an  anticaste  principle  is  that  differ-
ences  that  are  both  highly  visible  and  irrelevant  from  the  moral  point
of  view  ought  not  without  good  reason  be  turned,  by  social  and  legal
structures,  into  systematic  social  disadvantages.  A  systematic  disad-
vantage  is  one  that  operates  along  standard  and  predictable  lines  in
many  important  spheres  of life,  and  that  applies  in  realms  that  relate
to  basic  participation  as  a  citizen  in  a  democracy.  There  is  no  al-
gorithm  by  which  to  identify  those  realms.  As  a  provisional  working
list, we  might  include  education,  freedom  from  private  and  public  vio-
lence,  income  and  wealth,  employment,  political  representation,  lon-
gevity,  health,  and  political  influence.  (Recall  the  analogous  list  in  the
Port  Huron  Statement.)  The  anticaste  principle  suggests  that  with  re-
spect  to  basic  human  capabilities  and  functionings,6 a  one  group,  de-
fined  in  terms  of  a  morally  irrelevant  characteristic,  ought  not  to  be
systematically  below  another.

(1986).  For  more  detailed  criticism along  the  lines  suggested  here,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Routine
and  Revolution,  81  Nw.  U.  L.  REV.  869  (1987).

67.  See,  e.g.,  Reynolds,  supra  note  58,  at  1000-05.
68.  See  AMARTYA  SEN.  INEQUALITY  REEXAMINED  (1992);  Martha  C.  Nussbaum,  Aristote-
lian Social  Democracy,  in  LIBERALISM  AND  THE  GOOD  203  (R.  Bruce  Douglass  et  al.  eds.,  1990).

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  1995

In  the  areas  of race  discrimination,  a  large  part  of the  problem  is
this sort  of systemic  disadvantage.  A  social  or  biological  difference  has
the  effect  of  systematically  subordinating  members  of  the  relevant
group-not  because  of  "nature,"  but  because  of social  and  legal  prac-
tices.  It  does  so  in  multiple  spheres  and  along  multiple  indices  of  so-
cial  welfare:  poverty,  education,  political  power,  employment,  suscep-
tibility  to  violence  and  crime,  and  so  forth.  By  pointing  to  these
variables,  it should  be  clear  that  I  am  not  stressing  economic  variables
alone,  though  these  are  indeed  important.  I  am  instead  suggesting  ref-
erence  to  a  broad  and  eclectic  set  of  social  indicators.

Consider  in  this  regard-and  also  by  way  of  comparison  to  the
similar  effort  in  the  Port  Huron  Statement-the  Human  Development
Index  in  the  United  Nations  Development  Program's  1993  Human
Development  Report.6 9 The  index,  based  on  longevity,  educational  at-
tainment,  and  per  capita  income,  is  itself somewhat  crude.7 0  But  it  is
highly  revealing  that  the  United  States  as  a  whole  ranks  sixth;  that
white  Americans  by  themselves  would  rank  first;  and  that  blacks  by
themselves  would  rank  thirty-first  (next  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago).7 1

As  Martin  Luther  King  and  Malcolm  X  both  emphasized,  sys-
tematic  differences  of  this  kind  help  produce  frequent  injuries  to  self-
respect-the  time-honored  constitutional  notion  of  "stigma."  A  par-
ticular  concern  is  that  self-respect  and  its  social  bases  ought  not  be
distributed  along  the  lines  of  race. 2  When  someone  is  a  member  of a
group  that  is  systematically  below  others,  and  when  the  group  charac-
teristic  is  highly  visible,  insults  to  self-respect  are  likely  to  occur
nearly  every  day.  An  important  aspect  of  a  system  of  caste  is  that
social  practices  produce  a  range  of  obstacles  to  the  development  of
self-respect,  largely  because  of  the  presence  of  the  highly  visible  but
morally  irrelevant  characteristic  that  gives  rise  to  caste-like  status.

Of  course  the  law  cannot  provide  self-respect,  at  least  not  in  any
simple  or  direct  way.  But  group  membership  tends  to  fuel  a  cycle  of
discrimination, 3  in  which,  for  example,  employers  rely  on  statistical
discrimination;  group  members  adjust  their  aspirations  to  this  reli-
ance;  statistical  discrimination  becomes  all  the  more  rational;  and  so
on.  That  is  an  aspect  of the  caste  system  to  which  the  legal  system  is
attempting  to  respond.  It  can  operate  largely  because  the  high  visibil-
ity  of  the  group-based  characteristic.  If  the  characteristic  were  not

69.  UNITED  NATIONS  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM,  HUMAN  DEVELOPMENT  REPORT  1993,  at  9-

70. 

Id.  at  10-18;  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Well-Being  and  the State, 107  HARV  L  REV  1303,

20.

1322  n.72  (1994).

71.  UNITED  NATIONS  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM,  supra  note  69,  at  11,  18  &  figs.  1.12-1.13.
72.  Self-respect  is  emphasized  in  JOHN  RAWLS.  A  THEORY  OF  JUSTICE  440-46  (1971),  and

JOHN  RAWLS.  POLITICAL  LIBERALISM  (1993).

73.  For  more  detail,  see  Sunstein,  The  Anticaste Principle, supra note  30.

No.  I ]

CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT

visible,  the  same  pattern  could  not  occur. 7'  And  because  the  stigma-
tizing  characteristic  is  highly  visible,  it  will  probably  trigger  reactions
from  others  in  a  wide  variety  of  spheres,  even  in  the  interstices  of
everyday  life."  Highly  visible  characteristics  are  especially  likely  to
be  a  basis  for  statistical  discrimination  and  to  fuel  prejudice  from
third  parties.  Consider  stereotypes  about  the  physical  characteristics
of  members  of  religious  minorities,  and  compare  this  description  of
attitudes  in  prerevolutionary  America:

So  distinctive  and  so  separated  was  the  aristocracy  from ordinary
folk  that  many  still  thought  the  two  groups  represented  two  or-
ders  of  being.  . . . Ordinary  people  were  thought  to  be  different
physically,  and  because  of varying  diets  and  living  conditions,  no
doubt  in  many  cases  they  were  different.  People  often  assumed
that  a  handsome  child,  though  apparently  a  commoner,  had  to  be
some  gentleman's  bastard  offspring. 76

In  the  area  of  race,  daily  denials  of  basic  respect,  usually  based
on  prejudice  of  some  sort,  are  a  large  part  of  what  it  means  to  have  a
caste  system.  With  blacks,  for  example,  dark  skin  color  is  associated
with  a  range  of  stereotypes  that  can  have  harmful  effects  during  en-
counters  with  shopkeepers,  employers,  police  officers,  businesses,  co-
workers,  and  much  more.  These  encounters  rank  among  the  injuries
that  the  civil  rights  movement  of the  1960s  was  attempting  to  elimi-
nate.  I  suggest  that  an  anticaste  principle  is  a  reasonable  "reading"  of
its  animating  spirit.

It  is  important  as  well  to  note  that  any  such  principle  is  most
plausibly  used  by  legislative  and  executive  bodies,  and  that  the  focus
of  the  civil  rights  movement  was  on  those  bodies  as  well.  Courts
should  play  a  secondary  role.  They  lack  the  power  of  initiative,  the
fact-finding  capacity,  and  the  democratic  legitimacy  to  bring  about
systematic  social  change  on  their  own.77  On  this  count  participants  in
the  1960s  movement  were  very  much  on  the  right  track.  Their  sub-
stantive  goals  were  well-connected  with  this  institutional  choice,  and
with  their  lack  of emphasis  on  the  judiciary  as  the  foundation  for  so-
cial  reform.

III.  DEHUMANIZATION

I  must  now  venture  into  somewhat  more  difficult  and  speculative
territory.  It  has  to  do  with  issues  of character,  and  with  the  way  that

74.  Compare  the problems  of discrimination  against  homosexuals,  a  problem  that  raises  dif-

ferent  issues  because  homosexuality  is  not  readily  visible.

75.  See  Jane  Mansbridge,  Presentation  at  the Conference  on  Equal  Protection  and  Its  Crit-

ics  at  Brown  University  (Mar.  11,  1994).
76.  WOOD.  supra note  31,  at  27.
77.  See  generally  ROSENBERG,  supra  note  6.

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  1995

we  characterize  and  interact  with  people  with  whom  we  disagree,  or
even  people  that  we  consider  fundamentally  different,  or  oppressors.
Begin  with  the  opening  quotation  from  Tom  Hayden,  which
reveals  a  part  of the picture.  Hayden  writes  that it  is  time  to  "reassert
the personal."  Often it  is  said,  and  revealingly  so,  that  the "personal  is
the  political. ' 78  This  slogan  means  that  personal  issues,  especially  in
the  area  of  sex  equality,  can  be  a  product  of political  issues.  Individ-
ual  insults  and  injuries  may  connect  with  the  distribution  of  political
power;  individual  insults  and  injuries  may  cause  the  harm  they  do
only  because  of  the  distribution  of  political  power  (consider  the  issue
of  sexual  harassment).  But  the  converse  is  also  and  equally  true;  the
political  may  be  the  personal,  in  the  sense  that  one's  claims  about
politics  are  often  a  product  of  one's  personal  issues  as  well.  We  need
not  speculate  about  psychological  forces  in  order  to  recognize  this
point.  The  second  quotation  from  Hayden,  writing  in  1988,  makes
things  very  clear.  On  Hayden's  retrospective  view,  personal  desires  of
a  certain  kind  ("defining  not  only  yourself,  but  also  your  life  by  risk-
ing  your  life")  were  dominant,  and  civil  rights  claims  were  in  a  sense
quite  secondary.  To  put  things  a  bit  crudely,  an  important  aspect  of
the  1960s  movement,  especially  among  white  student  activists,  con-
sisted  of  the  playing  out  of  personal  issues  in  political  guise.  (This
does  not  of  course  disparage  the  political  claims,  which  stand  or  fall
independently  of  their  origins."9 )

There  is  a  deeper  point.  In  many  radical  movements,  those  who
themselves  as  more  than
seek  social  change  sometimes  portray 
human,  while  they  portray  their  enemies  as  less  than  human,  or  as
fundamentally  other  than  human.  Or  they  define both  themselves  and
their  opponents  just  in  terms  of what  separates  them,  so  that  there  are
no  other  common  links.  Often,  of  course,  this  is  a  strategy  of  those
seeking  to promote  or  maintain  racial  inequality;  consider  the  rhetoric
of  the  Nazi  Party,  or  of  the  Ku  Klux  Klan.  But  the  same  strategy  is
often  used  by  people  who  are  seeking  to  overcome  discrimination  and
oppression."0  Hence  there  was  a  tendency  in  the  1960s  civil  rights
movement  to  dehumanize  certain  groups  of  people-to  refuse  to  see
them  as  human  beings,  or  as  individuals  with  narratives,  sufferings,
and  life  histories  of  their  own.

78.  See,  e.g.,  SUSAN  MOLLER  OKIN,  WOMEN  IN  WESTERN  POLITICAL  THOUGHT  314  (7th
printing  1992)  (citing  ALICE  ECHOLS,  DARING  TO  BE  BAD:  RADICAL  FEMINISM  IN  AMERICA  16-18
(1989)).

79.  For  a  related  discussion,  see  MARTHA  C.  NUSSBAUM,  Perception and  Revolution:  The

Princess  Casamassima  and  the  Political Imagination, in  LOVE'S  KNOWLEDGE  195  (1990).

80.  Of  course  there  is  a  huge  difference  between  dehumanization  by  oppressors  and  dehu-
manization  by oppressed  people. The  first  involves an  unjust  goal,  the second  (by  hypothesis)  does
not.  But  along  the  dimension  I  am  discussing,  the  two  phenomena  are  the  same.

No.  1]

CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT

We  can  see  an  example  in  Malcolm  X's  frequent  description  of
his  oppressors  as  the  "white  man"-as  if there  were  only  one.  Recall
the  quotation  at  the  beginning  of  this  essay:  "We're  all  black  to  the
white  man." 
In  fact  Malcolm  X  used  singular  and  plural  forms
throughout  his  writing  and  speaking  for  rhetorical  effect.  Compare  his
statement  also  quoted  at  the  beginning  of  this  essay:  "[W]e're  a  thou-
sand  and  one  different  colors.  Turn  around,  look  at  each  other!"  This
"looking"  at  particularity  works, 
to  establish  common
ground.  We  can  see  something  similar  in  Malcolm  X's  reaction  to  the
assassination  of  President  Kennedy,  to  the  effect  that  the  "chickens
[have]  com[e]  home  to  roost.""1  The  oddity  of  the  reaction  comes
from  the  fact  that  Kennedy's  own  personal  history-his  own  life,  his
family,  his  own  role 
in  promoting  or  undermining  racial  equal-
ity-was  treated  as  quite  beside  the  point.

ironically, 

Martin  Luther  King  insistently  avoided  this  form  of dehumaniza-
tion.  Instead  he  attempted  at  all  times  to  combat  it.  In  doing  so  he
raised  two  different  points:  the  effects  of  this  distinctive  form  of  ha-
tred  on  those  who  hate,  and  the  erasure  of particularity  and  individu-
ality  that  is  brought  about  by  group-based  hatred.  Thus  King  wrote,
I  have  also  decided  to  stick  to  love.  . . . I'm  not  talking  about
emotional  bosh  when  I  talk  about  love,  I'm  talking  about  a
strong,  demanding  love.  And  I  have  seen  too  much  hate.  I've
seen  too  much  hate  on  the  faces  of sheriffs  in  the South.  I've seen
hate  on  the  faces  of  too  many  Klansman  and  too  many  White
Citizens  Councilors  in  the  South  to  want  to  hate  myself,  because
every  time  I  see  it,  I  know  that  it  does  something  to  their  faces
and  their  personalities  and  I  say  to  myself  that  hate  is  too  great
a  burden  to  bear.  I  have  decided  to  love.8 2

Thus  King  wrote,  "Hate  is  just  as  injurious  to  the  person  who  hates.
Like  an  unchecked  cancer,  hate  corrodes  the  personality  and  eats
away  its  vital  unity."8 "

But  most  of King's  response  was  connected  with  the  need  for  par-
ticularity-with  the  need  for  humility,  and  for  seeing  each  person  as
an  individual.  In  his  view,  this  understanding  was  interestingly  con-
nected  with  a  commitment  to  universality.  Rejecting  sharp  polarities
between  good  people  and  bad  people,  he  said,  "[T]here 
is  some  good
in  the  worst  of us  and  some  evil  in  the  best  of us.  When  we  discover
this,  we  are  less  prone  to  hate  our  enemies."  Thus  he wrote,  "The  one
thing  about  bitterness  is  its  blindness.  Bitterness  has  not  the  capacity

81.  See  AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  supra  note  I,  at  301.
82.  TESTAMENT  OF  HOPE,  supra  note  4,  at  250.
83. 

Id. at  102.  To this  Malcolm  X  responded:  "I do  not  agree  with  Martin  Luther King  that
one  should  love  a  racialist  whether  he  is  lynching  you  or  whatever  he  is  doing.  I believe  in fighting
a  racialist  physically."  MALCOLM  X,  supra  note  56,  at  66-67.

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  1995

to  make  the  distinction  between  some  and  all."'84  And  the  Port  Huron
Statement  reflected  a  similar  view:  "In  social  change  or  interchange,
we  find  violence  to  be  abhorrent  because  it  requires  generally  the
transformation  of the  target,  be  it  a  human  being  or  a  community  of
people,  into  a  depersonalized  object  of  hate."85  The  key  term  here  is
"depersonalized  object,"  something  that  is  also  accomplished  through
the  rhetorical  ploy  of using  a  singular  to  describe  a  group  ("the  white
man,"  "the  Jew,"  "the  liberal,"  and  so  forth).

In  his  famous  statement  after  his  trip  to  Mecca,  Malcolm  X
spoke  in terms  that  assert  both  particularity  and  universality,  in  a  way
that  connected  with  some  of  King's  own  writing.  Thus  Malcolm  X
said:

During  the  past  eleven  days  here  in  the  Muslim  world,  I  have
eaten  from  the  same  plate,  drunk  from  the  same  glass,  and  slept
in  the  same  bed  (or  on  the  same  rug)  with  fellow  Muslims  ...
whose  eyes  were  the  bluest  of  blue,  whose  hair  was  the  blondest
of  blond,  and  whose  skin  was  the  whitest  of  white.  And  in  the
words  and  in  the  actions and  in  the  deeds of  the  "white"  Mus-
lims,  I  felt  the same  sincerity  that  I  felt among  the  black  African
Muslims  of  Nigeria,  Sudan,  and  Ghana.
We  were  all  truly  the  same  .... 8'

On  this  score  it  will  be  useful  to  close  with  the  final  discussion  in
a  very  popular  book  on  the  1960s,  Destructive Generation.87  The  au-
thors  are  Peter  Collier  and  David  Horowitz,  former  editors  of  a  left-
wing  magazine,  Ramparts,  turned  Reagan  Republicans.  The  book
ends  with  an  anecdote.  The  authors  sought  out  Susan  Sontag,  who
had  recently  delivered  an  influential  speech  whose  theme  is  captured
in  its  title:  "Communism  Is  Fascism  with  a  Human  Face."  Collier
and  Horowitz,  staunch  anti-Communists,  praised  Sontag  for  that
speech,  but  "[w]arming  to  the  occasion,"  pressed  her  for  having  re-
published  without  critical  comment  a  1969  essay  about  Communist
North  Vietnam,  in  which  Sontag  appeared  to  praise  communism.  Col-
lier  and  Horowitz  asked  Sontag  why  she  had  not  offered  "further
to  the  adversary  culture's  conventional  wisdom  about
challenges 
America  and  democracy."  (Note  the  terms  "adversary  culture"  and
"conventional  wisdom.")  Collier  and  Horowitz  added  that  Europe  had
produced  Hitler,  and  that  it  was  America  that  had  rescued  Europe
"from  the  barbarisms  of  the  East."

84.  THE  WISDOM  OF  MARTIN  LUTHER  KING,  JR.,  supra note  15,  at  26.
85.  MILLER,  supra  note  2,  at  333.
86.  AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  supra note  1, at  340.
87.  PETER  COLLIER  &  DAVID  HOROWITZ.  DESTRUCTIVE  GENERATION:  SECOND  THOUGHTS

ABOUT  THE  SIXTIES  337-38  (1989).

No.  1]

CIVIL  RIGHTS  MOVEMENT

Sontag  responded,  "I'm  not  really  interested  in  having  this  dis-
cussion.  You're just  projecting  your  own  Manichaean  politics  onto  the
world.  I  don't  want  to  enter  your  world,  where  you  push  everything  to
that  Sontag  "was
extremes."  The  book  ends  with  a  suggestion 
right-we  did  push  things to  extremes."  But  according  to  the  authors,
her  "judgment  on  us  was  also  a  judgment  on  her  and  others  who  un-
derstood  the  political  stakes  but  didn't  push  things  far  enough."

What  may  be  especially  interesting  is  that  in  their  incarnation  as
1980s  Reagan  Republicans,  Collier  and  Horowitz  showed  the  same
character  and  sensibility  as  they  showed  in  their  incarnation  as  1960s
student  radicals.  This  is  a  character  and  a  sensibility  that  is  attracted
not  only to  sharp  and  simple  distinctions  between  good  people  and  evil
people,  and  not  only  to  an  unduly  clear  sense  of  precisely  which  peo-
ple  stand  with  us  and  which  stand  against  us,  but  also  and  precisely
for  the  same  reason  to  a  form  of  dehumanization.  The  seeds  of  vio-
lence  can  usually  be  found  here.

Some people  think  that America  has  had  one or  perhaps  two  con-
stitutional  "moments";  others  think  that  the  New  Deal  qualifies  as  a
third  such  moment,  or  even  that  America  has  had  a  large  number  of
constitutional  moments.  In  my  view,  any  such  picture  is  somewhat
artificial-useful  for  heuristic  purposes,  but  much  too  simple  for  real-
ity.  Our  constitutional  development  has  been  jagged  and  somewhat
unruly.  It  has  many  of  the  characteristics  of a  common-law  process,
punctuated  by  periods  of  public  upheaval,  in  which  the  common-law
process  becomes  less  cautious  and  incremental  than  it  usually  is.  The
civil  rights  movement  of  the  1960s  was  one  such  period  of  public
punctuation,  and  its  principal  actors  were,  in  that  sense,  constitution-
makers.  The  meaning  of  the  civil  rights  movement  has  yet  to  be  set-
tled.  But  it  is  hardly  adventurous  to  say  that  the  period  has  had  a
significant  and  continuing 
influence  on  our  understanding  of  the
American  political  order,  and  that  debates  over  its  meaning  and  sig-
nificance  will  help  determine  the  meaning  of that  political  order  in  the
future.  I  have  suggested  that  an  insistence  on  the  deviation  between
ideal  and  reality,  or  freedom  from  desperate  conditions,  opposition  to
caste,  and  caution  about  the  judiciary  were  defining  features  of  the
civil  rights  movement.  It  should  not  be  too  much  to  suggest  that  those
commitments  ought  to  play  a  large  role  in  similar  movements  in  the
future.

