University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

1997 

Faculty Scholarship 

Note on Voluntary Versus Involuntary Risks, A Second Annual 
Note on Voluntary Versus Involuntary Risks, A Second Annual 

Cummings Colloquium on Environmental Law: Risk in the 
Cummings Colloquium on Environmental Law: Risk in the 

Republic: Comparative Risk Analysis and Public Policy: Making 
Republic: Comparative Risk Analysis and Public Policy: Making 

Risk Policy in the Face of Expert/Public Conflicts 
Risk Policy in the Face of Expert/Public Conflicts 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Note on Voluntary Versus Involuntary Risks, A Second Annual Cummings Colloquium 
on Environmental Law: Risk in the Republic: Comparative Risk Analysis and Public Policy: Making Risk 
Policy in the Face of Expert/Public Conflicts," 8 Duke 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

A NOTE ON "VOLUNTARY"  VERSUS
"INVOLUNTARY"  RISKS

CASS R. SUNSTEIN

Ordinary  people  seem  to  perceive  voluntarily  incurred  risks  as
less  troublesome  than  involuntarily  incurred  risks.  Consider  the  di-
verse  public  reactions  to  airplane  crashes  and  automobile  crashes.
Or consider  the fact that tobacco  is by  far the largest  source  of  pre-
ventable  deaths  in  the United  States.  Why  do  we  not  devote  much
more of our regulatory effort to reducing smoking?  The reason  seems
to  lie in  a judgment  that  smoking is  a voluntary  activity,  and hence,
the  resulting  deaths  are  less  troublesome  than  are  other  sorts  of
deaths. People  have voluntarily  assumed the relevant  risks.  This idea
helps account for the fact that the government  devotes relatively little
in the way of resources  to control  not only smoking,  but also to  com-
bat the habits of poor diet and insufficient  exercise, which  produce  at
least 300,000 premature deaths every year.

The distinction between voluntary  and involuntary  risk may well
be  the  central  element  in  the  difference  between  lay  and  expert'
judgments  about  risk.  Experts  tend  to  focus  on  aggregate  lives  at
stake;  lay people  care  a great  deal  whether  a risk  is undertaken  vol-
untarily. Their  concern  on this  score  seems  quite reasonable,  in part
because  it accords  so  well  with  widespread  intuitions.  But my  basic
claim here is otherwise. I suggest that judgments  about whether a risk
is  "involuntary"  often  stem  from  confusion  and  selective  attention,
and that the real  basis  for such judgments  frequently lies  in an  ante-
cedent judgment  of  some  other kind.  It is  important  to  identify  and
defend such judgments.

More generally,  and more importantly, I contend  that the effort

risks 

"voluntary" 

from  governmental 

to  exempt 
undoubtedly  a response  to the public  demand for regulation-results
in hundreds  of thousands of unnecessary and preventable  deaths each
year. If the government  focused its attention  on more of the suppos-
edly  "voluntary"  causes  of death-consider  smoking,  poor  diet  and
exercise,  and automobile  accidents-it  could save  an enormous  nun-
ber  of lives, and it could  do so at a relatively low cost.

concern-

*  Karl  N. Llewellyn Distinguished  Service  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  University  of Chi-
cago  Law  School and  Department of Political Science.  This essay  draws on  Cass  R. Sunstein,
Bad Deaths, 14 J. OF RISK AND UNCERTAINTY 259  (1997);  Cass R. Sunstein, Selective Fatalism,
26 J. LEGAL STUD.  (forthcoming 1997).

HeinOnline  -- 8 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 173 1997-1998

174 

DUKE ENVIRONMENTAL LAW  & POLICY FORUM 

[Vol. 8:173

I.  PUZZLES

It is  tempting  to  think that  the  apparent, lay  preference  for  ac-,
cording  greater  weight  to  "involuntary"  risks  to life  requires  signifi-
cant qualification  of any criterion that experts  may use,  such as lives
or life-years  saved.  But a simple  reference  to voluntariness,  if taken
to suggest something  special about "lay rationality,"  raises many puz-
zles.  The  most  important  problem  is  that  it  is  not  simple  to  know
when  a risk  is voluntarily  incurred.  "Voluntariness"  may  be entirely
absent in the case  of an unforeseeable  collision with  an asteroid;  but
voluntariness  is not, in cases  of environmental,  occupational,  or most
other  social  risks,  an  all-or-nothing  matter. Instead  it is  a matter  of
degree.  Return to the conventional  thought  that airplane  crashes  are
"involuntary"  and  automobile crashes  more  "voluntary."  Certainly it
would be  possible  to see  the risks  from air  travel  as  voluntarily  run;
people have a choice about whether to fly, and when they  do fly, they
pay a certain amount for a certain package, including  risks  of various
sorts. The same is true of automobile safety-and it is not in any way
less  true,  however  disparately  the  two  kinds  of  risks  may  "seem."
Perhaps  people  are  responding  to  the  perceived  fact  that they  have
no control over  the pilot's behavior, whereas-they  have considerable
control over automobile  safety  since they are themselves  drivers. But
airlines  respond  to  market  forces,  including  the  market  for  safety,
and  many  people-injured  in  automobile  accidents  are  not  at  fault.
Thus, along  the dimension  of voluntariness,  this is hardly  a crisp dis-
tinction. The difference  between the two risks is hardly so categorical
as  to justify  an assessment  that they fall  on poles  of  some  voluntari-
ness-involuntariness  divide. Indeed, it is not clear  even what  is meant
by  the  suggestion  that one  is voluntary  and the  other  is  not.  Some-
thing else appears to underlie that suggestion.

I.  THREE CASES:  INFORMATION,  CONTRACT,  AND  COST
To  shed  some light  on the issue,  consider  three  classes  of cases.
First, consider  the question whether  workers  exposed  to cancer  risks
are voluntarily  or involuntarily  so exposed.  If workers  do  not know
about such risks-if they lack relevant information-we  seem to have
an  easy case  of involuntariness.  Thus it makes sense  to  say that risks
are  run  involuntarily  when  the  people  running  them  do  not  know
about them. Lack of adequate  information provides  a legitimate  case
for  a judgment  of involuntary  exposure  to risk. But of  course, infor-
mation itself can be' obtained at some cost, pecuniary or otherwise. In

HeinOnline  -- 8 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 174 1997-1998

Fall  1997]

VOLUNTARY  VERSUS INVOLUNTARY RISKS

cases  of this  kind,  we  are  thus  dealing-with  high  costs  of  risk  avoid-
ance,  in  the  distinctive  form  of  high  (sometimes  prohibitively  high)
costs  of acquiring  relevant information.

Second,  suppose  that  people  who  are  exposed  to  a  certain  risk
are  aware  of the  risk,  but are  not in  a  contractual  relation  with the
risk-producer.  Many  victims  of  pollution  are  in  this  position;  recall
that  in surveys  air pollution  is  a particular  source  of public  concern.
People  in Los Angeles  may well  know  that they  face  high  levels  of
smog. Are they exposed involuntarily?  In a way the answer is yes; but
they  can  take  steps  to  reduce  the  risks  associated  with  exposure  to
smog,  by  (among  other" things)  moving  away.  If  we  conclude  that
people  in  Los  Angeles  are  involuntarily  exposed  to  air  pollution
risks,  we may mean that  a risk is incurred  involuntarily when  and  in
the sense  that  it is  typically  very  expensive  for people  to  avoid  it-
and  when  someone  else  can  reduce  the risks  more  cheaply. Here  a
claim that the risk is faced  "involuntarily"  may mean that those who
"run"  the risk can reduce  it only at very high cost,  at least compared
to those who  "produce"  the risk. (The quotation  marks  are necessary
for  Coasian  reasons;  the  existence  of  the  risk  is  attributable  to  the
acts  and omissions  of people  on both sides.)1  Or it is possible  that we'
mean  that  on nonutilitarian  grounds, the  people exposed  to  the  risk
have  a moral entitlement  to be free  from it,  at least  if they  have  not
explicitly sold it.

But  turn  now to  a third  class of cases,'mvolving  a wage package
or contract that does include  compensation for the relevant risks.  As-
suming  that point, we  might want to  distinguish between  two  differ-
ent  possibilities.  In  a  case  of  a  high-level  scientist,  knowledgeable
about  relevant  risks  and  involved  in  work  that  he  finds  rewarding,
people  may well  conclude  that we have  an instance  of voluntariness
(in  the  same  category  can  be  found  the  case  of  an  astronaut).  But
people might not say the same about a low-level worker who does not
like his work at all.2 What  distinguishes  the  two  cases?  If  knowledge
is present,  or  if the compensation  package  includes  payment  for  the
relevant risk, it is not clear how the two  differ. The underlying  judg-
ment must be  that the  compensation  is inadequate,  perhaps  because
background  inequality  has produced  a wage  package  that seems  un-
fair even if voluntarily  chosen by the parties.

1.  See R.H. COASE,  THE FIRM, THE MARKET,  AND THE LAW  (1988).
2.  See ELIZABETH ANDERSON,  VALUE IN ETHICS AND  ECONOMICS 199-200  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 8 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 175 1997-1998

DUKE ENVIRONMENTAL LAW & POLICY FORUM

[Vol.  8:173

From  this  discussion  it  seems  reasonable  to  speculate  that  any
judgment  that a risk is run "involuntarily"  is probably  based on: (1) a
lack  of knowledge  of the risk,  or,  more accurately,  the high  costs  of
obtaining  information  about  the risk;  (2)  a  belief that,  despite  ade-
quate  information,  it would  be  very  costly  for  people  to  avoid  the
risk;  or  (3)  a belief that the risk  is unaccompanied  by  compensating
benefits, notwithstanding  the belief that the contract is in some  sense
worth signing. It may seem hard to make sense of the third ground.  If
people  have signed  the contract  with  full  information, in what  sense
can the risk be denominated involuntary?  What might be at work is a
judgment  that  background  inequalities  are  producing  the  relevant
bargain  (not by itself  a good reason  to  disrupt the deal,  because  any
such  disruption  will  not  respond  to  the  inequalities  and  may  even
make those who  are badly off worse  off). Or perhaps  there is a belief
that  workers  are  competing  to  their  collective  detriment,  and  an
agreement not to compete would be in their best interests?

On  this  view,  the  question  whether  a  risk  is  run  voluntarily  or
not is often not a' categorical  one but instead a question of degree,  as-
sociated  with  information  costs,  risk-reduction  costs,  and  the  exis-
tence  or not of  accompanying  benefits.  Of course  there  are  interest-
ing  background  questions  about  why  and  when  a  risk  "codes"  as
voluntary  or  involuntary;  undoubtedly  the  answer  depends  a  great
deal on  heuristic devices  used  by ordinary  people,  and also  on selec-
tive  attention, as people focus  on a single aspect  of  a complex  trans-
action or set of events.

III.  PURPOSES,  RESPONSIBILITY,  BLAME

Risks may  seem  "voluntarily"  run  when people  do  not approve
of the purpose for which  people run  the relevant  risks,  and involun-
tarily run when people think that the purpose for which the risk is run
is laudable.  It is predictable  that people  will  not want  to  pour  enor-
mous  taxpayer resources  into lowering  the risks  associated  with  sky-
diving, even if the dollars/life-years  saved ratio is quite  good.  By con-
trast,  it  is  doubtful  that  people  think  that  it  is  wrong  to  spend
enormous  resources  on  the  prevention  of  death  from  childbirth  or
from being a police  officer, even  though the decision to  have a  child
is  (with appropriate  qualifications)  voluntary,  as is the decision  to be-
come a police officer.

3.  See ROBERT H. FRANK,  CHOOSING  THE RIGHTPOND 176-77  (1985).

HeinOnline  -- 8 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 176 1997-1998

Fall 1997]

VOLUNTARY  VERSUS  INVOLUNTARY  RISKS

There is a related point. People  may think that when the appeal
or  purpose  of  the  activity  is  associated  with  its  very  riskiness,  re-
sources  should not be devoted  to risk-reduction. At least this  is plau-
sible  when  the risk is  an independent  good  or part  of  the benefit  of
the activity. It is easy to imagine  a belief that some activities-unsafe
sex,  cigarette  smoking-can  be treated  like  the  skydiving  case,  per-
haps  because the risks  are  sometimes  part of the benefit,  or because
the risks  are not incurred for a purpose that observers  find worthy or
valuable.

It might seem that this consideration-the  purpose for which  the
risk  is  incurred-overlaps  with  or  is  even  identical  to  the  question
whether  there  are  high  costs  of  risk-avoidance.  When  the  costs  are
low, as in skydiving,  the purpose might  seem inadequate.  But on  re-
flection, the two  ideas  are  hardly the  same; these  are  quite  different
moral  intuitions.  It may well  be that failing  to  skydive,  or  skydiving
with  some  safety-increasing  technology,  imposes  high  costs  on  sky-
divers. There seems to be an objective judgment, not necessarily  con-
nected  with  subjective  costs,  in the  claim that  some  risks  are  volun-
tary,  or deserve  less  attention, because  they  are  run  for  inadequate
purposes.

Relatedly,  airplane  accidents  may  seem  different  from  automo-
bile  accidents  not because  the former  are  less voluntary,  and not be-
cause  of the  diverse  costs  of  risk  avoidance, but because  the victims
of airplane  accidents  are  less  blameworthy  than the victims  of  auto-
mobile accidents  in the sense that any death or injury is not a product
of their  own negligence  or misconduct.  In the case  of an airplane  dis-
aster, weather conditions, mechanical  failure, or pilot error are likely
causes;  in  the  case  of  an  automobile  accident,  it  is  more  likely
(though  not  of  course  certain)  that  the  victim  could  have  avoided
death  through  more careful  driving.  The point  is  crude,  since  many
victims  of  automobile  accidents  are  not  drivers,  and many drivers  in
accidents  do  not behave  negligently. But the perceived  difference,  in
a significant  number of cases, may underlie  an apparent  judgment  of
"voluntariness"  that  is  really  a  judgment  about  responsibility  and
blameworthiness.  These judgments  must  of course  be  defended  and
earned.

HeinOnline  -- 8 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 177 1997-1998

DUKE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW & POLICY FORUM

[Vol.  8:173

IV.  UNDERLYING  QUESTIONS AND  ASSUMPTION  OF RISK
We  might  therefore  conclude  that  whether  a  risk  qualifies  as
voluntary  raises  many  of  the  questions  raised  by  the  question
whether  the  government  should  regulate  the market  at  all.  A  risk
might  be  characterized  as involuntarily  run  because  affected  people
lack relevant  information;  because  the transactions  costs  of bargain-
ing are high; because the risks should be seen to amount to  externali-
ties;  because  collective  action  problems  make market  outcomes  un-
satisfactory  since  (for example)  workers  are  in a prisoner's  dilemma
best  solved  through  law;  or because  some  motivational  or  cognitive
defect makes successful  solutions through markets unlikely.4  These  of
course  are  among the conventional  grounds for regulation in the first
instance.  When a risk seems  voluntary, and not worthy  of substantial
regulatory  resources,  the term  "voluntary"  may  well be  serving  as  a
placeholder  for  an  argument  that  there  is  no  sufficient  ground  for
governmental  action.  This  may  occur  because  the  accompanying
benefits  are  high  or  the  risk-reduction  costs  are  low,  and  because
market arrangements  take adequate  account  of these facts.

But there are  many problems  here. Should  voluntarily  run  risks
of death or injury receive  no public attention, on the ground  that the
ielevant people have already received  compensation?  The puzzle lies
in the fact that it is hard to  know when  aind  how a risk is voluntarily
run, in such a way as to make  a-government  role inadvisable.  Suppose
that we  consider  a risk  of  death  or injury to  be  incurred  voluntarily
when  an informed person  decided  to incur it in light  of its costs  and
benefits.  Suppose,  for  example,  that someone  purchases  a small  car
knowing  that it is equipped  with  fewer  safety  features,  or  decides  to
become  a  boxer,  an  astronaut,  or  a  police  officer  in  a  dangerous
neighborhood.  If  a  death  results  from  such  a  choice,  it might  seem
that  the  chooser  has  no  legitimate  ground  for  complaint;  there  has
been  ex ante compensation  for the risk. But even in such  cases,  it is
not clear that the government lacks  a role. If the government can  re-
duce  a serious risk at low cost, and thus  eliminate  deaths, it should  do
so even when there is ex  ante compensation for the relevant  risk. The
fact that someone voluntarily ran the risk, in one respect, is no reason
not to reduce  that very risk. Suppose that the government  can reduce

-4.  See  Cass  R. Sunstein,  Behavioral Analysis of Law, 64  U.  CH.  L.  REV.  (forthcoming

1997).

HeinOnline  -- 8 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 178 1997-1998

Fall1997]

VOLUNTARY  VERSUS  INVOLUNTARY RISKS

the  relevant  risks  in such  a  way  as  to  survive  any  cost-benefit  test.
Why should it not do so?

The  general  point is that observers  frequently confuse  two quite
different  questions:  (1) should people be banned from running  a cer-
tain risk when they have run that risk voluntarily?  and (2) should the
government  attempt  to  reduce  a  certain  risk when  people  have  run
that risk voluntarily?  A negative  answer to the first question does not
answer  the second  question.  People  may  run  a  risk  voluntarily,  but
also  be  better  off when  that risk  is  reduced.  They  are  hardly  hypo-
critical  or  confused  when  they  seek  the  government  to  help  in  risk
reduction.  They  may  well  say  that  they  acted  voluntarily,  but  that
they  did  not voluntarily  run  the risk,  at least  in the  sense  that  they.
wished  it to be lower  than it was,  and wish it to be lower  than it now
is.

V.  A  TENTATIVE CONCLUSION

From  these  points,  it should  be  concluded  that  a  lay  judgment
that a risk is  "voluntary"  should not be decisive  for purposes  of pol-
icy.  Many  risks  that people  consider  "voluntary"  should  be the  sub-
ject of greater  governmental  concern,  not least  because  hundreds  of
thousands  of  lives  might  thereby  be  saved.  The  lay  focus  on
"involuntary"  risks sometimes  points to  reasonable judgments,  but it
is at most a  start. The  danger  of using it as  the basis for policy is that
it is,  literally, dangerous,  in the sense that it ensures  that the govern-
ment will  do far less than it could to reduce  the number  of premature
deaths.

In short, there is no special magic in notions like "voluntary"  and
"involuntary."  Judgments  about the voluntary  character  of risk often
depend  on confusion  and selective  attention. People  often focus  on a
small  part  of  a  complex  interaction-not  the decision  to  fly, but the
accident  when  it  occurs;  not the  decision  to  live  in  a  high-polluting
area, but respiratory problems when they are  experienced.  Risks that
appear  involuntarily  run can often  be redescribed,  with  some  plausi-
bility,  as  voluntarily  run, and  the converse  is  also true.  A better un-
derstanding  of what  factors  underlie  a judgment  about voluntariness
should be used for purposes of regulatory policy. I have attempted to
identify  some of the possible factors here.

My basic conclusion is simple:  the government should  attempt to
save as many lives,  or as many life-years,  as it can, subject to the lim-
ited public and private resources  devoted to risk regulation.  Ordinar-

HeinOnline  -- 8 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 179 1997-1998

180 

DUKE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW & POLICY FORUM 

[Vol.  8:173

ily,  people's  concern, with  voluntariness  should  not  allow  dramatic
departures  from this basic  goal, which specifies  what the government
is generally trying  to increase. The most that can be said is that when
reasonable  judgments  underlie  a  judgment  that  people  have  been
voluntarily  or involuntarily  exposed to  a risk,  the  extent  of the  gov-
ernment's focus  might  be  adjusted.  In  other words,  the  government
might  devote  more  resources  to  a problem  when  those  at  risk  lack
relevant  information  or  when  the  costs  of  risk-avoidance  are  espe-
cially  high,  and  it might  devote  fewer  resources  to  a problem  when
those  at  risk  have  the  information  and  when  the  costs  of  risk-
avoidance are low.

HeinOnline  -- 8 Duke Envtl. L. & Pol'y F. 180 1997-1998

