Public Law and Legal Theory Working Papers

Working Papers

University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

1999

Second-Order Decisions
Cass R. Sunstein

Edna Ullmann-Margalit

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/
public_law_and_legal_theory

Part of the Law Commons

Chicago Unbound includes both works in progress and final versions of articles. Please be aware that
a more recent version of this article may be available on Chicago Unbound, SSRN or elsewhere.

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein & Edna Ullmann-Margalit, "Second-Order Decisions" (University of Chicago Public Law & Legal Theory Working
Paper No. 1, 1999).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Working Papers at Chicago Unbound. It has been accepted for inclusion in Public
Law and Legal Theory Working Papers by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more information, please contact
unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

CHICAGO

PUBLIC LAW AND LEGAL THEORY WORKING PAPER NO. 01

Second-Order  Decisions

Cass  R.  Sunstein  and  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit

THE  LAW  SCHOOL
THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHICAGO

This paper can be downloaded without charge at:

The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection:
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=193848

Second-Order  Decisions

Cass R. Sunstein* and Edna Ullmann-Margalit**

I.  Introduction

According  to  one  picture  of  practical  reasoning,  people  are
decision-making animals, assessing the advantages and disadvantages
of proposed courses of action  and choosing  in  accordance with  that
assessment.  This  picture  plays  a  familiar  role  in  economics  and
decision theory; in various forms, it is central  to leading descriptions
of reasoning in law and  politics.1 Even  in  psychology, where  models
of bounded rationality are pervasive and where it is common to speak
of  “satisficing”  rather  than  optimizing,  the  deviations  can  be
understood only against the background of this picture.2

As  many  people  have  noticed,  this  understanding  of  practical
reasoning  is  quite  inadequate.3  An  important  problem  is  that  it
                                                
*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,
University of Chicago, Law School and Department of Political Science.
**  Center  for  Rationality  and  Interactive  Decision  Theory,  The  Hebrew
University  of  Jerusalem.  We  are  grateful  to  Joshua  Cohen,  David  Friedman,
Elizabeth  Garrett,  Saul  Levmore,  Avishai  Margalit,  Martha  Nussbaum,  Eric
Posner,  Richard  Posner,  David  Strauss,  and  two  anonymous  reviewers  for
valuable  comments  on  a  previous  draft;  thanks  too  to  participants  in  a  faculty
workshop  at  the  University  of  Nebraska.
1 Thus the most complete treatment of legal reasoning,  Ronald  Dworkin,  Law’s
Empire  (Cambridge:  Harvard  University  Press,  1986),  deals  well  with  the  use
of precedent, but not at all with the  use  of  strategies  to  simplify  the  burdens  of
decision;  this  is  a  serious  gap.  Helpful  discussions  of  aspects  of  that  topic  can
be  found  in  Joseph  Raz,  Practical  Reason  and  Norms  37-45  (Princeton:
Princeton  University  Press,  2d  ed.  1991)  (discussing  rules  and  exclusionary
reasons)  and  Joseph  Raz,  The  Authority  of  Law  (Oxford:  Oxford  University
Press, 1986)  (discussing analogies). In  the  political  domain,  see  Yuen  Foongh
Khong, Analogies At War (1992).
2  A  prominent  exception  of  George  Ainslie,  Picoeconomics  (Cambridge:
Cambridge  University  Press,  1995),  but  Ainslie’s  focus  is  on  precommitment,
only  one  of  the  set  of  solutions  discussed  here,  and  Ainslie  does  not  clearly
distinguish between rules and other kinds of precommitment strategies.
3  See,  e.g.,  Jon  Elster,  Solomonic  Judgments  36-53  (Cambridge:  Cambridge
University  Press,  1990):  John  Rawls,  “Two  Concepts  of  Rules,”  Philosophical
Review  64  (1955) 3-32;  Edward  McClennen,  Rationality  and  Dynamic  Choice

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 2

ignores the existence of  simplifying strategies that  people adopt well
before  on-the-spot  decisions  must  be  made.4  Debates  over  rule
utilitarianism  have  of  course  emphasized  the  importance  of  these
strategies,  and  precommitments,  plans,  and  rules  have  received
prominent  attention  from  (among  others)  Jon  Elster,5  Edward
McClennen,6  Richard  Thaler,7  and  Frederick  Schauer.8  A  central
point  here 
their  own
shortcomings—calculative,  moral  or  otherwise—by  making  some
meta-choice  before the  moment  of  ultimate decision. But there  are
significant  gaps  in  these  discussions.  They  do  not  take  sufficiently
seriously the  reluctance of  ordinary people and  social  institutions  to
make  on-the-spot  decisions,9  and  they  offer  a  truncated  and

to  overcome 

that  people 

seek 

is 

Journal  of  Economics 

Information  Acquisition,” 

                                                                                                               
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990). See also the useful survey of  a
number of treatments in McClennen  at 219-238.  Within  economics,  see,  e.g.,
Thomas  Schelling,  “Enforcing  Rules  on  Oneself,”  1  J  L  Econ.  &  Org.  357
(1985); Kaplow,  supra  note;  Richard  Thaler,  Quasi-Rational  Economics  77-90
(New  York:  Rusell  Sage,  1993);  Eric  Rasmussen,  “Managerial  Conservatism
and  Rational 
and
Management  Strategy,  1:  175-202  (1992);  Eric  Rasmussen,  Games  and
Information 129 (Oxford: Blackwell 1994).
4  Mill  himself  emphasized  the  point;  see  John  Stuart  Mill,  Utilitarianism,  i n
John Stuart Mill, On Liberty  and  Other  Essays  151-53  (John  Gray  ed.,  Oxford:
Oxford  University  Press,  1991).
5  See  Jon  Elster,  Ulysses  and  the  Sirens  pp.  36-47  (Cambridge:  Cambridge
University  Press,  1979).
6 See Edward McClennen, p. 50-85.
7 See Richard Thaler, supra note, at 77-90.
8  See  Frederick  Schauer,  Playing  By  The  Rules  (Cambridge:  Cambridge
institutional  discussion,
University  Press,  1992),  which  contains  useful 
particularly  of  the  relationship  between  courts  and 
legislatures.  Conrad
Johnson,  Moral  Legislation  (Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press,  1991),  is
in  some  ways  complementary,  discussing  the  differences  between  decisions  at
the  legislative  level  and  individual  choices.
9  For  example,  Elster’s  principal  concern  is  with  the  particular  problem  of
weakness of will, see Ulysses and the Sirens, p. 37, which is important  but,  as  we
will  see,  only  one  of  a  large  number  of  grounds  for  second-order  decisions.
Thaler  and  Schelling  are  similarly  concerned  with  self-control  problems.
McClennen’s  principal  interest  is  in  dynamic  consistency.  See  p.  219.  Mill’s
brief  but  important  discussion  involves  the  cognitive  demands  of  constant
calculation. See Mill, p. 152.

3 

Second-Order  Decisions

undifferentiated  sense  of  the  range  of  potential  strategies  for
improving, or reducing the burdens, of first-order decisions. They  do
not,  for example, investigate why  an  agent  might  adopt a  firm  rule
or instead a soft presumption or  a  standard;  nor  do  they  deal  with
choices  between 
these  options  and  delegating  to  others  or
proceeding  via  small,  reversible  steps.10  The  result  is  to  give  an
inadequate  understanding  of  how  agents  and  institutions  do  or
should proceed, and no  real  sense  of  the  political,  moral,  and  legal
issues involved.

By  second-order  decisions  we  refer  to  decisions  about  the
appropriate  strategy  for  reducing  the  problems  associated  with
making  a  first-order  decision.  Second-order  decisions  thus  involve
the  strategies  that  people  use  in  order  to  avoid  getting  into  an
ordinary decision-making  situation  in  the  first  instance.  There  are
important  issues  here  about  cognitive  burdens  and  also  about
responsibility, equality, and fairness. In law, for example, some judges
favor a second-order decision in  favor  of  rules,  on  the  ground  that
rules promote predictability and minimize the  burdens of  subsequent
decisions. In politics, legislatures often adopt a second-order decision
in  favor of  a  delegation  to  some  third  party,  like  an  administrative
agency. But there  are many  alternative strategies, and  serious ethical
and even democratic questions are raised by rule-bound decisions (as
opposed, for example, to small, reversible steps) and by delegations (as
opposed, for example, to rebuttable presumptions).

We  aim  here  to  clarify  the  choice  among  second-order
strategies. We  do  so  by  showing  that  these  strategies  differ  in  the
extent  to  which  they  produce  mistakes  and  also  in  the  extent  to
which  they  impose informational,  moral, and other  burdens on  the
agent and on others,  either before the  process of  ultimate decision or
during the  process of  ultimate decision. We  identify three  especially
interesting  kinds of  cases. The  first  involves  second-order  decisions
                                                
10  Johnson,  supra  note,  is  typical  in  not  exploring  the  second-order  alternatives
to  rules  (such  as  presumptions)  as  ways  of  promoting  consequentialist  goals.
Elster  offers  illuminating  discussions  of  some  of  these  strategies,  but  separately
and  in  various  places,  without  discussing  how  agents  can  and  do  choose
between  them,  and  with  little  treatment  of  institutional  questions.  See  Jon
Elster,  Solomonic  Judgments  36-45  (Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press,
1993)  (discussing  randomization;  Elster,  Ulysses  and  the  Sirens  pp.  36-47
(discussing precommitment, apparently via rules).

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 4

that  greatly  reduce  burdens  at  the  time  of  ultimate  decision,  but
require  considerable  thinking  in  advance.  Decisions  of  this  kind,
which we  call High-Low,  may be difficult to make before the  fact;
the question is whether  the  burdens are worth  incurring  in  light  of
the  aggregate burdens, moral,  cognitive,  and  otherwise,  of  second-
order and  first-order  decisions  taken  together.  The  second  we  call
Low-Low. Some second-order  strategies impose little in  the  way  of
decisional burdens either before or during the ultimate decision. This
is a great advantage, and a major question is whether  the  strategy in
question  (consider  a  decision  to  flip  a  coin)  produces  too  much
unfairness  or  too  many  mistakes.  The  third  we  call  Low-High.
Some second-order strategies involve low  ex-ante decisional burdens
for  the  agents  themselves,  at  the  cost  of  imposing  possibly  high
subsequent  burdens  on  someone  else  to  whom  the  first-order
decision  is  “exported”;  a  delegation  of  power  to  some  trusted
associate, or to an authority, is the most obvious case.

By drawing  on  actual practices, individual and institutional,  we
attempt to provide guidance for seeing when one or another  strategy
will  be  chosen,  when  one  or  another  makes  best  sense,  and  how
both rational and boundedly rational persons and institutions might
go about making the relevant choices.11 No particular strategy can  be
said to be better in  the  abstract; but it is possible to identify,  in  the
abstract, the  factors  that  push  in  favor  of  one  or  another  strategy,
and also the contexts in which each approach makes sense.

We  suggest, for example, that  a second-order decision  in  favor
of  firm rules (a form  of  High-Low)  is  appropriate  when  an  agent
faces  a  large  number  of  decisions  with  similar  features  and  when
advance planning is especially important; in such cases, the  crudeness
of  rules  is  easily  tolerated  because  of  their  overall  advantages.  By
contrast, a second-order decision in  favor of  small, reversible steps (a
form  of  Low-Low)  is  preferable  when  the  agent  lacks  reliable
information  and  reasonably  fears  unanticipated  bad  consequences;
this  point  helps  explain  the  method  that  is  often  at  work  among
common  law  courts (and argues against some  of  the  critics  of  that
                                                
11  Of  course  second-order  decisions  might  operate  as  a  rational  response,  by
boundedly  rational  persons  or  institutions,  to  their  own  bounded  rationality;
but  such  decisions  might  also  suffer  from  bounded  rationality  and  go  wrong
because of cognitive or motivational problems. See below.

5 

Second-Order  Decisions

method).  A sensible agent  will  choose  the  alternative  second-order
strategy  of  delegating  to  another  person  or  institution  (a  form  of
Low-High)  when  there  is  a  special  problem  with  assuming
responsibility—informational,  moral,  or  otherwise—and  when  an
appropriate delegate, with  sufficient  time and expertise, turns out to
be  available;  this  point  helps  illuminate  debates  over  delegations
within  the  family and from  legislatures to  administrative  agencies.12
In the process we address a range of ethical, political, and legal issues
that are raised by various second-order decisions.

II. Decisions and Mistakes

A. Strategies

The  following  catalogue  captures  the  major  second-order
strategies.  The  taxonomy  is  intended  to  be  exhaustive  of  the
possibilities, but the  various items should not  be seen as exclusive  of
one another; there is some overlap between them.

Rules.  People  anticipating  hard  or  repetitive  decisions  may  do
best to adopt a rule. A key feature of  a rule  is  that  it  amounts  to  a
full, or nearly full, ex ante  specification of results in  individual cases.
People might  say, for example,  that  they  will  never  cheat  on  their
taxes  or  fail  to  meet  a  deadline.  A  legislature  might  provide  that
judges can  never make exceptions to the  speed-limit law  or the  law
banning  dogs  from  restaurants,  or  that  everyone  who  has  been
convicted of three felonies must be sentenced to life imprisonment

Presumptions.  Sometimes  ordinary  people 

and  public
institutions  rely not  on  a rule but instead on  a  presumption,  which
can  be rebutted. The  result, it  is  hoped,  is  to  make  fewer  mistakes
while at the same time incurring reasonable decisional burdens.13 An

                                                
12  Of  course  self-interested  participants  in  politics  will  attempt  to  exploit
arguments  of  this  kind  in  order  to  produce  their  preferred  outcome.  A n
industry  representation  nervous  about its  chances  of  success  in  the  legislature
might  argue  strongly  on  behalf  of  a  delegation,  in  the  hopes  that  the  delegate
will  be  more  receptive  to  its  arguments  (or  more  vulnerable  to  its  influence).
We deal only in  passing  with  the  strategic  considerations  involved  in  second-
order  strategies;  this  is  a  fertile  area  for  further  work,  both  empirical  and
theoretical.
13  It  is  important  here  to  distinguish  between  a  presumption  and  a  rule-with-
exceptions. A rule with  exceptions  has  the  following  structure:  “Do  X—except

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 6

administrative agency might presume, for example, that  no  one  may
emit more than  X  tons  of  a certain pollutant, but  the  presumption
can be rebutted by showing that further reductions are not feasible.

Standards.  Rules  are  often  contrasted  with  standards.14  A  ban
on “excessive” speed on the highway is a standard; so is a requirement
that  pilots of  airplanes be “competent,”  or  that  student  behavior  in
the  classroom be “reasonable.” These  might  be compared with  rules
specifying a 55 mph speed limit, or a ban  on  pilots who  are over the
age of 70, or a requirement that students sit in assigned seats.

Routines. Sometimes a  reasonable way  to deal with  a decisional
burden  is  to  adopt  a  routine.  By  this  term  we  mean  something
similar  to  a  habit,  but  more  voluntary,  more  self-conscious,  and
without the pejorative connotations of some habits (like the  habit of
chewing  one’s fingernails).  Thus  a  forgetful  person  might  adopt  a
routine  of  locking  his  door  every  time  he  leaves  his  office,  even
though sometimes he knows he will return  in  a few  minutes; thus  a
commuter  might  adopt  a  particular  route  and  follow  it  every  day,
even though on some days another route would be better.

Small steps. A possible way  of  simplifying a difficult situation at
the  time of  choice is to make a small, incremental  decision,  and  to
leave  other  questions  for  another  day.  When  a  personal  decision
involves  imponderable  and  apparently  incommensurable  elements,
people often take small, reversible steps first.15 For example, Jane  may

                                                                                                               
in circumstances A, in which case you are exempt from doing X.”  For  example,
“observe  the  speed  limit—except  when  you’re  driving  a  police  car  or  an
ambulance in an emergency, in which  cases  you  may  exceed it.”  By  contrast,  a
typical  presumption  says  something 
like:  “Act  on  the  assumption  that
P—unless  and  until  circumstances  A  are  shown  to  obtain,  in  which  case,  do
something  else.”  The  two  amount  to  the  same  thing  when  the  agent  knows
whether  or  not  circumstances  A  obtain.  The  two  are  quite  different  when  the
agent lacks that information. With a presumption, you can  proceed  without  the
information;  with  a  rule-with-exceptions,  you  cannot  proceed,  that  is,  you  are
justified  neither  in  doing  X  nor  in  not  doing  X.  See  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit,
“On Presumption,” J.Phil 80: 143-162 (1983).
14  See,  e.g.,  Louis  Kaplow,  “Rules  and  Standards:  An  Economic  Analysis,”
Duke  L.J.  42  (1992):  189-221;  Kathleen  Sullivan,  “Foreword:  The  Justices  of
Rules and Standards,” Harv. L. Rev. 105 (1993): 22-103.
15  See  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit,  “Opting:  The  Case  of  ‘Big’  Decisions,”  in  The
1985 Yearbook of the Wissenschaftkeleg Zu Berlin.

7 

Second-Order  Decisions

decide to live with  Robert  before she decides whether  she wants  to
marry  him;  Marilyn  may  go  to  night  school  to  see  if  she  is  really
interested in law. A similar “small steps” approach is the  hallmark of
Anglo-American  common  law.16  Judges  typically  make  narrow
decisions, resolving little  beyond  the  individual  case;  at  least  this  is
their  preferred  method  of  operation  when  they  are  not  quite
confident about the larger issues, not only in the common law but in
constitutional law too.17

Picking.  Sometimes  the  difficulty  of  decision,  or  symmetry
among the options, pushes people to decide on a random  basis. They
might,  for example, flip a coin,  or  make  some  apparently  irrelevant
factor  decisive  (“it’s  a  sunny  day,  so  I’ll  take  that  job  in  Florida”).
Thus they might “pick” rather than  “choose” (taking  the  latter term
to mean basing a decision on preference).18 A legal system might  use
a lottery to decide who serves on juries or in  the  military, and indeed
lotteries  are  used 
in  many  domains  where  the  burdens  of
individualized  choice  are  high,  and  when  there  is  some  particular
problem with  deliberation about  the  grounds  of  choice,  sometimes
because of apparent symmetries among the candidates.

an 

and 

relevant 

argument 

influential 

                                                
16  See  Edward  Levi,  An  Introduction  to  Legal  Reasoning  3-  15  (Chicago:
University  of  Chicago  Press,  1948).  In  political  science,  see  Charles
Lindblom,  “The  Science  of  Muddling  Through,”  19  Pub.  Admin.  Rev.  79
(1955),  which  offers 
about
incrementalism.  See  also  Charles  Lindblom,  “Still  Muddlin,  Not  Yet
Through,”  Public  Administration  Review  39  (1979):  517-26.  Lindblom’s
discussion  is  in  the  same  general  family  as  our  exploration  of  small  steps,
though  (oddly)  Lindblom  does  not  discuss  the  judiciary,  and  he  does  not
explore when other second-order stategies might be preferable.
17  Thus  in  cases  involving  the  right  to  die,  affirmative  action,  and  sex  equality,
Justices  Sandra  Day  O’Connor  and  Ruth  Bader  Ginsburg  much  favor  small
steps  as  the  strategy  of  choice;  this  is  the  ground  on  which  they  tend  to
disagree with Justice  Scalia,  and  in  fact it  counts  as  the  leading  jurisprudential
dispute on the current Supreme Court The tension between the  rule  of  law  and
the  common  law  method  is  the  basic  theme  of  Antonin  Scalia,  A  Matter  of
Interpretation 5-15 (Princeton:  Princeton  University  Press,  1997).  For  general
discussion,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  One Case  At A  Time:  Judicial  Minimalism  on
the  Supreme  Court  (Cambridge:  Harvard  University  Press,  1999).
18  See  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit  and  Sidney  Morgenbesser,  “Picking  and
Choosing,” Social Research 44 (1977): 757-83.

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 8

Delegation.  A familiar way  of  handling  decisional burdens is to
delegate  the  decision  to  someone  else.  People  might,  for  example,
rely on  a spouse or a friend, or choose an  institutional  arrangement
by which certain decisions are made by authorities established at the
time  or  well  in  advance.  Such  arrangements  can  be  more  or  less
formal;  they  involve  diverse  mechanisms  of  control,  or  entirely
relinquished control, by the person or people for whose  benefit  they
have been created.

Heuristics.  People often  use heuristic devices,  or  mental  short-
cuts, as a  way  of  bypassing  the  need  for  individualized  choice.  For
example, it can  be overwhelming  to figure out for whom  to vote in
local  elections;  people  may  therefore  use  the  heuristic  of  party
affiliation.  When  meeting  someone  new,  your  behavior  may  be  a
result of heuristic devices specifying the  appropriate type of  behavior
with  a  person  falling  in  the  general  category  in  which  the  new
person  seems  to  fall.  A  great  deal  of  attention  has  been  given  to
heuristic devices said to  produce  departures  from  “rationality.”19  But
often  heuristic  devices  are  fully  rational,  if  understood  as  a  way  of
producing  pretty  good  outcomes  while  at  the  same  time  reducing
cognitive overload or other decisional burdens.

B. Costs of Decisions and Costs of Errors

Under  what  circumstances  will,  or  should,  an  agent  or
institution make some second-order decision rather than  making  an
all-things-considered  judgment  on  the  spot?  And  under  what
circumstances  will,  or  should,  one  or  another  strategy  be  chosen?
Many  people  have  emphasized  the  particular  value  of  rules,  which
can  overcome myopia or  weakness  of  will20;  but  the  problem  is  far
more general, and rules are just one  of  many  possible solutions. Our
ultimate  goal  is  to  suggest  the  most  promising  contexts  for  the
principal candidates, especially rules, small steps, and delegation.

We have said that second-order strategies differ in  the  extent  to
which  they  produce  mistakes  and  decisional  burdens.  In  what
follows  we  shall  suggest  that  second-order  strategies  should  be
                                                
19  See,  e.g.,  John  Conlisk,  “Why  Bounded  Rationality?,”  J.  Econ.  Lit.  34
(1996): 669-698.
20 See the discussion of precommitment in Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens,  and  the
treatment of “resolute choice” in McClennen.

9 

Second-Order  Decisions

chosen  by attempting  to minimize the  sum of  the  costs  of  making
decisions and the costs of error, where  the  costs of  making  decisions
are the  costs of  coming  to closure on  some action  or set of  actions,
and where  the  costs of  error are assessed by examining  the  number,
the  magnitude, and the  kinds of  mistakes.21 We  understand “errors”
as suboptimal outcomes,  whatever  the  criteria  for  deciding  what  is
optimal; thus both rules and delegations can  produce errors (the  rule
may  be  crude;  the  delegate  may  be  incompetent).  If  the  costs  of
producing  optimal  decisions  were  zero,  it  would  be  best  to  make
individual calculations in each case, for this approach  would  produce
correct  judgments  without  compromising  accuracy  or  any  other
important  value. This  would  be  true  for  individual  agents  and  also
for institutions. It is largely because people (including public officials)
seek to reduce decisional burdens, and to minimize their own  errors,
that  sometimes they  would  like not  to have  options  and  sometimes
not to  have information; and they  may make second-order decisions
to reduce either options or information (or both).22

Three  additional  points  are  necessary  here.  The  first  involves
responsibility:  people  sometimes  want  to  assume  responsibility  for
certain decisions even  if  others  would  make  those  decisions  better,
and people sometimes want to relieve themselves of  responsibility for
certain  decisions  even  if  other  people  would  make  those  decisions
worse. These  are familiar phenomena  in  daily life; so too in  politics
and  law,  where  people  with  authority  encounter  formal  and
informal  barriers  to  their  own  efforts  to  delegate.  A  failure  of

                                                
21 Kaplow illuminatingly uses a framework of this sort, but  in  a  way  that  seems
to us too reductionistic. Schauer, pp. 196-206, recognizes that the case  for  rules
depends  on  empirical  considerations.  The  treatments  of  precommitment  i n
Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens, and Schelling do not explore  the  circumstances  i n
which  a  rule-bound  strategy  is  preferable  to  some  other  (second-order)
approach,  nor  do  they  explore  the  grounds  for  choice  among  the  various
second-order  strategies  discussed  here.  In  general,  existing  treatments  of
precommitment tend to ambiguous about whether the  relevant  strategy  is  a  rule
or  something  else.  See,  e.g.,  Elster,  Ulysses  and  the  Sirens,  at  37-40
(collecting  heterogeneous  illustrations).
22  See  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit,  “On  Not  Wanting  To  Know,”  in  Reasoning
Practically  (New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  forthcoming  1999);  Gerald
Dworkin,  “Is  More  Choice  Better  Than  Less?”,  in  Autonomy  (New  York:
Oxford  University  Press,  1991).

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 10

responsibility  might  be  understand  as  a  kind  of  “cost,”  but  it  is
qualitatively  different  from  the  decision  costs  and  error  costs
discussed  thus  far,  and  raises  separate  questions.  Special  issues  are
created by institutional  arrangements  that  divide  authority,  such  as
the  separation  of  powers;  such  arrangements  forbid  people  from
assuming  or  delegating  certain  decisions,  even  if  they  would  very
much like to do so.

The  second  point  comes  from  the  fact  that  multi-party
situations  raise  distinctive  problems.  Above  all,  public  institutions
(including  legislatures,  agencies,  and  courts)  may  seek  to  promote
planning by setting  down  rules  and  presumptions  in  advance.  The
need for planning  can  argue strongly  against  on-the-spot  decisions
even if they would be both correct and costless to achieve. As we  will
see, the  need for planning  can  lead  in  the  direction  of  a  particular
kind of second-order strategy, one  that  makes on-the-spot  decisions
more or less mechanical.

The  third  and  most  important  point  is  that  a  reference  to  a
“sum” of decision costs and error costs should not be taken to suggest
that  a  straightforward  cost-benefit  analysis  is  an  adequate  way  to
understand  the  choice  among  second-order  strategies.  Of  course
there  is  no  simple  metric  along  which  to  align  the  various
considerations.  Important  qualitative  differences  can  be  found
between  decision costs and error costs,  among  the  various  kinds  of
decision costs, and also among the various kinds of  error costs. Thus
for  any  agent  the  costs  of  decision  may  include  time,  money,
unpopularity, anxiety, boredom, agitation, anticipated ex  post  regret
or remorse, feelings of responsibility for harm  done to self or others,
injury to self-perception, guilt, or shame. We  refer to decision costs
and error costs in  order to start with  a  relatively  simple  framework;
additional  considerations  will  be  introduced  as  the  discussion
proceeds.

Things  become  differently  complicated  for  multimember
institutions, where these  points also apply, but where  interest-group
pressures may be important,  and where  there  is the  special  problem
of reaching  a degree of  consensus. A legislature, for example, might
find  it  especially  difficult  to  specify  the  appropriate  approach  to
global warming,  given the  problems posed by disagreement, varying
intensity  of  preference, and aggregation issues; for  similar  reasons  a
multimember  court  may  have  a  hard  time  agreeing  on  how  to

11 

Second-Order  Decisions

handle an asserted right to physician-assisted suicide. The  result may
be strategies for delegation or for deferring decision, often  via  small
steps.

An  institution  facing  political  pressures  may  have  a  distinctive
reason to adopt a particular kind of  second-order decision, one  that
will deflect responsibility for  choice.  Jean  Bodin defended the  creation
of an independent judiciary, and thus provided an  initial insight  into
a  system  of  separated  and  divided  powers,  on  just  this  ground;  a
monarch is  relieved of  responsibility for unpopular but indispensable
decisions  if  he  can  point  to  a  separate  institution  that  has  been
charged  with  the  relevant  duty.23  This  is  an  important  kind  of
enabling constraint, characteristic  of  good second-order decisions. In
modern states, the existence of an independent  central  bank  is often
justified on this ground. In  the  United States, the  President  has no
authority over the  money  supply  and  indeed  no  authority  over  the
Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  partly  on  the  theory  that
this will prevent the President from being criticized for necessary but
unpopular decisions (such as refusing to increase the supply of money
when  unemployment  seems  too  high);  the  fact  that  the  Federal
Reserve Board is unelected is an advantage here. There  are analogues
in  business, in  workplaces, and even in  families, where  a mother  or
father  may  be  given  the  responsibility  for  making  certain  choices,
partly in  order to  relieve  the  other  of  responsibility.  Of  course  this
approach can cause problems of fairness, equality, and mistake.

C. Burdens Ex Ante and Burdens On-the-Spot

The inquiry into  second-order strategies might  be organized by
noticing  a  simple  point:  Some  such  strategies  require  substantial
thought  in  advance but  little  thought  on-the-spot,  whereas  others
require little  thought  before  the  situation  of  choice  arises  and  also
little thought on-the-spot. Stlll others involve little ex-ante thought,
which  leads  to  imposing  the  possibly  high  decisional  burdens  on
others. Thus  there  is a temporal difference in  the  imposition of  the
burdens of decision, which we describe with the terms “High-Low,”
“Low-Low,”  and “Low-High.”  To  fill out  the  possibilities,  we  add

                                                
23  See  Stephen  Holmes,  Passions  and  Constraint  (Chicago:  University  of
Chicago  Press,  1996).

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 12

“High-High”  as  well.  By  the  term  decision  costs  we  refer  to  the
overall costs, which may be borne by different people or agencies: the
work  done before the  fact  of  choice may not  be  carried  out  by  the
same actors who  will  have  to  do  the  thinking  during  the  ultimate
choice. Consider Table 1:

Table 1: Burdens Ex Ante and Burdens On the Spot

little ex ante
thinking

Low-Low:
picking; small
steps; various
heuristics; some
standards (1)

Low-High:
delegation (3)

little on-the-spot

thinking

Substantial on-
the-spot
thinking

Substantial ex ante
thinking

High-Low:
rules; presumptions; some
standards; routines (2)

High-High:
some characters in Henry
James novels;
dysfunctional
governments (4)

Cell 1 captures strategies that  promise  to  minimize  the  overall
burdens of  having  to make decisions (whether  or not  they  promote
good  overall  decisions).  These  are  cases  in  which  agents  do  not
invest a great deal of thought either before or at the time of  decision.
Picking  is the  most obvious case;  consider  the  analogous  possibility
of flipping a coin.  Small steps are more demanding,  since the  agent
does have to make some  decisions,  but  because  the  steps  are  small,
there  need  be  comparatively  little  thought  before  or  during  the
decision. The  most  sharply  contrasting  set  of  cases  is  High-High,
Cell (4). As this cell captures strategies that maximize overall decision
costs, it ought for our purposes to remain empty, or at least nearly so.
Fortunately it seems  to  be  represented  only  by  a  small  minority  of
people in actual life. Often those who fall in Cell (4) seem hopelessly
indecisive, but it is possible to imagine  people  thinking  that  High-
High  represents  a  norm  of  moral  responsibility,  or  that  (as  some
people  seem  to  think)  incurring  high  burdens  of  decision  is

13 

Second-Order  Decisions

something to relish. It is also possible to urge High-High  where  the
issue  is  extremely  important  and  where  there  is  no  other  way  of
ensuring  accuracy;  consider,  for  example,  the  decision  when  to
terminate  a war,  a decision that  may reasonably call for a great  deal
of deliberation both before and during the period of choice.

Cell (2) captures a common  aspiration  for  national  legislatures
and  for  ordinary  agents  who  prefer  their  lives  to  be  rule-bound.
Some institutions and agents spend a great deal of time choosing the
appropriate rules; but once  the  rules  are  in  place,  decisions  become
extremely simple, rigid, even mechanical.  Everyone knows  people of
this sort; they can  seem both  noble  and frustrating  precisely because
they follow rules to the letter. Legal formalism—the commitment to
setting out clear rules in advance and mechanical decision afterwards,
a commitment defended by Supreme Court Justices Hugo Black and
Antonin Scalia—is associated with cell (2).24

When  planning  is  important  and  when  a  large  number  of
decisions must be made,  cell  (2)  is  often  the  best  approach,  as  the
twentieth-century  movement  away  from  the  common  law,  and
toward  bureaucracy  and  simple  rules,  helps  to  confirm.  Individual
cases of unfairness may be tolerable if the  overall result is to prevent
the system from being overwhelmed by decisional demands. Cell (2)
is also likely to be the  best approach when  many  people are involved
and it is known  in  advance that  the  people  who  will  have  to  carry
out on-the-spot  decisions  constantly  change.  Consider  institutions
with many employees and a large turnover (the  army, entry levels of
large corporations, and so forth).  The  head of  an  organization  may
not  want  newly  recruited,  less-than-well-trained  people  to  make
decisions  for  the  firm:  rules  should  be  in  place  so  as  to  insure
continuity  and  uniform  level  of  performance.  On  the  other  hand,
the  fact  that  life will  confound  the  rules  often  produces  arguments
for  institutional  reform  in  the  form  of  granting  power  to
administrators or employees to exercise “common  sense” in  the  face
of  rules.25 An  intermediate case can  be  found  with  most  standards;
the  creation of  the  standard may itself  require  substantial  thinking,

                                                
24 See Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation pp. 5-20.
25 See Phillip Howard, The  Death  of Common  Sense  12-51  (New  York:  Warner
Books, 1996).

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 14

but even when the standard is in  place, agents  may have to do some
deliberating in order to reach closure.

Cell (3) suggests that  institutions  and individuals sometimes do
little  thinking  in  advance  but  may  or  may  not  minimize  the
aggregate costs of  decision. The  best case for this approach involves
an  agent  who  lacks  much  information  or  seeks  for  some  other
reason to avoid responsibility, and a delegate who  promises to make
good  decisions  relatively  easily.  As  we  have  seen,  delegations  may
require little advance thinking, at least on the  substance of  the issues
to be decided; the burdens of decision will  eventually be faced by the
object  of  the  delegation.  Of  course  while  some  delegations  are
almost automatic (say, in a family), some people think long  and hard
about  whether  and  to  whom  to  delegate.  Also,  some  people  who
have  been  delegated  power  will  proceed  by  rules,  presumptions,
standards,  small  steps,  picking,  or  even  subdelegations.  Note  that
small steps might be seen as an effort to “export” the costs of decision
to  one’s  future  self;  this  is  related  to  an  important  theme  in  the
common law, and an aspect that is highly valued by many judges.

It  is an  important  social  fact  that  many  people  are  relieved  of
the  burdens  of  decision  through  something  other  than  their  own
explicit wishes. Consider prisoners, the mentally handicapped, young
children, or (at some times and places) women;  in  a range  of  cases,
society  or  law  makes  a  second-order  decision  on  someone  else’s
behalf,  often  without  any  indication  of  that  person’s  own  desires.
The  usurpation of  another’s decisions,  or  second-order  decisions,  is
often based on a belief that the  relevant other  will  systematically err.
This  of  course  relates  to  the  notion  of  paternalism,  which  can  be
seen as frequently arising when there is delegation without consent.
In  some cases,  second-order  decisions  produce  something  best
described as  Medium-Medium,  with  imaginable  extensions  toward
Moderately  High-Moderately  Low, 
and  Moderately  Low-
Moderately High.  As  examples  consider  some  standards,  which,  it
will be recalled, structure first-order decisions but require a degree of
work  on  the  spot, with  the  degree depending on  the  nature  of  the
particular standard. But after understanding  the  polar cases,  analysis
of these intermediate cases is straightforward, and hence  we  will  not
undertake that analysis here.

15 

Second-Order  Decisions

We now  turn  to the  contexts in  which  agents  and institutions
will,  or  should,  follow  one  or  another  of  the  basic  second-order
strategies.

III.  Low-High
(with  Special  Reference  to  Delegation)

A. Informal and Formal Delegations

As a first approximation, a delegation is a second-order strategy
that  exports decision-making  burdens to someone  else,  in  an  effort
to reduce the agent’s burdens both before and at the  time of making
the  ultimate decision. A typical case involves an  agent  who  seeks to
avoid responsibility (for some strategic or ethical reason, or because of
a simple lack of information) and who identifies an available delegate
whom he trusts to make a good, right, or expert decision.

Informal delegations occur all the time. Thus,  for example, one
spouse may delegate to another  the  decision about  what  the  family
will eat for dinner, what  investments  to choose, or what  car to buy.
Such  delegations  often  occur  because  the  burdens  of  decision  are
high  for  the  agent  but  low  for  the  delegate,  who  may  have
specialized information, who may lack relevant biases or motivational
problems, or who  may not  mind  (and who  may even enjoy)  taking
responsibility for the decision in  question. (These  cases may then  be
more accurately captured as special cases of Low-Low.) The  intrinsic
burdens of having to make the decision are often counterbalanced by
the  benefits  of  having  been  asked  to  assume  responsibility  for  it
(though these may be costs rather than benefits in some cases). Thus
some  delegates  are  glad  to  assume  their  role;  this  is  important  to,
though  it  is  not  decisive  for,  the  ethical  issue  whether  to  delegate
(consider the question of justice within  the  family). And  there  is an
uneasy  line,  raising  knotty  conceptual  and  empirical  questions,
between a delegation and a division of  labor (consider the  allocation
of household duties). A key issue here is whether the recipient of  the
delegation has the authority to decline.

Government  itself is a large recipient of  delegated  decisions,  at
least if sovereignty is understood to lie in the citizenry. On  this view,
the  executive
institutions–-legislatures,  courts, 
various  public 
branch–-exercise  explicitly  or  implicitly  delegated  authority,  and
there  are  numerous  subdelegations,  especially  for  the  legislature,

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 16

environmental 

which  must  relieve  itself  of  many  decisional  burdens.  A  legislature
may delegate because it believes that  it lacks  information  about,  for
example, 
the
problems 
telecommunications  market;  the  result 
is  an  Environmental
Protection  Agency  or a Federal  Communications  Commission.  Or
the  legislature  may  have  the  information  but  find  itself  unable  to
forge a consensus on underlying  values about, for example, the  right
approach to affirmative action or to age discrimination.

changes 

or 

in 

Often a legislature lacks the time and the  organization  to make
the  daily decisions that  administrative agencies are  asked  to  handle;
consider the  fact  that  legislatures that  attempt  to  reconsider  agency
decisions often find themselves involved in weeks or even months  of
work, and fail to reach closure. Or the  legislature may be aware that
its  vulnerability  to  interest-group  pressures  will  lead  it  in  bad
directions,  and  it  may  hope  and  believe  that  the  object  of  the
delegation  will  be  relatively  immune.  Interest-group  pressures  may
themselves  produce  a  delegation,  as  where  powerful  groups  are
unable to achieve a clear victory in a legislature but are able to  obtain
a grant of authority to an administrative agency over which  they will
have power. The legislature may even want to avoid responsibility for
some  hard  choice,  fearing  that  decisions  will  produce  electoral
reprisal.  Self-interested  representatives  may  well  find  it  in  their
electoral self-interest to enact a vague or vacant  standard (“the public
interest,”  “reasonable  accommodation”  of  the  disabled,  “reasonable
regulation” of pesticides), and to delegate the  task of  specification to
someone  else,  secure  in  the  knowledge  that  the  delegate  will  be
blamed for problems in implementation.

B. When to Delegate

Delegation  deserves  to  be  considered  whenever  an  appropriate
and  trustworthy  delegate  is  available  and  there  is  some  sense  in
which  it seems undesirable for the  agent  to be making  the  decision
by himself. But obviously delegation can be a mistake—an abdication
of  responsibility, an  act of  unfairness, a recipe for more  rather  than
fewer errors, for even higher (aggregate) costs of  decision. And  since
delegation  is  only  one  of  a  number  of  second-order  strategies,  an
agent should usually consider other possibilities before delegating.

17 

Second-Order  Decisions

Compared  to  a  High-Low  approach,  a  delegation  will  be
desirable if the  legislature, or  the  delegator,  is  unable  to  generate  a
workable rule or presumption (and if anything it could come up with
would  be  costly  to  produce)  and  if  a  delegate  would  therefore  do
better on  the  merits. This  may be the  case on  a multimember body
that  is unable to reach agreement,  or when  an  agent  or  institution
faces a cognitive or motivational problem, such as weakness of will or
susceptibility to outside influences.  A delegation will also be favored
over High-Low  if the  delegator seeks to avoid responsibility for the
decision for political,  social,  or  other  reasons,  though  the  effort  to
avoid responsibility may also create problems of legitimacy, as when  a
legislator  relies  on  “experts”  to  make  value 
judgments  about
environmental protection or disability discrimination.

As compared with  small steps  or  picking,  a  delegation  may  or
may not  produce higher  total decision costs (perhaps the  delegate is
slow or a procrastinator). Even if the delegation does produce higher
total  decision  costs,  it  may  also  lead  to  more  confidence  in  the
eventual decisions,  at  least  if  reliable  delegates  are  available.  In  the
United  States,  for  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  has  a  high
degree of public respect and hence there is little pressure to eliminate
or  reduce  the  delegation.  But  a  delegate—a  friend,  a  spouse,  an
Environmental  Protection  Agency—may  prove  likely  to  err,  and  a
rule, a presumption, or small steps may emerge instead. Special issues
are  raised  in  technical  areas,  which  create  strong  arguments  for
delegation,  but  where  the  delegate’s  judgments  may  be  hard  to
oversee (even if they conceal controversial judgments  of value; return
to the EPA26).

There  is  also  the  independent  concern  for  fairness.  In  some
circumstances, it is unfair  to delegate to,  for  example,  a  friend  or  a
spouse  the  power  of  decision,  especially  but  not  only  because  the
delegate  is  not  a  specialist.  Issues  of  gender  equality  arise  when  a
husband delegates to his wife  all  decisions  involving  the  household
and  the  children,  even  if  both  husband  and  wife  agree  on  the
delegation.  Apart  from  this  issue,  a  delegation  by  one  spouse  to
another  may  well  seem  inequitable  if  (say)  it  involves  a  child’s
                                                
26 This is the basic theme  of  Marc  Roberts  et  al.,  The  Environmental  Protection
Agency:  Asking  the  Wrong  Questions  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  2d  ed.
1996).

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 18

problems with alcohol, because it is an  abdication of  responsibility, a
way  of  transferring  the  burdens  of  decision  to  someone  else  who
should not be forced to bear them alone.

the 

agency) 

(usually  an 

legitimacy  of  delegations 

In  institutional  settings,  there  is  an  analogous  problem  if  the
delegate 
lacks  political
administrative 
accountability  even  if  it  has  relevant  expertise.  The  result  is  the
continuing  debate  over 
to
administrative  agencies.27  Such  delegations  can  be  troublesome  if
they  shift  the  burden  of  judgment  from  a  democratically  elected
body  to  one  that  is  insulated  from  political  control.  What  we  are
adding here is that the longstanding  debate over delegations offers a
far  too  limited  sense  of  the  alternatives.  A  legislature  is  not
confronted  only  with  the  choice  whether  or not  to delegate;  if  the
legislature wants  to avoid the  degree  of  specificity  entailed  by  rule-
bound law, it might  instead enact  a presumption or take small  steps
(as,  for  example,  through  an  experimental  pilot  program).  Related
issues  are  raised  by  the  possibly  illegitimate  abdication  of  authority
when a judge delegates certain powers to law clerks (as is occasionally
alleged about Supreme Court justices) or to special masters who  are
expert  in  complex  questions  of  fact  and  law  (as  was  alleged  in
connection  with  a delegation of  factfinding  power  to  a  prominent
law  professor  in  the  Microsoft  litigation,  a  delegation  that  was
ultimately ruled invalid).

C.  Complications

Three  important  complications  deserve  comment.  First,  any
delegate may itself resort to making  second-order decisions, and it is
familiar to find  delegates undertaking  each  of the  strategies that  we
have  described.  Sometimes  delegates  prefer  High-Low  and  hence
generate rules; almost everyone knows that this is the  typical strategy
of  the  Internal  Revenue  Service.  Alternatively,  delegates  may  use
standards or proceed by small steps. This  is the  general approach  of
the  National  Labor Relations  Board, which  (strikingly) avoids  rules
whenever  it  can,  and  much  prefers  to  proceed  case-by-case.  Or  a
delegate  may  undertake  a  subdelegation.  Confronted  with  a
                                                
27 Compare David Schoenbrod, Power  Without  Responsibility  (New  Haven:  Yale
University  Press,  1995)  with  Jerry  Mashaw,  Chaos,  Greed,  and  Governance
(New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press,  1997).

19 

Second-Order  Decisions

delegation  from  her  husband,  a  wife  may  consult  a  sibling  or  a
parent. Asked by Congress to make hard choices, the  President  may
and  frequently  does  subdelegate  to  some  kind  of  commission,  for
some of  the  same reasons that  spurred  Congress  to  delegate  in  the
first instance. Of course a delegate may just pick.

The  second  complication  is  that  the  control  of  a  delegate
presents a potentially serious principal-agent problem. How  can  the
person who  has  made  the  delegation  ensure  that  the  delegate  will
not  make serious and numerous mistakes, or instead fritter  away  its
time  trying  to  decide  how  to  decide?  There  are  multiple  possible
mechanisms  of  control.  Instead  of  giving  final  and  irreversible
powers of choice to the  delegate, a person or institution  might  turn
the delegate into a mere consultant  or advice-giver. A wide range  of
intermediate relationships is possible. In  the  governmental  setting,  a
legislature can influence the ultimate decision by voicing its concerns
publicly  if  an  administrative  agency  is  heading  in  the  wrong
direction,  and  the 
legislature  has  the  power  to  overturn  an
administrative agency  if it can  muster the  will  to  do  so.  Ultimately
the delegator may retain the  power  to eliminate the  delegation, and
to ensure against (what the delegator would consider to be) mistakes,
it may be sufficient  for the  delegate to know  this  fact.  In  informal
relations,  involving  friends,  colleagues,  and  family  members,  there
are  various  mechanisms  for  controlling  any  delegate.  Some
“delegates” know  that  they  are  only  consultants;  others  know  that
they have the effective power of decision. All this happens through  a
range of cues, which may be subtle.

The  third complication stems from  the  fact  that  at the  outset,
the  burdens of  a second-order decision  of  this  kind  may  not  be  so
low  after all, since the  person  or  institution  must  take  the  time  to
decide  whether  to  delegate  at  all  and  if  so,  to  whom  to  delegate.
Complex issues may arise  about  the  composition  of  any  institution
receiving  the  delegation;  these  burdens  may  be  quite  high  and
perhaps  decisive  against  delegation  altogether.  A  multimember
institution  often  divides  sharply  on  whether  to  delegate  and  even
after  that  decision  is  made,  it  may  have  trouble  deciding  on  the
recipient of the delegated authority.

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 20

D. Intrapersonal Delegations and Delegation to Chance

Thus  far we  have been  discussing cases in  which  the  delegator
exports the burdens of decision to some other party. What  about the
intrapersonal  case?  On  the  one  hand,  there  is  no  precise  analogy
between that problem  and the  cases under discussion. On  the  other
hand, people confronted with  hard choices can  often  be understood
to have chosen to delegate the power of choice  to their future selves.
Consider, for example, such decisions as whether  to buy a house, to
have another child, to get married or divorced, to move to a new city;
in such cases agents who procrastinate may understand themselves to
have delegated the decision to their future selves.

There  are  two  possible  reasons  for  this  kind  of  intrapersonal
delegation,  involving  timing  and  content  respectively.  You  may
believe you know what the right decision is, but also believe it is not
the  right  time to be making  that  decision, or at least  not  the  right
time to announce it publicly. Alternatively, you may not  know  what
the  right  decision  is  and  believe  that  your  future  self  will  be  in  a
better position to  decide.  You  may  think  that  your  future  self  will
have  more  information,  suffer  less  or  not  at  all  from  cognitive
difficulties, bias, or motivational problems, or be in  a better position
to assume the  relevant responsibility. Perhaps  you  are  feeling  under
pressure, suffering from illness, or not sure of your judgment  just yet.
In  such cases, the  question of  intrapersonal, intertemporal choice  is
not  so  far  from  the  problem  of  delegation  to  others.  It  is  even
possible  to  see  some  overlapping  principal-agent  problems  with
similar mechanisms  of  control,  as people impose  certain  constraints
on  their  future  selves.  There  are  close  parallels  for  judges  and
legislators, who care a great deal about both timing and content,  and
who may wait for one or another reason.

From the  standpoint  of  the  agent,  then,  the  strategy  of  small
steps,  like  delay,  can  be  seen  as  a  form  of  delegation.  Also,  the
strategy of delegation itself may turn  into  that  of  picking when  the
delegate is a chance device. When I make my future decision depend
on  which  card  I  draw  from  my  deck  of  cards,  I’ve  delegated  my
decision to the random card-drawing mechanism, thereby effectively
turning my decision from choosing to picking.

21 

Second-Order  Decisions

IV.  High-Low
(with Special Reference to Rules and Presumptions)

We  have  seen  that  people  often  make  second-order  decisions
that  are themselves costly, simply in  order to reduce  the  burdens  of
later decisions in particular cases. This is the  most conventional  kind
of  precommitment  strategy.28 The  most promising  setting  for  rule-
bound precommitment  involves a large number  of  similar  decisions
and a need for advance planning  (as  opposed  to  improvisation).  In
such a setting,  the  occasional errors inevitably produced by  rules  are
likely  to  be  worth  incurring.  When  this  process  is  working  well,
there is much to do before the second-order decision has been  made,
but once the decision is in place, things are greatly simplified.29

A. Diverse Rules, Diverse Presumptions

We  have suggested that  rules  and  presumptions  belong  in  the
High-Low category, and  frequently this is true. But the  point  must
be  qualified;  some  rules  and  presumptions  do  not  involve  high
burdens  of  decision  before  the  fact.  For  example,  a  rule  might  be
picked rather than chosen—drive on the right-hand side of the road,
or spoons to the  right,  forks to the  left. Especially when  what  it  is
important  is to allow  all  actors  to  coordinate  on  a  single  course  of
conduct,  there  need  be  little  investment  in  decisions  about  the
content of the relevant  rule. A rule might  even be framed narrowly,
so  as  to  work  as  a  kind  of  small  step.  A  court  might  decide,  for
example, that a law excluding homosexuals from the armed services is
unconstitutional, and this decision might be framed as a rule; but the
court’s opinion  could be issued in  such a  way  as  to  leave  undecided
most other issues involving the  constitutional  status of  homosexuals.
Rules often  embody small steps. Of  course  the  same  points  can  be
made about presumptions, which  are sometimes picked  rather  than
chosen and which might be quite narrow.

                                                
28  See,  e.g.,  Elster;  Schauer.
29  See,  e.g.,  Elster  and  Schelling,  who  see  that  precommitment  strategies  are
often  appropriate,  but  who  do  not  discuss  the  choice  between  rules  and
alternative  candidates,  or  whether  some  other  second-order  strategy  might  be
better.

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 22

For  present  purposes  we  focus  on  situations  in  which  an
institution or an agent is willing to deliberate a good deal to generate
a  rule  or  a  presumption  that,  once  in  place,  turns  out  greatly  to
simplify  (without  impairing  and  perhaps  even  improving)  future
decisions.  This  is  a  familiar  aspiration  in  law  and  politics.  A
legislature might,  for example, decide in  favor  of  a  speed  limit  law,
partly in order to ensure coordination  among  drivers, and partly as a
result of a process of balancing various considerations about risks and
benefits. People are especially willing to expend a great deal of effort
to generate rules in  two  circumstances: (1) when  planning  and  fair
notice  are important  and (2) when  a large number  of  decisions will
be made.30

In  most well-functioning  legal systems, for example,  it  is  clear
what  is and what  is not  a crime. People  need  to  know  when  they
may be subject to criminal punishment  for what  they  do. In  theory
if not  in  practice, the  American  Constitution  is  taken  to  require  a
degree  of  clarity  in  the  criminal  law,  and  every  would-be  tyrant
knows  that  rules may be  irritating  constraints  on  his  authority.  So
too, the law of contract and property is mostly defined by clear rules,
simply  because  people  could  not  otherwise  plan,  and  in  order  for
economic development to be possible they need to be in a position to
do so. When large numbers of  decisions have to be made, there  is a
similar tendency to spend a great deal of time to clarify outcomes in
advance. In  the  United States, the  need to make a large number  of
decisions has pushed the  legal system into  the  development of  rules
governing  social  security  disability,  workers’  compensation,  and
criminal sentencing.  The  fact  that  these  rules produce  a  significant
degree of  error  is  not  decisive;  the  sheer  cost  of  administering  the
relevant  systems,  with  so  massive  a  number  of  decisions,  makes  a
certain number of errors tolerable.

Compared to rules,  standards  and  “soft”  presumptions  serve  to
reduce  the  burdens  of  decision  ex  ante  while  increasing  those
burdens at the  time of  decision. This  is  both  their  virtue  and  their
vice. Consider, for  example,  the  familiar  strategy  of  enacting  rigid,
rule-like environmental regulations while  at the  same time allowing
a “waiver” for  special  circumstances.  The  virtue  of  this  approach  is
                                                
30 See Louis Kaplow, “Rules and Standards:  An  Economic  Analysis,”  42  Duke
LJ (1992, supra.

23 

Second-Order  Decisions

that  the  rigid rules will  likely produce  serious  mistakes—high  costs,
low  environmental  benefits—in  some  cases;  the  waiver  provision
allows  correction  in  the  form  of  an  individualized  assessment  of
whether  the  statutory  presumption  should  be  rebutted.  The
potential  vice  of  this  approach  is  that  it  requires  a  fair  degree  of
complexity in a number of  individual cases. Whether  the  complexity
is  worthwhile  turns  on  a  comparative  inquiry  with  genuine  rules.
How much  error would  be produced by the  likely candidates? How
expensive  is  it  to  correct  those  errors  by  turning  the  rules  into
presumptions?

B. Of Institutions, Planning, and Trust

Often institutions are faced with the  decision whether  to adopt
a High-Low  strategy or instead to delegate. We  have seen contexts
in  which  a delegation is better. But in  three  kinds of  circumstances
the  High-Low  approach is to be preferred. First, when  planning  is
important,  it  is  important  to  set  out  rules  (or  presumptions)  in
advance. The  law  of property  is  an  example.  Second,  there  is  little
reason to delegate when the agent or institution has a high degree of
confidence  that  a  rule  (or  presumption)  can  be  generated  at
reasonable cost, that  the  rule (or presumption) will  be accurate, and
that  it will  actually be followed.  Third,  and  most  obviously,  High-
Low  is better when  no  trustworthy  delegate is available, or when  it
seems  unfair  to  ask  another  person  or  institution  to  make  the
relevant  decision.  Liberal  democracies  take  these  considerations  as
special reasons to justify rules in the context of criminal law: The law
defining  crimes  is  reasonably  rule-like,  partly  because  of  the
importance  of  citizen  knowledge  about  what  counts  as  a  crime,
partly because of a judgment that police officers and courts cannot be
trusted to define the  content  of  the  law.  Generally legislatures tend
in  the  direction  of  rule-like  judgment  when  they  have  little
confidence in  the  executive; in  America, parts of the  Clean Air Act
are  a  prime  example  of  a  self-conscious  choice  of  High-Low  over
delegation.

When  would  High-Low  be  favored  over  Low-Low  (picking,
small  steps)?  The  interest  in  planning  is  highly  relevant  here  and
often  pushes in  the  direction of  substantial thinking  in  advance.  If
the agent or institution has faith in its ability to generate  a good rule

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 24

or presumption, it does not make much  sense to proceed by random
choice  or incrementally.  Hence  legislatures have often  displaced the
common law approach of  case-by-case judgment with  clear rules set
out  in  advance.  In  England  and  America,  this  has  been  a  great
movement  of  the  twentieth  century, largely  because  of  the  interest
in  planning  and  decreased  faith  in  the  courts’  ability  to  generate
good outcomes through  small  steps.  Of  course  mixed  strategies  are
possible. An institution may produce a rule to cover certain  cases but
delegate decision in  other  cases; or a delegate may  be  disciplined  by
presumptions and standards;  or  an  area  of  law,  or  practical  reason,
may be covered by some combination  of  rule-bound  judgment  and
small steps.

C. Private Decisions: Ordinary People,  Intrapersonal  Collective  Action
Problems,  and  Recovering  Addicts

Thus  far  we  have  been  stressing  public  decisions.  In  their
individual  capacity,  people  frequently  adopt  rules,  presumptions,  or
self-conscious  routines  in  order  to  guide  decisions  that  they  know
might,  in  individual  cases,  be  too  costly  to  make  or  be  made
incorrectly because of their own motivational problems. Sarah  might
decide, for example, that  she will  turn  down  all invitations for  out-
of-town  travel in  the  month  of  September, or John  might  adopt  a
presumption against going  to any weddings  or  funerals  unless  they
involve close family members, or Fred might  make up his mind  that
at dinner parties, he will drink whatever  the  host  is drinking.  Rules,
presumptions, and routines of  this kind are  an  omnipresent  feature
of practical reason; sometimes they are chosen self-consciously and as
an  exercise of  will,  but more often  they  are,  or  become,  so  familiar
and simple  that  they  appear  to  the  agent  not  to  be  choices  at  all.
Problems  arise  when  a  person  finds  that  he  cannot  stick  to  his
resolution,  and  thus  High-Low  may  turn  into  High-High,  and
things may be as if the  second-order decision had not  been  made at
all.

Some  especially  important  cases  involve  efforts  to  solve  the
kinds  of  intertemporal,  intrapersonal  problems  that  arise  when
isolated, small-step first-order decisions  are  individually  rational  but
produce harm to the individual when  taken  in  the  aggregate. These
cases might be described as involving  “intrapersonal collective action

25 

Second-Order  Decisions

problems.”31 Consider, for example, the decision to smoke a cigarette
(right  now),  or  to  have  chocolate  cake  for  desert,  or  to  have  an
alcoholic drink after dinner, or to gamble on  weekends.  Small steps,
which  are  rational  choices  when  taken  individually  and  which
produce net benefits when taken  on  their own,  can  lead to harm  or
even disaster when  they accumulate. There  is  much  room  here  for
second-order  decisions.  As  a  self-control  strategy,  a  person  might
adopt  a  rule:  cigarettes  only  after  dinner;  no  gambling,  ever;
chocolate  cake  only  on  holidays;  alcohol  only  at  parties  when
everyone else is drinking. But a presumption might work better – for
example, a presumption against chocolate  cake,  with  the  possibility
of  rebuttal on  special occasions,  when  celebration  is  in  the  air  and
the cake looks particularly good.

Well-known private agencies designed to help people with  self-
control  problems (Alcoholics’ Anonymous,  Gamblers’  Anonymous)
have as their business the  development of second-order strategies of
this general kind. The most striking cases involve recovering addicts,
but people who  are  not  addicts,  and  who  are  not  recovering  from
anything,  often  make  similar  second-order  decisions.  When  self-
control  is  particularly  difficult  to  achieve,  an  agent  may  seek  to
delegate instead. Whether  a delegation (Low-High)  is preferable to
a  rule  or  presumption  (High-Low)  will  depend  in  turn  on  the
various considerations discussed above.

V. Low-Low
(with Special Reference to Picking and Small Steps)

A.  Equipoise,  Responsibility,  and  Commitment

Why  might  an  institution  or  agent  pick  rather  than  choose?
When  would  small steps be best? At  the  individual  level,  it  can  be
obvious that  when  you are  in  equipoise,  you  might  as  well  pick;  it
simply  is  not  worthwhile  to  go  through  the  process  of  choosing,
with  its  high  cognitive  or  emotional  costs.  As  we  have  seen,  the
result can  be picking in  both  low-stakes  (cereal  choices)  and  high-
stakes (employment opportunities) settings. Picking can even be said
to operate as a kind of delegation, where the object of  the  delegation
                                                
31  Cf.  Thomas  Schelling,  “Self-Command  in  Practice,  in  Policy,  and  in  a
Theory of Rational Choice,” Am. Econ. Rev. 74 (1984): 1-22.

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 26

is “fate,” and the  agent  loses  the  sense  of  responsibility  that  might
accompany  an  all-things-considered  judgment.  Thus  some  people
sort out hard questions by resorting to a chance device (like flipping a
coin).

Small  steps, unlike a  random  process,  are  a  form  of  choosing.
Students  in  high  schools tend  to  date in  this spirit, at least most of
the  time; often  adults do too. Newspapers and magazines offer  trial
subscriptions; the  same is true for  book  clubs.  Often  advertisers  (or
for  that  matter  prospective  romantic  partners)  know  that  people
prefer  small  steps  and  they  take  advantage  of  that  preference  (“no
commitments”).  In  the  first  years  of  university,  students  need  not
commit  themselves to any particular  course  of  study;  they  can  take
small  steps  in  various  directions,  sampling  as  they  choose.  Typical
cases  for  small  steps  thus  involve  a  serious  risk  of  unintended  bad
consequences  because  of  a  disproportion  between  the  paucity  or
dearth  of  information  and  the  magnitude  of  the  decision;  hence
reversability is especially important.

On  the  institutional  side,  consider  lotteries  for  both  jury  and
military service. The  appeal  of  a  lottery  for  jury  service  stems  from
the  relatively low  costs of  operating  the  system  and  the  belief  that
any  alternative  device  for  allocation  would  produce  more  mistakes,
because it would  depend  on  a  socially  contentious  judgment  about
who should  be serving on juries, with  possibly destructive results for
the jury system itself. The key point is that the jury is supposed to be
a cross-section of the community, and a random  process seems to be
the  best  way  of  serving  that  goal  (as  well  as  the  fairest  way  of
apportioning  what  many  people regard as a social burden).  In  light
of  the  purposes  of  the  jury  system,  alternative  allocation  methods
serve,  an
would  be  worse;  consider  stated  willingness 
individualized inquiry into grounds for excuse, or financial  payments
(either  to  serve  or  not  to  serve).  For  military  service,  related
judgments are involved, in the form of a belief that any stated criteria
for service might be morally suspect, and hence  a belief that  random
outcomes produce less in the way of error.32

to 

                                                
32  On  ethical  and  political  issues  associated  with  lotteries  in  general,  see  Jon
Elster,  Solomonic  Judgments  36-122  (Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press
1993).

27 

Second-Order  Decisions

B. Change, Unintended Consequences, and Reversibility

Lotteries involve random processes; small steps do not.  We  have
said  that  Anglo-American  judges  often  proceed  case-by-case,  as  a
way of minimizing the burdens of  decision and the  consequences of
error. In  fact  many  legal cultures embed a kind of norm  in  favor of
incremental  movement.  They  do  this  partly  because  of  the
distinctive  structure  of  adjudication  and  the  limited  information
available to the  judge: in  any particular case, a judge  will  hear  from
the  parties  immediately  affected,  but  little  from  others  whose
interests might be at stake. Hence there is a second-order decision in
favor of small steps.

Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  court  in  a  case  involving  a
particular  patient  seeking  a  “right  to  die”  finds  that  it  has  little
information;  if  the  court  attempted  to  generate  a  rule  that  would
cover  all  imaginable  situations  in  which  that  right  might  be
exercised, the case would take a very long time to decide. Perhaps  the
burdens of  decision would  be prohibitive. This  might  be so  because
of a sheer lack of information, or it might be because of the  pressures
imposed  on  a  multimember  court  consisting  of  people  who  are
unsure or  in  disagreement  about  a  range  of  subjects.  Such  a  court
may have a great deal of difficulty in reaching  closure on  broad rules.
Small steps are a natural result.

When judges proceed by small steps, they do so precisely because
they know that their rulings  create precedents; they want  to narrow
the  scope  of  future  applications  of  their  rulings  given  the  various
problems  described  above,  most  importantly  the  lack  of  sufficient
information  about  future  problems.  A  distinctive  problem  involves
the possibility of too much information. A particular case may have a
surplus  of  apparently  relevant  details,  and  perhaps  future  cases  will
lack one or more of the relevant features, and this will  be the  source
of  the  concern  with  creating  wide  precedents.  The  existence  of
(inter  alia) features  X  or  Y  in  case  A,  missing  in  case  B,  makes  it
hazardous to generate a rule in case A that would govern case B. The
narrow writing and reception of the Supreme Court’s decision in the
celebrated  Amish  case,  allowing  an  exemption  of  Amish  children
from mandatory public schooling, is an example.

Small  steps  can  also  make  special  sense  if  circumstances  are
changing  rapidly.  Perhaps  relevant  facts  and  values  will  change  in

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 28

such a way  as to make a rule quickly anachronistic  even if it  is  well
suited  to  present  conditions.  Thus  it  is  possible  that  any  decision
involving  the  application  of 
to  new
communications  technologies,  including  the  Internet,  should  be
narrow, because a broad decision, rendered at this time, would  be so
likely to go wrong.  On  this view, a small step is best because of  the
likelihood that a broad rule would be mistaken when applied to cases
not before the court.

first  amendment 

the 

In  an  argument  very  much  in  this  spirit,  Joseph  Raz  has
connected  a  kind  of  small  step—the  form  usually  produced  by
analogical  reasoning—to  the  special  problems  created  by  one-shot
interventions  into  complex systems.33 In  Raz’ view, courts reason by
analogy  in  order  to  prevent  unintended  side-effects  from  large
disruptions.  Similarly  supportive  of  the  small-step  strategy,  the
German  psychologist Dietrich Dorner  has  done  some  illuminating
computer experiments designed to see whether people can  engage  in
successful  social  engineering.34 
Participants  are  asked  to  solve
problems  faced  by  the  inhabitants  of  some  region  of  the  world.
Through  the  magic  of  the  computer,  many  policy  initiatives  are
available  to  solve  the  relevant  problems  (improved  care  of  cattle,
childhood  immunization,  drilling  more  wells).  But  most  of  the
participants produce eventual calamities, because they  do  not  see the
complex,  system-wide  effects  of  particular  interventions.  Only  the
rare participant is able to see a number  of steps  down  the  road—to
understand  the  multiple  effects  of  one-shot  interventions  on  the
system.  The  successful  participants  are  alert  to  this  risk  and  take
small, reversible steps, allowing  planning  to occur over time. Hence
Dorner,  along  with  others  focussing  on  the  problems  created  by
interventions  into  systems,35  argues  in  favor  of  small  steps.  Judges
face similar problems, and incremental  decisions  are  a  good  way  of
responding to the  particular problem of  bounded  rationality  created
by ignorance of possible adverse effects.

From  these  points  we  can  see  that  small  steps  may  be  better
than  rules  or  than  delegation.  Often  an  institution  lacks  the
                                                
33 Joseph Raz, The Authority of Law  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1985).
34 See Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure (1994).
35  See  James  Scott,  Seeing  Like  a  State  (New  Haven:  Yale  University  Press,
1998).

29 

Second-Order  Decisions

information  to  generate  a  clear  path  for  the  future;  often  no
appropriate  delegate  has  that  information.  If  circumstances  are
changing  rapidly, any rule or presumption might  be confounded  by
subsequent  developments.  What  is  especially  important  is  that
movement in any particular direction should be reversible if problems
arise. On the other hand, a small steps approach embodies a kind of
big (if temporary)  decision  in  favor  of  the  status  quo;  a  court  that
tries to handle a problem of  discrimination incrementally  may allow
unjust practices to continue, and so too with  a state that  is trying  to
alleviate  the  problem  of  joblessness  in  poor  areas.  A  small  steps
approach might also undermine planning and fail to provide advance
notice of the content of law  or policy. Thus  it cannot  be said that  a
small  steps  approach  is,  in  the  abstract,  a  rational  approach  to
bounded  rationality36;  whether  it  is  a  (fully  optimal)  response  to
bounded  rationality,  or  a  (suboptimal)  reflection  of  bounded
rationality, depends on the context.

The  analysis  is  similar  outside  of  the  governmental  setting.
Agents  might  take  small  steps  because  they  lack  the  information
that  would  enable  them  to  generate  a  rule  or  presumption,  or
because the decision they face is unique and not likely to be repeated,
so that there is no reason for a rule or a presumption. Or small steps
may follow  from  the  likelihood of  change  over time,  from  the  fact
that  a large decision might  have unintended  consequences, or  from
the wish to avoid or at least to defer the  responsibility for large-scale
change.   

                                                
36  In  one  form  or  other,  small  steps  are  favored  in  Scott,  supra  note;  Edward
Levi, An  Introduction  to Legal  Reasoning  3-15  (Chicago:  University  of  Chicago
Press,  1949);  Alexander  Bickel,  The  Least  Dangerous  Branch  (New  Haven:  Yale
University  Press,  1962).  These  discussions  fail,  however,  to  notice  that  there
are  circumstances  in  which  a  form  of  High-Low  is  preferable,  as  where
advanced planning is necessary; consider the areas of property and contract  law,
where a high degree of certainty is extremely  important.  Thus  those  who  favor
Low-Low  tend  to  share  the  problem  with  those  who  favor  High-Low,  see
Scalia,  supra  note;  they  appear  not  to  see  that  the  virtues  and  vices  of  any
particular  second-order  strategy  depend  on  context  and  on  the  competence  of
relevant  institutions,  and  cannot  rest  on  a  priori  arguments.

Table 2: Second-Order Strategies

Strategies

Examples

Potential Advantages

Potential Disadvantages

Appropriate  Context

1.  low-high:
delegation

spouses,  friends;
administrative
agencies

relief from direct
responsibility  for
ultimate decisions;
increased chance for
good outcomes

Anglo-American
common law;
lotteries;  big
personal
decisions

low  overall  costs;
reversibility;  coping
with change and with
unintended
consequences

problems relating to trust,
fairness,  and
responsibility;  possible
high  costs  in  deciding
whether and to whom to
delegate

difficulty  of  planning;
high aggregate decision
costs; multiple mistakes

speed limit laws;
legal  formalism;
criminal  law;
recovering
addicts; rigid
people

certain  Henry
James characters;
dysfunctional
governments

low costs of numerous
decisions  once  in
place;  uniformity;
facilitates  planning

difficulty of generating
good rules or
presumptions;  mistakes
once in place

none  (unless  decision
costs are actually
pleasant to incur and
decisions end up being
good)

paralysis;  unpopularity;
individual  or  institutional
collapse

2.  low-low:
picking,  small
steps,  various
heuristics

3.  high-low:
rules,
presumptions,
routines

4.  high-high

availability of appropriate and
trustworthy  delegate;  high
burdens of, or perceived
likelihood  of  error  in,
decision by delegator

equipoise/ symmetry of
preferences  or  values;
reasonable aversion to drastic
changes; reasonable fear of
unanticipated consequences

sheer number of anticipated
decisions/  decisionmakers;
repetitive nature of future
decisions;  need  for  planning,
confidence in ability to
generate ex ante decisions

agency  or  institution  cannot
do otherwise

30

31

Second-Order  Decisions

VI. Summary and Conclusions

A. Second-Order Strategies

The discussion is summarized in  Table 2. Recall that  the  terms
“low” and “high” refer to the  overall costs of  the  decision, which  are
not  necessarily borne  by the  same agent: with  Low-High  the  costs
are split between  delegator and delegate; with  High-Low  they  may
be split between  an  institution  (which  makes the  rules, say) and  an
agent (who follows the rules).

There  are  two  principal  conclusions.  The  first  is  that  no
second-order  strategy  can  reasonably  be  preferred  in  the  abstract.
The second is that it is possible to identify the settings in  which  one
or another is likely to make sense, and also the  factors that  argue in
favor of, or against, any particular approach.

B. Do People Actually Make Second-Order Decisions? Should They?

There  remains  an  important  underlying  issue:  do  people,  or
institutions,  actually  make  a  self-conscious  decision  about  which
second-order strategy to favor, given the menu of possibilities?

Sometimes  this  is  indeed  the  case.  A  legislature  may,  for
example,  deliberate  and  decide  to  delegate  rather  than  to  generate
rules; a court may choose, self-consciously, to proceed incrementally;
having  rejected  the  alternatives,  a  President  may  recommend  a
lottery  system  rather  than  other  alternatives  for  admitting  certain
aliens to the  country.  An  institution  or a person may well  make  an
all-things-considered  decision  in  favor  of  one  or  another  second-
order strategy.

Sometimes,  however,  a rapid  assessment  of  the  situation  takes
place,  rather  than  a  full  or  deliberative  weighing  of  alternative
courses of  action.  This  is often  the  case  in  private  decisions,  where
judgments  often  seem  immediate.  Indeed,  second-order  decisions
might be too costly if they were a product of  an  optimizing strategy;
so  taken,  they  would  present  many  of  the  problems  of  first-order
decisions. As in the case of  first-order decisions, it sometimes makes
sense to proceed with  what  seems best, rather than  to  maximize  in
any systematic fashion, simply because the former way  of  proceeding
is easier (and thus  may maximize once  we  consider decision costs of
various  kinds).  For  both  individuals  and  institutions,  the  salient
features of  the  context  usually  suggest  a  particular  kind  of  second-

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 32

order strategy; there  is no  reason to think  long  and  hard  about  the
second-order decision.

These  are intended  as descriptive points about the  operation of
practical  reason.  But  there  is  a  normative  issue  here  as  well,  for
people’s  second-order  decisions  often  go  wrong.  People  tend  to
make mistakes when  they  choose strategies a priori; and  often  they
would  do better to be self-conscious and reflective about the diverse
possibilities. For example, legal formalists,  most  prominently  Justice
Antonin  Scalia,  argue  for  a  High-Low  strategy,  but  they  do  so
without  engaging  the  pragmatic  and  empirical  issues  at  stake,  and
without  showing  that  this  strategy  is  preferable  to  the  realistic
second-order alternatives.37

The  same  can  be  said  about  those  who  argue  that  rules  can
promote  consequentialism  indirectly38  and  also  those  who  favor
incrementalism,  or  small  steps,  in  political  or  legal  reasoning.39
There  are  many  ways  of  handling  decisional  burdens,  and  others
may be better.

Pathologically  rigid rules can  be a serious  problem  for  law  and
policy;  the  Sentencing  Guidelines  are  often  criticized  on  this
ground, and whether or not the criticism is just, pathological rigidity
is a problem for societies as well as individuals. Sometimes  delegation
is a most unfortunate route to travel.

At the political level, and occasionally at the individual level too,
it would be much better to be more explicit and self-conscious about
the various alternatives, so as to ensure that  societies and institutions
do  not  find  themselves  making  bad  second-order  decisions,  or
choosing  a second-order strategy without  a sense of  the  candidates.
We  have  attempted  to  systematize  the  underlying  considerations
here.

                                                
37 See Antonin Scalia, A Matter of Interpretation pp. 5-24. Schauer  sees  that  the
choice  of  formalism  must  be  largely  based  on  empirical  considerations,  but  he
does not identify alternative second-order possibilities or show how  they  might
be compared to rule-bound law.
38  See  Johnson.  Nothing  said  here  shows  that  Johnson  is  wrong;  it  shows  only
that  a  full  defense  of  using  rules  as  a  way  of  promoting  consequentialist  goals
would  have  to  grapple  with  various  second-order  alternatives  (such  as
presumptions  or  standards).
39 See Edward Levi, supra note, at 3-7; Lindblom, supra note.

33

Second-Order  Decisions

C.  Rationality  and  Bounded  Rationality

Second-order  decisions  are  often  a  response  to  a  particular
source  of  bounded  rationality:  limited  information.  As  we  have
emphasized, second-order strategies are potentially optimal solutions
to the problems posed by unanticipated side-effects and the  difficulty
of obtaining knowledge about the future. Or they may respond to an
institution’s  awareness  that  it  is  prone  to  use  unreliable  heuristic
devices  when  a  decision  must  be  made  on  the  spot.  In  addition,
second-order  strategies  may  be  a  response  to  motivational  rather
than cognitive problems; people try, for example, to counteract  their
own  tendencies  toward  impulsiveness,  myopia,  and  unrealistic
optimism.40  In  these  ways  second-order  decisions  can  be  seen  as
rational responses by rational actors making those decisions with  full
awareness of  the  costs  of  obtaining  information  and  of  their  own
propensities for error.

But  of  course  bounded  rationality  can  affect  second-order
decisions as well. When  rational actors make second-order decisions
to  overcome  their  own  bounded  rationality,  these  decisions  may
themselves  be  made  badly,  as  a  result  of  informational  and
motivational problems. A lack of  information  may press people  and
institutions in the direction of suboptimal second-order strategies; an
inadequately  informed  court,  for  example,  may  choose  small  steps
even though  rules would  be better. We  suspect  that  the  availability
heuristic—by which  people make judgments  by focusing  on  similar
cases  that  come  readily  to  mind—underlies  some  erroneous
judgments  about  appropriate  second-order  strategies.41  Bad  second-
order  decisions  can  also  be  a  result  of  motivational  problems.  An
impulsive or myopic agent or institution may fail to see the  extent  to
which  rules  will  be  confounded  by  subsequent  developments;  an
unrealistically  optimistic  agent  or  institution  may  overestimate  its
                                                
40  See  Neil  Weinstein,  “Unrealistic  Optimism  About  Susceptibility  to  Health
Problems,”  J.  Behavioral  Medicine  10  (1987):  481-512, 
for  a  general
discussion.
41  Cf.  Itzhak  Gilboa  and  David  Schmeidler,  “Case-Based  Decision  Theory,”
Q.  J.  Econ.  110  (1995)  605-34;  Daniel  Kahneman  and  Don  Lovallo,  Timid
Choices and Bold Forecasts: A  Cognitive  Perspective  on  Risk  Taking,  Mgmt.
Sci. 39 (1993): 17-35.

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 34

capacity  to  make  optimal  small  steps.  Thus  people  may  choose
second-order  strategies  that  badly  disserve  their  own  goals,  as,  for
example,  when  people  rely  on  heuristic  devices  that  produce
mistakes.42

D.  Conclusion

Ordinary people and official  institutions  are  often  reluctant  to
make  on-the-spot  decisions;  they  respond  with  one  or  another
second-order strategy. The  diverse  candidates  raise  separable  ethical
and  political  problems.  Some  such  strategies  involve  high  initial
burdens but generate a relatively simple, low-burden  mechanism  for
deciding  subsequent  cases.  These  strategies,  generally  taking  the
form  of  rules  or  presumptions,  are  best  when  the  anticipated
decisions are numerous and repetitive and when  advance notice  and
planning are important.

Other  strategies  involve  both  light  initial  burdens  and  light
burdens  at  the  time  of  making  the  ultimate  decision.  These
approaches work  well  when  a degree of  randomization  is  appealing
on  normative  grounds  (perhaps  because  choices  are  otherwise  in
equipoise,  or  because  no  one  should  or  will  take  responsibility  for
deliberate  decision),  or  when  a  first-order  decision  is  simply  too
difficult  to  make  (because  of  the  cognitive  or  emotional  burdens
involved in  the  choice)  or  includes  too  many  imponderables  and  a
risk of large unintended consequences. A key point  in  favor of  small
steps involves reversibility.

Still  other  strategies  involve  low  initial  burdens  but  high,
exported  burdens  at  the  time  of  decision,  as  when  a  delegation  is
made to another  person or institution,  or  (in  a  metaphor)  to  one’s
future self. Delegations take many different forms, with  more or  less
control retained by the  person or institution  making  the  delegation.
Strategies of delegation make sense when a delegate is available who
has  relevant  expertise  (perhaps  because  he  is  a  specialist)  or  is
otherwise trustworthy (perhaps because he  does not  suffer from  bias
or  some  other  motivational  problem),  or  when  there  are  special
political, strategic, or  other  advantages  to  placing  the  responsibility
for  decision  on  some  other  person  or  institution.  Delegations  can

                                                
42 See Khong for suggestive examples.

35

Second-Order  Decisions

raise  serious  ethical  or  political  issues  and  create  problems  of
unfairness, as when  delegates are burdened with  tasks  that  they  do
not  voluntarily assume, or would not  assume  under  just  conditions,
and when  the  delegation is inconsistent  with  the  social  role  of  the
delegator, such as a legislature or a court. Hence  delegations can  be
troubling  from  the  point  of  view of  democracy or the  separation  of
powers.

The  final  set of  cases involve high  burdens both  before  and  at
the time of  decision, as in  certain fictional  characters, and in highly
in  the
dysfunctional  governments.  We  have  merely  gestured 
direction  of  this  strategy,  which  may  make  sense  under  extreme
circumstances, but which  generally  can  be  considered  best  only  on
the  assumption that  bearing  high  overall  burdens  of  decision  is  an
affirmative good (perhaps for  moral  reasons)  or  even  something  to
relish.  This  assumption  might  appear  peculiar,  but  it  undoubtedly
helps  explain  some  otherwise  puzzling  human  behavior—behavior
that  often  provides  the  motivation  to  consider  the  other,  more
promising second-order decisions discussed here.

Chicago  Public  Law  and  Legal  Theory  Working  Paper 36

Forthcoming  in  Ethics. Published in  the  Chicago  Public  Law  and
Legal Theory Working Paper Series with permission.

Readers with comments should address them to:

Cass R. Sunstein
Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor of Jurisprudence
The University of Chicago Law School
1111 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637

