University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2001

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and
Law
Cass R. Sunstein

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working
Paper No. 138, 2001).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 138 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
Probability Neglect: 
Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law 
 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: 
http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
 
The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=292149

 

 

Preliminary draft 11/20/01 
All rights reserved 
 

Probability Neglect: 
Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law 
 
Cass R. Sunstein* 
 
 
Abstract 

 

 

When strong emotions are triggered by a risk, people show a remarkable tendency to neglect a 
small probability that the risk will actually come to fruition. Experimental evidence, involving 
electric shocks and arsenic, supports this claim, as does real-world evidence, involving responses 
to abandoned hazardous waste dumps, the pesticide Alar, and anthrax. The resulting “probability 
neglect”  has  many  implications  for  law  and  policy.  It  suggests  the  need  for  institutional 
constraints  on  policies  based  on  ungrounded  fears;  it  also  shows  how  government  might 
effectively  draw  attention  to  risks  that  warrant  special  concern.  Probability  neglect  helps  to 
explain the enactment of certain legislation, in which government, no less than ordinary people, 
suffers from that form of neglect. When people are neglecting the fact that the probability of harm 
is  small,  government  should  generally  attempt  to  inform  people,  rather  than  cater  to  their 
excessive  fear.  But  when  information  will  not  help,  government  should  respond,  at  least  if 
analysis  suggest  that  the  benefits  outweigh  the  costs.  The  reason  is  that  fear,  even  if  it  is 
excessive, is itself a significant problem, and can create additional significant problems. 

 

“If  someone  is  predisposed  to  be  worried,  degrees  of  unlikeliness  seem  to 
provide  no  comfort,  unless  one  can  prove  that  harm  is  absolutely  impossible, 
which itself is not possible.”1  

 
“[A]ffect-rich  outcomes  yield  pronounced  overweighting  of  small 

probabilities . . . .”2 

 
“On  Sept.  11,  Americans  entered  a  new  and  frightening  geography,  where 
the continents of safety and danger seemed forever shifted. Is it safe to fly? Will 
terrorists wage germ warfare? Where is the line between reasonable precaution 
and  panic?  Jittery,  uncertain  and  assuming  the  worst,  many  people  have 
answered  these  questions  by  forswearing air travel, purchasing gas masks and 
radiation detectors, placing frantic calls to pediatricians demanding vaccinations 
against exotic diseases or rushing out to fill prescriptions for Cipro, an antibiotic 
most experts consider an unnecessary defense against anthrax.”3 

                                                 

*Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor,  University  of  Chicago,  Law  School  and 
Department of Political Science. I am grateful to Christine Jolls, Eric Posner, Richard Posner, and 
Adrian  Vermeule  for  helpful  comments  on  a  previous  draft,  and  to  Martha  Nussbaum  for 
valuable discussion. 

1See John Weingart, Waste Is A Terrible Thing To Mind 362 (2001). 
2Yuval  Rottenstreich  and  Christopher  Hsee,  Money,  Kisses,  and  Electric  Shocks:  On  the 

Affective Psychology of Risk, 12 Psych Rev. 185, 188 (2001). 

3Erica  Goode,  Rational  and  Irrational  Fears  Combine  in  Terrorism's  Wake,  The  New  York 

Times, Oct. 2, 2001. 

 

I. Preface: Terrorism’s Aftermath 

 
 

 
 

 
 

This is an essay about the role of the emotions in producing responses to 
risks,  and  in  particular  about  how  strong  emotions  lead  people  to  neglect  the 
probability that a risk will come to fruition. I started writing the essay a few days 
before the terrorist attacks on Washington, DC and New York City on September 
11, 2001. It goes without saying that in the immediate aftermath of those attacks, 
people  became  exceedingly  frightened.  Many  people  were  saying,  “you  cannot 
be safe anywhere.” They were especially afraid to fly. In response to the attacks, 
new  security  measures  at  airports  were  imposed  at  airports.  There  was  a 
significant reduction in flying. One reason was simple fear. Another reason was 
the increased inconvenience (and to that extent cost, monetary and otherwise) of 
flying. Many people drove who would have flown; many others stayed at home. 

For those who study the topic of risk regulation, there are many things to 
say  about  this  state  of  affairs.  First,  safety  is  a  matter  of  degree;  it  is  foolish  to 
worry,  as  people  seemed  to  be  doing,  about  whether  they  are  “safe”  or  “not 
safe.” As a statistical matter, most people, in most places (not excluding airports), 
were  not  at  significantly  more  risk  after  the  attacks  than  they  were  before. 
Second,  the  result  of  the  new  security  measures  might  have  been  to  increase 
deaths on balance.4 It is entirely possible that the new measures saved no lives at 
all.  In  addition,  any  substitution  of  driving  for  flying  is  likely  to  cause  deaths, 
because  driving  is  a  less  safe  method  of  transportation.5  Perhaps  hundreds  of 
lives, on balance, will ultimately be lost as a result of the new security measures.6 
Third, the costs of the new measures might well outweigh the benefits. As noted, 
there might be no benefits at all. Once monetized, the various costs are likely to 
be  huge,  undoubtedly  in  the  billions.  The  sensible  technocrat  asks:  Should  we 
not, therefore,  reject  at  least some of the new security measures, on the ground 
that they fail both health-health balancing and cost-benefit balancing? 

It is not at all clear that the sensible technocrat is wrong. But things are not 
so  obvious.  People  were  afraid  to  fly,  and  they  demanded  stringent  security 
measures. Indeed few people publicly objected to them; it is hard to find a single 
person who was willing to launch a public objection on technocratic grounds. (It 
is  an  interesting  question  whether  people  objected  to  them  privately  and  were 

                                                 

4See Robert W. Hahn, The Economics of Airline Safety, 20 Harv. L. & Pub. Policy 791 (1997). 
5Id. 
6Id. 

 

2 

 

silencing  themselves,  and  if  so  exactly  why.7)  Perhaps  fewer  people  would  fly, 
and  more  people  would  die,  without  those  measures.  This  too  is  a  technical 
question. But the demand for stringent security measures itself reflected the fact 
that people would have felt distressed, or upset, or fearful if government did not 
respond. A failure to respond would itself have imposed costs. One point seems 
clear:  An  effort  to  assess  the  costs  of  airplane  crashes,  and  terrorism,  will  be 
ludicrously  incomplete  if  it  does  not  take  account  of  the  consequences  of 
emotional  reactions,  which  are  themselves  costs,  and  which  will  impose 
significant  additional  costs.  I  flew  myself,  about  a  week  after  the  attacks,  and 
while I believed that that the probability of danger was very low, I was not at all 
comfortable about flying, and the day before the flight was pretty miserable. 

 

II. Emotions, Probability Neglect, and the Worst Case 

 
On  the  conventional  view  of  rationality,  emotions,  as  such,  are  not  assessed 
independently;  they  are  not  taken  to  play  a  distinctive  role.8  Of  course  people 
might be risk-averse or risk-inclined. It is possible, for example, that people will 
be willing to pay  $100  to  eliminate a 1/1000 risk of losing $900. But analysts do 
not generally ask, or care, whether these dispositions are a product of emotions 
or something else.  

 
What can be said for the conventional view of rationality can also be said for 
prospect  theory,  a  less  conventional  view  about  decision  under  risk.9  Prospect 
theory  emphasizes  a  number  of  anomalies  in  people’s  reactions  to  risks.  For 
present  purposes,  what  is  most  important  is  that  prospect  theory  offers  an 
explanation for simultaneous gambling and insurance.10 When given the choice, 
many people will reject a certain gain of X in favor of a gamble with an expected 
value below X, if the gamble involves a small probability of riches. At the same 
time,  people  prefer  a  certain  loss  of  X  to  a  gamble  with  an  expected  value  less 
than  X,  if  the  gamble  involves  a  small  probability  of  catastrophe.11  If  expected 
utility  theory  is  taken  as  normative,  then  people  depart  from  the  normative 
theory  of  rationality  in  giving  excessive  weight  to  low-probability  outcomes 

                                                 

7See Timur Kuran, Private Truths, Public Lies (1997), for an account. 
8See, e.g., Richard Posner, Economic Analysis of Law ch. 1 (5th ed. 1999); J. Von Neumann and 

O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic Behavior (1944). 

9See  Daniel  Kahneman  and  Amos Tversky, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under 

Risk, in Choices, Values, and Frames 17 (Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky eds. 2001). 

10Id. at 14-15. 
11A  lucid  discussion,  with  applications  to  litigation,  is  Chris  Guthrie,  Framing  Frivolous 

Litigation, 67 U. Chi. L. Rev. 163 (2000). 

 

3 

 

when the stakes are high. But in making these descriptive claims, prospect theory 
does not set out a special role for emotions. Nor is this a puzzling oversight, if it 
counts  as  an  oversight  at  all.  For  many  purposes,  what  matters  is  what  people 
choose, and it is unimportant to know whether their choices depend on cognition 
or emotion, whatever may be the difference between these two terms. 

judgment  and  decisionmaking.12  With  some 

 
No one doubts, however, that in many domains, emotions have a large effect 
on 
low-probability  events, 
anticipated and actual emotions help to determine choice. Those who buy lottery 
tickets,  for  example,  often  fantasize  about  the  goods  associated  with  a  lucky 
outcome.13 With respect to risks of harm, many of our ordinary ways of speaking 
suggest  strong  emotions:  panic,  hysteria,  terror.  People  might  refuse  to  fly,  for 
example,  not  because  they  are  currently  frightened, but because they anticipate 
their own anxiety, and they want to avoid it. It is well known that people often 
decide as they do because they anticipate their own regret.14 The same is true for 
fear. Knowing that they will be afraid, people may refuse to travel to the Israel or 
South  Africa,  even  if  they  would  much  enjoy  seeing  those  nations  and  even  if 
they believe, on reflection, that their fear is not entirely rational. Recent evidence 
is  quite  specific.15  It  suggests  that  people’s  aversion  to  a  small  probability of an 
especially bad outcome is heightened when the outcome is “affect rich” – when it 
involves  not  simply  a  serious  loss,  but  one  that  produces  strong  emotions, 
including fear.16 

 
Drawing  on  and  expanding  this  evidence,  I  will  emphasize  a  single 
phenomenon  here.  Sometimes  people  focus  on  the  worst  possible  case,  which 
triggers  strong  emotions.  When  this  is  so,  people  fail  to  inquire  into  the 
probability that the worst case will occur. In such cases, emotions lead to what I 
will  call  probability  neglect,  which  is  properly  treated  as  a  form  of  quasi-
rationality.17 From the normative point of view, it is not fully rational to treat  a 
1% chance of X as equivalent, or nearly equivalent, to a 99% chance of X, or even 

                                                 

Emotions, 89 Geo. L. J. 1977, 1979-84 (2001). 

12George Loewenstein, Risk As Feelings, 127 Psych Bull 267 (2001); Eric Posner, Law and the 

13Philip Cook and Charles T. Clotfelter, Selling Hope (1991). 
14G. Loomes and R. Sugden, Regret Theory: An Alternative Theory of Rational Choice under 

Uncertainty, 92 Ec. Journal 805 (1982). 

15See  Yuval  Rottenstreich  and  Christopher  Hsee,  Money,  Kisses,  and  Electric  Shocks:  On  the 
Affective  Psychology  of  Probability  Weighting,  supra,  at  186–88;  Loewenstein  et  al.,  supra,  at 
276–78. 
16Id. 
17For the term, see Richard Thaler, Quasi-Rational Economics (1993). 

 

4 

 

a 10%  chance of X. Because people suffer from probability neglect, and because 
neglecting  probability  is  not  fully  rational,  the  phenomenon  I  identify  casts 
additional  doubt  on  the  widespread  idea  that  ordinary  people  have  a  kind  of 
“richer  rationality”  superior  to  that  of  experts.18  Most  of  the  time,  experts  are 
concerned  principally  with  the  number  of  lives  at  stake,19  and  for  that  reason 
they  will  be  closely  attuned,  as  ordinary  people  are  not,  to  the  issue  of 
probability. 

 
It  is  not  at  all  clear  how  the  law  should  respond  to  this  form  of  quasi-
rationality.  I  will  suggest  that  at  a  minimum,  an  understanding  of  probability 
neglect  will  help  to  understand  how  government  and  law  might  accomplish 
shared  social  goals.  If  government  wants  to  insulate  itself  from  probability 
neglect,  it  will  create  institutions  designed  to  ensure  that  genuine  risks,  rather 
than  tiny  ones,  receive  the  most  concern.  Such  institutions  will  not  require 
agencies to discuss the worst-case scenario.20 And if government is attempting to 
increase public concern with a genuine danger, it should not emphasize statistics 
and  probabilities,  but  should  instead  draw  attention  to  the  worst  case  scenario. 
An  understanding  of  probability  neglect  will  also  help  us  to  make  better 
predictions  about  the  public  “demand”  for  law.  When  a  bad  outcome  is  highly 
salient and triggers strong emotions, government will be asked to do something 
about it, even if the probability of the bad outcome is low.  

 
For  law,  the  most  difficult  questions  seem  to  be  normative  in  character. 
Should  government  respond  to  intense  fears  that  involve  statistically  remote 
risks? When people suffer from probability neglect, should law and policy do the 
same  thing?  I  suggest  that  if  it can, government should attempt to educate and 
inform people, rather than capitulating to unwarranted public fear. On the other 
hand, public fear, however unwarranted, may be intractable, in the sense that it 
is  impervious  to  efforts  at  reassurance.  And  if  public  fear  is  intractable,  it  will 
cause serious problems, because fear is itself extremely unpleasant, and because 
fear  is  likely  to  influence  conduct,  producing  (for  example)  wasteful  and 
excessive  private  precautions.  If  so,  a  governmental  response,  via  regulatory 

                                                 

18See Clayton Gillette and James Krier, Risk, Courts, and Agencies, 138 U Pa L Rev 1027, 1061-
1085 (1990) (defending the idea of competing rationalities). I do not mean to deny that some of 
the  time,  ordinary  people  care,  rationally,  about  values  that  experts  disregard.  All  I  mean  to 
suggest  is  that  insofar  as  people  focus  on  the  badness  of  the  outcome but not on its likelihood, 
they are thinking less clearly than experts, who tend to focus on the statistical deaths at stake. 

19See Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk 113 (2001). 
20See Edward Fitzgerald, The Rise and Fall of Worst Case Analysis, 18 Dayton L Rev 1 (1992). 

 

5 

 

safeguards,  would  appear  to  be  justified  if  the  benefits,  in  terms  of  fear 
reduction, justify the costs. 

 

III. Probability Neglect: The Basic Phenomenon 

 
Many  experiments  suggest  that  when  it  comes  to  risk,  a  key  question  is 
whether  people  can  imagine  or  visualize  the  “worst case” outcome.21 When the 
worst  case  produces  intense  fear,  little  role  is  played  by  the  stated  probability 
that that outcome will occur.22 An important function of strong emotions is thus 
to  drive  out  quantitative  judgments,  including  judgments  about  probability,  by 
making the best case or the worst case seem highly salient.23 By way of preface, 
however, it is important to note that a great deal of evidence shows that whether 
or  not  emotions  are  involved,  people  are  relatively  insensitive  to  differences  in 
probabilities, at least when the relevant probabilities are low. 

 
A. Insensitivity to Variations among Low Probabilities 
 
Do people care about probability at all? Of course they do. But some people, 
some  of  the  time,  show  a  remarkable  unwillingness  to  attend  to  that  issue. 
Several  studies  show  that  when  people  are  seeking  relevant  information,  they 
often do not try to learn about the issue of probability. One study, for example, 
finds that in deciding to purchase warranties for consumer products, people do 
not spontaneously point  to the probability of needing repair as a reason for the 
purchase.24 Another study finds that those making hypothetical risky managerial 
decisions  rarely  ask  for  data  on  probabilities.25  Perhaps  these  findings  reflect 
people’s  implicit  understanding  that  in  these  settings,  the  relevant  probability 
“low, but not zero,” and that finer distinctions are unhelpful. And indeed, many 
studies find that significant differences in (low) probabilities have little impact on 
decisions. This finding is in sharp conflict with the standard view of rationality, 
which  suggests  that  people’s willingness to pay for small risk reductions ought 
                                                 

21Loewenstein et al., supra note, at 275-76. 
22See Loewenstein, supra note; Yuval Rottenstreich and Christopher Hsee, Money, Kisses, and 
Electric  Shocks:  On  the  Affective  Psychology  of  Probability  Weighting,  supra,  at  186-88.  The 
availability heuristic is obviously relevant here, interacting in interesting ways with affect. 

23For a general argument that strong emotions can drive out other considerations, see George 
Loewenstein, A Visceral Account of Addiction, in Smoking: Risk, Perception, and Policy 188, 189-
95 (Paul Slovic ed. 2001) 

24Robin  Hogarth  and  Howard  Kunreuther,  Decision  Making  Under  Ignorance,  10  J  Risk  and 

25O. Hober et al., Active Information Search and Complete Information Presentation, 95 Acta 

Uncertainty 15 (1995).  

Psychologica 15 (1997). 

 

6 

 

to  be  nearly  proportional to the size of the reduction.26 In an especially striking 
study,  Kunreuther  and  his  coauthors  found  that  mean  willingness  to  pay 
insurance premiums did not vary among risks of 1 in 100,000, 1 in 1 million, and 
1  in  10  million.27  They  also  found  basically  the  same  willingness  to  pay  for 
insurance premiums for risks ranging from 1 in 650, to 1 in 6300, to 1 in 68,000.28  

 
The  study  just  described  involved  a  “between  subjects”  design;  subjects 
considered  only  one  risk,  and  the  same  people  were  not  asked  to  consider  the 
several  risks  at  the  same  time.  But  several  studies  have  a  “within  subjects” 
design,  and  even  here,  differences  in  low  probabilities  have  little  effect  on 
decisions. An early study examined people’s willingness to pay (WTP) to reduce 
travel fatality risks. The central finding was that the mean WTP to reduce fatality 
risk by 7/100,000 was merely 15% higher than the mean WTP to reduce the risk 
by  4/100,000.29  A  later  study  found  that  for  serious  injuries,  WTP  to  reduce  the 
risk  by  12/100,000  was  only  20%  higher  than  WTP  to  reduce  the  same  risk  by 
4/100,000.30  These  results  are  not  unusual.  Lin  and  Milon  attempted  to  elicit 
people’s  willingness  to  pay  to  reduce  the  risk  of  illness  from  eating  oysters.31 
There was little sensitivity to variations in probability of illness.32 A similar study 
found  little  change  in  WTP  across  probability  variations  involving  exposure  to 
pesticides residues  on fresh produce.33 A similar anomaly was found in a study 
involving hazardous wastes, where WTP actually decreased as the stated fatality 
risk reduction decreased.34  

 
There  is  much  to  say  about  the  general insensitivity to significant variations 
within the category of low-probability events. It would be difficult to produce a 
rational  explanation  for  this  insensitivity;  recall  the  standard  suggestion  that 

                                                 

26Phaedra  Corso  et  al.,  Valuing  Morality  Risk  Reduction:  Using  Visual  Aids  to  Improve  the 

Validity of Contingent Valuation, 23 J. Risk and Uncertainty 165, 166-68 (2001). 

27Howard Kunreuther et al., Making Low Probabilities Useful, 23 J Risk and Uncertainty 103, 

107 (2001). 

Papers 676 (1995). 

28Id. at 108-09. 
29Jones Lee et al. The Value of Safety: Results of a National Survey, 95 Ec J. 49 (1985). 
30Jones  Lee  et  al.,  Valuing  the  Prevention  of  Non-Fatal  Road  Injuries,  47  Oxford  Economic 

31Lin  and  Milon,  Contingent  Valuation  of  Health  Risk  Reductions  for  Shellfish  Products,  in 

Valuing Food Safety and Nutrition 83 (J.A. Caswell ed. 1995). 

32Id. 
33Y.S Eom, Pesticide Residue Risk and Food Safety Valuation: A Random Utility approach, 76 

Am. J. of Agric. Economics 760 (1994). 

Changes, 95 J Polit Economy 89 (1987). 

34V.  K.  Smith  and  W.  H.  Desvouges,  An  Empirical  Analysis  of  the  Economic  Value  of  Risk 

 

7 

 

WTP for small risk reductions should be roughly proportional to the size of the 
reduction.35  Why  don’t  people  think  in  this  way?  An  imaginable  explanation  is 
that  in  the  abstract,  most  people  simply  do  not  know  how  to  evaluate  low 
probabilities.  A  risk  of  7/100,000  seems  “small”;  a  risk  of  4/100,000  also  seems 
“small.”36 These figures can be evaluated better if they are placed in the context 
of one  another; everyone would prefer  a risk of 4/100,000 to a risk of 7/100,000, 
and  joint  evaluation  improves  evaluability.37  But  even  when  the  preference  is 
clear, both risks seem “small,” and hence it is not at all clear that a proportional 
increase in WTP will follow. As noted, most of the studies described above were 
“within  subjects”  rather  than  “between  subjects”  and  hence  evaluability  was 
promoted  by  the  process  of  comparison.  As  suggested  by  the  findings  of 
Kunreuther and his coauthors, it is likely that in a between-subjects design, WTP 
to eliminate a  risk of 4/100,000 would be about the same as WTP to eliminate a 
risk  of  7/100,000,  simply  because  the  small  difference  would  not  matter  when 
each risk is taken in isolation. 

 
Note  also  that  the  studies  just  described  involve  contingent  valuation,  not 
real-world choices. A significant question is whether and when actual behavior, 
in consumer choice or political judgment, shows a general neglect of differences 
among  low  probabilities.  In  labor  markets,  for  example,  are  risks  of  4/100,000 
compensated  at  about  the  same  level  as  risks  of  7/100,000?  This  would  be  a 
serious  market  failure.  I  am  aware  of  no  data  on  the  question.38  But  we  might 
expect that risk markets will reduce the problem of neglect, if only because some 
number  of  people  will  appreciate  the  relevant  differences,  and  drive  wage  and 
prices  in  the  appropriate  direction.  Quite  apart  from  market  behavior,  some 
imaginative  studies  attempt  to  overcome  probability  neglect  through  visual 
aids39  or  through  providing  a  great  deal  of  information  about  comparison 
scenarios  located  on  a  probability  scale.40  Without  these  aids,  it  is  not  so 
surprising that differences in low probabilities do not much matter to people. For 
most  of  us,  most  of  the  time,  the  relevant  differences—between,  say,  1/100,000 

                                                 

35Phaedra  Corso  et  al.,  Valuing  Morality  Risk  Reduction:  Using  Visual  Aids  to  Improve  the 

Validity of Contingent Valuation, 23 J. Risk and Uncertainty 165, 166-68 (2001). 

36Kunreuther et al., supra note, at 105.  
37Christopher Hsee, Attribute Evaluability, in Choices, Values, and Frames, supra, at 543. 
38W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1992), reports a number of studies showing a wage premium 
for  risky  jobs,  and  these  studies  suggest,  though  they  do  not  prove,  that  differences  in  low 
probabilities will be reflected in wages. 

39See Corso et al., supra. 
40Howard Kunreuther et al., Making Low Probabilities Useful, 23 J Risk and Uncertainty 103 

(2001) 

 

8 

 

and 1/1,000,000—are not pertinent to our decisions, and by experience we are not 
well-equipped to take those differences into account. 

 
My  topic  here,  however,  is  not  the  general  neglect  of  differences  in  low 
probabilities,  but  the  particular  role  of  strong  emotions  in  crowding  out  any 
assessment of probability, both low and less low. My central claim is that when 
strong  emotions  are  involved,  large-scale  variations  in  probabilities  will  matter 
little  –  even  when  the  variations  unquestionably  matter  when  emotions are not 
triggered.  More  generally,  probability  neglect  is  dramatically  heightened  when 
emotions are involved. The point applies to hope as well as fear; vivid images of 
good  outcomes  will  crowd  out  consideration  of  probability  too.41  Lotteries  are 
successful partly for this reason.42 But the subject here is fear rather than hope. 

 
B. A Simple Demonstration 
 
The  basic  point  has  received  its  clearest  empirical  confirmation  in  a  striking 
study  of  people’s  willingness  to  pay  to  avoid  electric  shocks.43  The  central 
purpose  of  the  study  was  to  test  the  relevance  of  probability  in  “affect  rich” 
decisions.  The  experiment  of  central  importance  here  attempted  to  see  whether 
varying  the  probability  of  harm  would  matter  more,  or  less,  in  settings  that 
trigger strong emotions than in settings that seem relatively emotion-free. In the 
“strong  emotion”  setting,  participants  were  asked  to  imagine  that  they  would 
participate in an experiment involving some chance of a “short, painful, but not 
dangerous  electric  shock.”44  In  the  relatively  emotion-free  setting,  participants 
were told that the experiment entailed some chance of a $20 penalty. Participants 
were asked to say how much they would be willing to pay to avoid participating 
in  the  relevant  experiment.  Some  participants  were  told  that  there  was  a  1% 
chance  of  receiving  the  bad  outcome  (either  the  $20  loss  or  the  electric  shock); 
others  were  told  that  the  chance  was  99%;  and  still  others  were  told  that  the 
chance was 100%.  

 
The central result was that variations in probability affected those facing the 
relatively emotion-free injury, the $20 penalty, far more than they affected people 
facing the more emotionally evocative outcome of an electric shock. For the cash 
                                                 

41See  Yuval  Rottenstreich  and  Christopher  Hsee,  Money,  Kisses,  and  Electric  Shocks:  On  the 

Affective Psychology of Probability Weighting, supra, at 176-88 

42See Phillip Cook, Selling Hope (1993). 
43Yuval  Rottenstreich  and  Christopher  Hsee,  Money,  Kisses,  and  Electric  Shocks:  On  the 

Affective Psychology of Probability Weighting, supra, at 176-88. 

44Id. at 181. 

 

9 

 

penalty,  the  difference  between  the  median  payment  for  a  1%  chance  and  the 
median  payment  for  a  99%  chance  was  predictably  large  and indeed consistent 
with  the  standard  model:  $1  to  avoid  a  1%  chance,  and  $18  to  avoid  a  99% 
chance.45  For  the  electric  shock,  by  contrast,  the  difference  in  probability  made 
little difference to median willingness to pay: $7 to avoid a 1% chance, and $10 to 
avoid a 99% chance!46 Apparently people will pay a significant amount to avoid a 
small probability of a hazard that is affectively-laden – and the amount that they 
will pay will not vary greatly with changes in probability. 

 
C. A More Complex Demonstration 
 
To  investigate  the  role  of  probability  and  emotions  in  responses  to  risk,  I 
conducted  an  experiment  asking  about  one hundred University of Chicago law 
students to describe their maximum willingness to pay to reduce levels of arsenic 
in drinking water. The questions had a high degree of realism. They were based 
on  actual  choices  confronting  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  involving 
cost  and  benefit  information  within  the  ballpark  of  actual  figures  used  by  the 
agency itself.47  

 
Participants  were  randomly  sorted  into  four  groups,  representing  the  four 
conditions  in  the  experiment.  In  the  first  condition,  people  were  asked  to  state 
their maximum willingness to pay to eliminate a cancer risk of one in 1,000,000.48 
In the second condition,  people were asked to state their maximum willingness 
to pay to eliminate a cancer risk of one in 100,000. In the third condition, people 
were  asked  the  same  question  as  in  the  first,  but  the  cancer  was  described  in 
vivid terms, as “very gruesome and intensely painful, as the cancer eats away at 
the internal organs of the body.” In the fourth condition, people were asked the 
same question as in the second, but the cancer was described in the same terms 
as in the third condition. In each condition, participants were asked to check off 
their  willingness  to  pay  among  the  following  options:  $0,  $25,  $50,  $100,  $200, 
$400, and $800 or more. Notice that the description of the cancer, in the “highly 
emotional” conditions, was intended to add little information, consisting simply 

                                                 

45Id. 
46Id. 
47See Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, Georgetown L.J (forthcoming). 
48Note that the phrasing of the question ensures that participants would think of the reduction 
of the risk to zero, rather than to some fraction of what it was before. People are willing to pay far 
more to eliminate risks than to reduce them, even if the savings are identical. See Kahneman and 
Tversky, supra note.  

 

10 

 

of  a  description  of  many  cancer  deaths,  though  admittedly  some  participants 
might well have thought that these were especially horrific deaths. 

 
The  central  hypothesis  was  that  the  probability  variations  would  matter  far 
less  in  the  highly  emotional  conditions  than  in  the  less  emotional  conditions. 
More  specifically,  it  was  predicted  that  differences  in  probability  would  make 
little  or  no  difference  in  the  highly  emotional  conditions  --  and  that  such 
variations  would  have  real  importance  in  the  less  emotional  conditions.  This 
prediction  was  meant  to  describe  a  substantial  departure  from  expected  utility 
theory, which predicts that an ordinary, risk-averse person should be willing to 
pay more than 10X to eliminate a risk that is ten times more likely than a risk that 
he is willing to pay X to eliminate.49 

 
Here are the results in tabular form: 
 

 

Unemotional 

Emotional 

Description, Median 
(Mean in Parentheses) 

Description, Median  

(Mean in 
Parentheses) 

$100 ($241.30) 
$100 ($132.95) 

1/100,000 
1/1,000,000 

$100 ($194.44) 
$25 ($71.25) 

 
In  short,  the  central  hypothesis  was  confirmed.  In  the  highly  emotional 
condition  with  a  1/100,000  risk,  the  median  willingness  to  pay  was  $100.  In  the 
highly emotional condition with a 1/1,000,000 risk, the median WTP was exactly 
the  same.  In  sharp  contrast,  variations  in  probability  made  a  significant 
difference in the less emotional conditions. For a 1/100,000 risk, the median WTP 
was  $100.  But  for  a  1/1,000,000  risk,  it  was  merely  $25.  If  we  investigate  the 
means, the central finding is reduced but in the same direction: The difference in 
probability had a far greater impact in the less emotional condition (an increase 
from $71.25 to $194.44, or about 180%, as opposed to an increase from $132.95 to 
$241.30, or about 80%). 

 
From this experiment, there are several other noteworthy findings. By itself, 
the  highly  emotional  description  of  the  cancer  had a substantial effect  on  WTP, 
holding  probability  constant.  For  the  1/1,000,000  risk,  the  emotional  description 
increased median WTP fourfold, from $25 to $100, and nearly doubled the mean, 
from $71.25 to $132.95. For the 1/100,000 risk, the median stayed constant ($100), 
                                                 
49See Corso et al., supra. 

 

11 

 

but  the  mean  was  significantly  affected,  rising  from  $194.44  to  $241.30.50  At  the 
same  time,  and  basically  consistent  with  other  work  on  probability  neglect, 
varying the probability had a relatively weak effect on WTP in both conditions. 
In the emotional conditions, the tenfold increase in the risk had no effect on the 
median and did not even double the mean, which increased merely from $132.95 
to  $241.30.  In  the  less  emotional  conditions,  that  tenfold  increase  moved  the 
median  from  $25  to  $100,  while  moving  the  mean  from  $71.25  to  $194.44.  But 
note that in this experiment, the relatively sophisticated participants in the study 
showed  far  more  susceptibility  to  probability  information  than  in  the  studies, 
described above, by Kunreuther et al.; but even so, the susceptibility was far less 
than conventional (normative) theory would predict.51  

 
Indeed,  the  effect  of  the  more  emotional  description  of  the  outcome  was 
essentially  the  same  as  the  effect  of  the  tenfold  increase  in  its  probability.  My 
principal emphasis, however, is on the fact that when the question was designed 
to trigger especially strong emotions, variations in probability had little effect on 
WTP, far less of an effect than when the question was phrased in less emotional 
terms. This is the kind of probability neglect that I am emphasizing here. 

 
D. Other Evidence 
 
Probability neglect, when strong emotions are involved, has been confirmed 
in many studies.52 Consider, for example, experiments designed to test levels of 
anxiety  in  anticipation  of  a  painful  electric  shock  of  varying  intensity,  to  be 
administered after a “countdown period” of a stated length. In these studies, the 
stated  intensity  of  the  shock  had  a  significant  effect  on  physiological  reactions. 
But  the  probability  of  the  shock  had  no  effect.  “Evidently,  the  mere  thought  of 
receiving  a  shock  was  enough  to  arouse  subjects,  and  the  precise  likelihood  of 
being  shocked  had  little  impact  on  their  arousal  level.”53  A  related  study  asked 
people  to  provide  their  maximum  buying  prices  for  risky  investments,  which 
contained  different  stated  probabilities  of  losses  and  gains  of  different 

                                                 

50This relatively small effect might be a product of the fact that the less emotional description 
did,  after  all,  involve  a  cancer  death,  which  is  known  to  produce  strong  reactions.  See  Richard 
Revesz, Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives, 
99  Col  L  Rev  941  (1999).  A  more  pronounced  effect  might  be  expected  if  the  death  was  simply 
described as a death. 

51See id. 
52For an overview see George Loewenstein et al., Risk As Feelings, 127 Psych Bulletin 267, 276 

(2001). 
53Id.  

 

12 

 

magnitudes.54  Happily  for  the  standard  theory,  maximum  buying  prices  were 
affected  by  the  size  of  losses  and  gains and also by probabilities. (Note that for 
most people, this experiment did not involve an affect-rich environment.) But – 
and this is the key point -- reported feelings of worry were not much affected by 
probability levels.55 In this study, then, probability did affect behavior, but it did 
not affect emotions. In most of the cases dealt with here, intense emotions drive 
out concern with probability, and hence both behavior and worry are affected. 

 
It should not be surprising, in this light, that visualization or imagery matters 
a great deal to people’s reactions to risks.56 When an image of a bad outcome is 
easily  accessible,  people  will  become  greatly  concerned  about  a  risk,  holding 
probability constant.57 Consider the fact that the fact that when people are asked 
how  much  they  will  pay  for  flight  insurance  for  losses  resulting  from 
“terrorism,” they will pay more than if they are asked how much they will pay 
for  flight  insurance  from  all  causes.58  The  evident  explanation  for  this  peculiar 
result  is  that  the  word  “terrorism”  evokes  vivid  images  of  disaster,  thus 
crowding out probability judgments. Note also that when people discuss a low-
probability  risk,  their  concern  rises  even  if  the  discussion  consists  mostly  of 
apparently  trustworthy  assurances  that  the  likelihood  of  harm  really  is 
infinitesimal.59  The  reason  is  that  the  discussion  makes  it  easier  to  visualize  the 
risk and hence to fear it.  

 
Note that this is not a point about the availability heuristic, which leads not to 
neglect probability, but answer the question of probability by substituting a hard 
question (what is the statistical risk?) with an easy question (do salient examples 
readily come to mind?).60 My point here is not that visualization makes an event 
seem more probable (though this is also often true), but that visualization makes 
the issue of probability less relevant or even irrelevant. In theory, the distinction 
should  not  be  obscure.  In  practice,  of  course,  it  will  often  be  hard  to  know 
whether the availability heuristic or probability neglect is driving behavior. 
                                                 

54Id. 
55Id. 
56See  Paul  Slovic  et  al.,  Violence  Risk  Assessment  and  Risk  Communication,  24  Law  and 

Human Behavior 271 (2000). 

and Uncertainty 35 (1993). 

57See Loewenstein et al., supra, at 275–76. 
58See E.J. Johnson et al., Framing, Probability Distortions, and Insurance Decisions, 7 H. Risk 

59See  A.S.  Alkahami  and  Paul  Slovic,  A  Psychological  Study  of  the  Inverse  Relationship 

Between Perceived Risk and Perceived Benefit, 14 Risk Analysis 1086, 1094–94 (1994). 

60See  Amos  Tversky  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Availability:  A  Heuristic  for  Judging  Frequency 

and Probability, 5 Cognitive Psychology 207 (1973). 

 

13 

 

Emotional reactions to risk, and probability neglect, also account for “alarmist 
bias.”  61  When  presented  with  competing  accounts  of  danger,  people  tend  to 
move  toward  the  more  alarming  account.62  In  the  key  study,  W.  Kip  Viscusi 
presented subjects with information from two parties, industry and government. 
Some subjects were given low-risk information from government, and high-risk 
information from industry; other subjects were given high-risk information from 
government,  and  low-risk  information  from  industry.  The  basic  result  was  that 
people  treated  “the  high  risk  information  as  being  more  informative.”63  This 
pattern held regardless of whether the low risk information came from industry 
or  from  government.  Thus  people  show  “an  irrational  asymmetry:  respondents 
overweight the value of a high risk judgment.”64 If the discussion here is correct, 
one reason is that the information, whatever its content, makes people focus on 
the worst case. There is a lesson for policy here: It might not be helpful to present 
people  with  a  wide  range  of  information,  containing  both  assuring  and  less 
assuring accounts. 

 
The  most  sensible  conclusion  is  that  with  respect  to  risks  of  injury  of  harm, 
vivid  images  and  concrete  pictures  of  disaster  can  “crowd  out”  other  kinds  of 
thoughts,  including  the  crucial  thought  that  the  probability  of  disaster  is  really 
small.65 “If someone is predisposed to be worried, degrees of unlikeliness seem to 
provide  no  comfort,  unless  one  can  prove  that  harm  is  absolutely  impossible, 
which itself is not possible.”66 With respect to hope, those who operate gambling 
casinos  and  state  lotteries  are  well-aware  of  the  underlying  mechanisms.  They 
play on people’s emotions in the particular sense that they conjure up palpable 
pictures  of  victory  and  easy  living.  With  respect  to  risks,  insurance  companies 
and environmental groups do exactly the same. The point explains “why societal 
concerns about hazards such as nuclear power and exposure to extremely small 
amounts  of  toxic  chemicals  fail  to  recede  in  response  to  information  about  the 
very small probabilities of the feared consequences from such hazards.”67  
                                                 

61W.  Kip  Viscusi,  Alarmist  Decisions  With  Divergent  Risk  Information,  107  Ec.  Journal 1657, 

1657–59 (1997) 

62Id. 
63Id. at 1666. 
64Id at 1668. 
65It would be tempting to venture a sociobiological explanation for probability neglect. While 
plausible,  such  an  explanation  would  be  highly  speculative:  We  could  imagine  sociobiological 
explanations  both  for  probability  neglect  and  for  intense  concern  with  probability.  I  emphasize 
empirical evidence here, not theoretical accounts. 

66See Weingart, supra note 1, at 362. 
67See Paul Slovic et al., The Affect Heuristic, forthcoming in Intuitive Judgment: Heuristics and 

Biases (Tom Gilovich et al. eds, forthcoming), unpublished manuscript at 11. 

 

14 

 

E. Notes on the Media and on Heterogeneity 
 
From what has been said thus far, it should be clear that news sources can do 
a great deal to trigger fear, simply by offering examples of situations in which the 
“worst  case”  has  actually  come  to  fruition.  For  crime,  the  point  is  well 
established.68  Media  coverage  of  highly  unusual  crimes makes people fearful of 
risks that they are most unlikely to face.69 When newspapers and magazines are 
emphasizing  deaths  from  anthrax  or  mad  cow  disease,  we  should  expect  a 
significant  increase  in  public  concern,  not  only  because  of  the  operation  of  the 
availability  heuristic,  but  because  people  will  not  naturally  make  sufficient 
adjustments  from  the  standpoint  of  probability.  In  fact  there  is  a  large warning 
here. If newspapers, magazines, and news programs are stressing certain harms 
from  remote  risks,  people’s  concern  is  likely  to  be  out  of  proportion  to  reality. 
Significant changes should therefore be expected over time.70 Across nations, it is 
also  easy  to  imagine  substantial  differences,  in  social  fear,  if  small  initial 
differences are magnified as a result of media influences.71 

 
It is also true that individuals and even societies differ in their susceptibility 
to  probability  neglect.  Though  experiments  have  not  been  conducted  on  the 
precise  point,  it  is  clear  that  some  people  take  probability  information  into 
account  even  when  the  context  ordinarily  engages  human  emotions.  It  also 
seems clear that  some people neglect probability information much of the time, 
focusing  insistently  on  the  worst  case  (or  for  that  matter  the  best).  The  arsenic 
experiment, mentioned  above, displays a great deal of individual heterogeneity 
in  taking  account  of  probability.72  Those  who  are  peculiarly  insensitive  to 
probability  information  are  likely  to  do  poorly  in  many  domains,  including 
economic  markets;  those  who  are  unusually  attentive  to  that  information  are 
likely to do well for just that reason. Perhaps there are demographic differences 
here; it is well-known that some groups are less concerned about most risks than 
are  others,73  and  that  the  difference  in  concern  may  stem,  in  part,  from  the  fact 
that some groups are less likely to neglect probability.  

 
On  the  social  level,  institutions  can  make  a  great  deal  of  difference  in 
decreasing  or  increasing  susceptibility  to  probability/neglect.  Highly  responsive 
                                                 

68See Joel Best, Random Violence: How We Talk About New Crimes and New Victims (1999). 
69Id. 
70See the account of fears of criminal violence in id. 
71See the discussion of multiple equilibria in Kuran and Sunstein, supra note, at 743–46. 
72Unpublished data on file, University of Chicago Law School. 
73See Slovic, supra note, at 396–402. 

 

15 

 

democratic  institutions,  automatically  translating  public  fear  into  law,  will 
neglect  probabilities  when  emotions  are  running  high.  A  more  deliberative 
democracy would attempt to create institutions that have a degree of immunity 
from short-turn public alarm.74 Cost-benefit analysis might, for example, serve as 
a  check  on  regulation  that  would  accomplish  little  good,  or  less  good  than  is 
justified  by  the  facts.75  The  point  raises  the  general  question  of  the  relationship 
between probability neglect and law.  

IV. Law 

 
If emotionally charged outcomes produce intense reactions even though they 
are highly unlikely to occur, how might our understanding of law be improved? 
To  answer  this  question,  it  is  important  to  separate  law’s  prescriptive,  positive, 
and normative tasks.76 With prescriptive analysis, we seek to find effective ways 
to achieve shared goals; positive analysis attempts to explain why law takes the 
form that it does;  normative  analysis explores what law should do. I take these 
up in sequence.  

 
A. Prescriptions: Obtaining Agreed-Upon Goals 
 
Suppose that government is seeking to lead people to achieve goals on which 
there is a  social  consensus. Government might, for example, want to encourage 
people to avoid large risks and to worry less over small risks. If so, it would do 
well to  attempt  not to provide information about probabilities, but to appeal to 
people’s  emotions  and  to  attend  to  the  worst  case.  With  respect  to  the  risks  on 
which it wants people to focus, government should use vivid images of alarming 
scenarios. For cigarette smoking, abuse of alcohol, reckless driving, and abuse of 
drugs, this is exactly what government occasionally attempts to do. It should be 
no  surprise  that  some  of  the  most  effective  efforts  to  control  cigarette  smoking 
appeal to people’s emotions, by making them feel that if they smoke, they will be 
dupes  of  the  tobacco  companies or imposing harms on innocent third parties—
and they do so especially by providing vivid images of illness or even death.77 

 

 

                                                 

74See Kuran and Sunstein, supra note; Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason (forthcoming 2002). 
75Matthew Adler and Eric Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis, 109 Yale LJ 167 (1999). 
76See Christine Jolls et al., A Behavioral Approach to Law and Economics, 50 Stan L Rev 1471, 

1474 (1998). 

77See Lisa Goldman and Stanton Glantz, Evaluation of Antismoking Advertising Campaigns, 

279 Journal of the American Medical Association 772 (1998). 

 

16 

 

 Because  of  probability  neglect,  it  should  not  be  terribly  difficult  to  trigger 
public  fear  (terrorism  is  effective  in  part  for  exactly  that  reason).  But  there  are 
serious ethical issues here. Government ought to treat its citizens with respect78; 
it  should  not  treat  them  as  objects  to  be  channeled  in  government’s  preferred 
directions.  Perhaps  government  ought  not  to  manipulate  or  to  trick  them,  by 
taking  advantage  of  their  limitations  in  thinking  about  risk.  A  skeptic  might 
think that the use of worst-case scenarios, or dramatic images of harm, consists of 
unacceptable  manipulation.  While  I  cannot  fully  resolve  the  issue  here,  the 
charge  seems  to  me  unwarranted.  So  long  as  the  government  is  democratically 
accountable,  and  attempting  to  discourage  people  from  running  genuinely 
serious risks, there should be no objection in principle. Those who want people 
to  run  risks,  for  economic  or  other  purposes,  use  similar  techniques,79  and 
government  should  probably  be  permitted  to  meet  fire  with  fire.  Democratic 
accountability  is  important  because  it  is  a  check  on  manipulative  behavior;  if 
government is manipulating people in an objectionable way, citizens are likely to 
rebel.  Of  course  the  issue  is  not  simple.  In  the  context  of  state  lotteries,  state 
governments  use  dramatic  images  of  “easy  street”  in  order  to  lead  people  to 
spend  money  for  tickets  whose  actuarial  value  is  effectively  zero,  and  this 
strategy, exploiting probability neglect in the domain of hope, does raise ethical 
issues.80 My suggestion is only that if government wants people not to run risks, 
it is likely to do well if it appeals to their emotions. 

 
There is also a striking asymmetry between increasing fear and decreasing it. 
If people are now alarmed about a low-probability hazard, is there anything that 
government  can  do  to  provide  assurance  and  to  dampen  concern?  This  is  an 
unanswered question. The only clear point is that if government is unlikely to be 
successful  if  it  simply  emphasizes  the  low  probability  that  the  risk  will  occur. 
There appears to be no evidence that any particular strategy will succeed. But the 
best  approach  seems  to  be  simple:  change  the  subject.  We  have  seen  that 
discussions  of  low-probability  risks  tend  to  heighten  public  concern,  even  if 
those discussions consist largely of reassurance. Perhaps the most effective way 
of reducing fear of a low-probability risk is simply to discuss something else and 
to let time do the rest. Of course media attention can undermine this approach. 

 

                                                 

78See  the  discussion  of  the  publicity  condition  in  John  Rawls,  A  Theory  of  Justice  (1971),  a 
condition that raises some questions about any governmental effort to enlist probability neglect 
in its preferred directions. 

79See Smoking (Paul Slovic ed. 2001). 
80See Philip Cook and Charles T. Clotfelter, Selling Hope (1991). 

 

17 

 

As  I  have  suggested,  institutional  safeguards  might  well  be  the  best  way  of 
ensuring  against  the  harmful  consequences  of probability neglect. The Office of 
Information  and  Regulatory  Affairs,  within  the  Office  of  Management  and 
Budget,  monitors  agency  action  to  ensure  that  it  is  directed  against  significant 
problems.81  A  general  requirement  of  cost-benefit  balancing  should  provide  a 
check  on  regulations  that  cannot  be  grounded  in  objective  fact.82  If government 
wants  to  protect  itself  against  the  pattern  of  “paranoia  and  neglect”  83 that now 
characterizes  regulatory  policy,  analytic  requirements  and  institutional  checks 
will provide a start. 

 

B. Positive Analysis: What Drives the Demand For Law? 

 
If  probability  neglect  characterizes  individual 

judgment  under  certain 
circumstances, might government and law be neglecting probability under those 
same  circumstances?  There  is  good  reason  for  an  affirmative  answer.  In  the 
domain  of  risk  regulation  as  elsewhere,  public  officials are highly responsive to 
the  public  demand  for  law.  If  people  insist  on  government  protection  against 
risk,  government  is  likely  to  provide  that  protection.  If  people  show  unusually 
strong  reactions  to  low-probability  catastrophes,  government  is  likely  to  act 
accordingly.  Of  course  interest  groups  are  involved  as  well.  When  their  self-
interest  is  at  stake,  we  should  expect  them  to  exploit  people’s  emotions,  in 
particular  by  stressing  the  worst  case.  In  the  environmental  area,  for  example, 
there  has  been  an  intense  debate  about  whether  the  National  Environmental 
Policy Act requires agencies to discuss the worst-case scenario in environmental 
impact  statements.84  Environmental  groups  sought  to  ensure  discussion  of  that 
scenario.85  They  did  so  in  part  to  stimulate  public  concern,  with  the knowledge 
that  the  worst  case  might  well  have  a  great  deal  of  salience,  even if it is highly 
unlikely. For its part, the government originally required discussion of the worst 
case, but changed in its mind, with the apparent understanding that people are 
too  likely  to  overreact.  Hence  the  current  approach,  upheld  by  the  Supreme 
Court,86 requires consideration of low-probability events, but only if they are not 
entirely remote and speculative. 

                                                 

81For an overview, see http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/regpol.html 
82See Kuran and Sunstein, supra note. 
83John  D.  Graham,  Making  Sense  of  Risk:  An  Agenda  for  Congress,  in  Risks,  Benefits,  and 

Lives Saved 183, 183, Robert Hahn ed. (New York: Basic Books, 1996). 

84See Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council, 490 US 332 (1989); Robert Percival et al., 

Environmental Regulation 903–04 (3d ed. 2000). 

85See Edward Fitzgerald, The Rise and Fall of Worst Case Analysis, 18 Dayton L Rev 1 (1992). 
86Id. 

 

18 

 

 
A good deal of legislation and regulation can be explained partly by reference 
to  probability  neglect  when  emotions  are  running  high.  In  this  space,  I  cannot 
demonstrate the point rigorously. But consider a few examples87: 

 

! In the aftermath of the adverse health effects allegedly caused by abandoned 
hazardous  waste  in  Love  Canal,  the  government  responded  with  an 
aggressive  program  for  cleaning  up  abandoned  hazardous  waste  cites, 
without  examining  the  probability  that  illness  would  actually  occur.  In  fact 
little was accomplished by early efforts to assure people of the low probability 
of  harm.88  When  the  local  health  department  publicized  controlled  studies 
showing  little  evidence  of  adverse  effects,  the  publicity  did  not  dampen 
concern,  because  the  numbers  “had  no  meaning.”89  In  fact  the  numbers 
seemed  to  aggravate  fear,  insofar  as  they  discussed  the  problem  at  all:  “One 
woman,  divorced  and  with  three  sick  children,  looked  at  the  piece  of  paper 
with  numbers  and  started  crying  hysterically:  ‘No  wonder  my  children  are 
sick. Am I doing to die? What’s going to happen to my children?’”90 Questions 
of  this  sort  contributed  to  the  enactment  of  new  legislation  to  control 
abandoned  hazardous  waste  sites,  legislation  that  did  not  embody  careful 
consideration  of  the  probability  of  significant  health  or  environmental 
benefits.91  Even  now,  the  government  does  not  take  much  account  of  the 
probability of significant harm in making clean-up decisions.92 

! During a highly publicized campaign designed to show a connection between 
Alar, a pesticide, and cancer in children, the public demand for action was not 
much  affected  by  the  EPA’s  cautionary  notes  about  the  low  probability  of 
getting that disease.93  

                                                 

87The  catalogue  in  Aaron  Wildavsky,  But  Is  It  True  (1997),  offers  many  illustrations  of 
inadequately  founded  health  and  safety  scares,  many  of  which  might  be  analyzed  in  the  terms 
used here, 

88See Timur Kuran and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan. 

L. Rev. 683, 691–98 (1999). 

89 ois Marie Gibbs, Love Canal: The Story Continues 25 (1998). 
90Id. 
91See Kuran and Sunstein, supra note; James Hamilton and W. Kip Viscusi, Calculating Risks 

92See  Hamilton  and  Viscusi,  supra  note  (discussing  lack  of  government  interest  in  size  of 

population affected). 

93See Robert Percival et al., supra note, at 524. 

(2000). 

 

19 

 

! In the fall of 2001, vivid images of shark attacks created a public outcry about 
new risks for ocean swimmers.94 Consider the fact that a NEXIS search found 
no  fewer  than  940  references  to  shark  attacks  between  August  4,  2001,  and 
September  4,  2001,95  with  130  references  to  "the  summer  of  the  shark."96  This 
was so notwithstanding the exceedingly low probability of a shark attack, and 
the  absence  of  any  reliable  evidence  of  an  increase  in  shark  attacks  in  the 
summer  of  2001.97  Predictably,  there  was  considerable  discussion  of  new 
legislation  to  control  the  problem,98  and  eventually  such  legislation  was 
enacted.99  Public  fear  seemed  relatively  impervious  to  the  fact  that  the 
underlying risk was tiny.  

! Jury behavior is not likely to be greatly affected by assurance that the risk was 
unlikely  to  come  to  fruition,  even  if  the  issue  of  probability  is  legally 
relevant.100  In  cases  involving  low-probability  risks  of  emotionally  gripping 
harms,  it  should  be  relatively  easy  to  convince  jurors  to  offer  high  damage 
awards.  Litigators  therefore  do  well  to  try  to  engage  jurors’  emotions  by 
pointing  to  the  worst  case.  There  is  a  strong  implication  here  for  the  law  of 

                                                 

94See  Howard  Kurtz,  Shark  Attacks  Spark  Increased  Coverage,  Washington  Post  On-Line, 
Sept.  5,  2001,  available  at  http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A44720-2001Sep5. 
html:  “A  maritime  expert  said  on  last  night's  ‘NBC  Nightly  News’  that  more  people  die  from 
bees,  wasps,  snakes  or  alligators  than  from  shark  attacks.  But  there's  no  ratings  in  bees. 
Unpleasant little critters, but not scary-looking enough. With ‘Jaws’ music practically playing in 
the background, the media have turned this into the Summer of the Shark. Never mind that the 
number of attacks has actually dropped since last year. 

They're here, they're nasty and they could be coming to a beach near you.” 
95NEXIS search, Sept. 4, 2001. In fact Time Magazine offered a widely discussed cover story on 
sharks  and  shark  attacks  under  a  screaming  cover  entitled,  Summer  of  the  Shark,  see  Terry 
McCarthy, Why Can't We Be Friends?; A horrific attack raises old fears, but new research reveals 
surprising  keys  to  shark  behavior,  Time  Magazine,  July  30,  2001,  at  p.  34.  The  story  itself 
suggested that the probability of being attacked by a shark is about 1/30 the probability of being 
struck by lightning. Id. 

96NEXIS search, Sept. 4, 2001. 
97For data on shark attacks, see http://www.flmnh.ufl.edu/fish/Sharks/ISAF/ISAF.htm. The cite 
offers  comparative  risk  data,  showing,  for example, that while there were 18 shark injuries and 
deaths in the United States in 1996, there were 10,000 injuries and deaths from buckets and pails, 
over  1,500  injuries  and  deaths  from  toilet  bowl  products,  and  over  198,000  injuries  and  deaths 
from nails, tacks, screws, and bolts. 

98See  Maya  Bell,  Divers  Defend  Courting  the  Fish  So  Many  Fear;  a  Wave  of  Recent  Shark 
Attacks Has Brought South Florida Shark-Feeding Groups under State Scrutiny; Making Friends 
with  the  Toothy  Terrors  Destroys  Their  Aversion  to  People  and  Encourages  Aggression,  Other 
Experts Say, The Orlando Sentinel, p. A1, August 29, 2001. 

99See Florida commission bans shark feeding, November 1, 2001, posted: 2:20 PM EST (1920 
GMT), available at http://www.cnn.com/2001/TRAVEL/NEWS/11/01/shark.feeding.ap/index.html. 

100See Phantom Risk: Scientific Inference and the Law (Kenneth Foster et al. eds 2000). 

 

20 

 

negligence:  Even  if  the  law  asks  the  jury  to  balance  the  benefits  of  the 
defendant’s action against the costs, the jury is likely to disregard the issue of 
probability  if  its  attention  is  focused  on  an  outcome  that  triggers  strong 
emotions. Along the same lines, an understanding of probability neglect helps 
explain  the  finding,  in  both  experimental  and  real-world  settings,  that  juries 
do not respond favorably to a demonstration that the defendant performed a 
cost-benefit analysis before proceeding, even if the analysis places a high value 
on  human  life.101  The  reason  is  that  jurors  will  be  focusing  on the badness of 
the outcome, not the low (ex ante) probability that it would have occurred. 
! The  anthrax  scare  of  October,  2001  was  based  on  exceedingly  few  incidents. 
Only four people died of the infection; only about a dozen others fell ill. The 
probability  of  being 
low.  Nonetheless,  fear 
proliferated,  with  people  focusing their attention on the outcome rather than 
the  low  probability  of  the  harm.  The  government  responded  accordingly, 
investing  massive  resources  in  ensuring  against  anthrax  infections.  Private 
institutions reacted the same way, asking people to take extraordinary care in 
opening the mail even though the statistical risks were tiny (see appendix for 
an  example).  To  say  this  is  not  to  suggest  that  extensive  precautions  were 
unjustified  in  this  case.  Private  and  public  institutions  faced  an  unknown 
probability of a major health problem, and it was appropriate to respond. My 
point is that public fear was disproportionate to its cause, and that the level of 
response was disproportionate too. 

infected  was  exceedingly 

C. Normative Issues: Capitulating to Fear? 
 
For  law,  the  hardest  questions  might  well  be  normative  ones:  How  should 
law  and  government  respond  to  a  quasi-rational  public  panic,  based  on  an 
intense  emotional  reaction  to  a  low-probability  risk?  Let  us  distinguish  two 
possible positions. The technocrat would want to ignore public irrationality, and 
to  respond  to  risks  if  and  to  the  extent  that  they  are  real.  The  populist  would 
want to respond to public concerns, simply because they are public concerns. In 
my  view,  both  positions  are  far  too  simple,  though  the  populist  is  closer  to  the 
mark. 
 
Suppose  that  people  are  greatly  concerned  about  a  risk  that  has  a  small  or 
even miniscule probability of occurring -- shark attacks, or anthrax in the mail, or 
terrorism on airplanes. If government is confident that it knows the facts, and if 
people  are  far  more  concerned  than  the  facts  warrant,  should  the  government 

                                                 

101See W. Kip Viscusi, Corporate Risk Analysis: A Reckless Act?, 52 Stan. L. Rev. 547 (2000). 

21 

 

 

 

respond,  via  regulation,  to  their  concerns?  Or  should  it  ignore  them,  on  the 
ground  that  the  concerns  are  irrational?  Consider  the  individual  analogy  first. 
Even if people’s fear is itself irrational, it might well be rational for them to take 
account of that fear in their behavior. If I am afraid to fly, I might decline to do 
so, on the ground that my fear will make the experience quite dreadful (not only 
while  flying  but  in  anticipating  it).  At  the  same  time,  the  fear  itself  might  be 
irrational, and I might even recognize that fact. If the fear exists, but if I cannot 
eliminate  it,  the  most  rational  decision  might  be  not  to  fly.  So  too  at  the  social 
level. Suppose, for example, that people are afraid of arsenic in drinking water, 
and that they demand steps to provide assurance that arsenic levels will not be 
hazardous.  Suppose  too  that  the  risks  from  existing  levels  of  arsenic  are 
infinitesimal. Is it so clear that government should refuse to do what people want 
it  to  do?  The  fear  is  by  hypothesis  real.  If  people  are  scared  that  their  drinking 
water  is  “not  safe,”  they  are,  simply  for  that  reason,  experiencing  a  significant 
loss.  In  many  domains,  widespread  fear  helps  produce  an  array  of  additional 
problems.  It  may,  for  example,  make  people  reluctant  to  engage  in  certain 
activities, such as flying on airplanes or eating certain foods. The resulting costs 
can be extremely high.102 Why shouldn’t government attempt to reduce fear, just 
as it attempts to produce other gains to people’s well-being? 

 
The simplest answer here is that if government is able to inform and educate 
people, it should do that instead. It should not waste resources on steps that will 
do nothing other than to reduce fear. But the simplest answer is too pat. Whether 
information and education will work is an empirical question on which we lack 
definitive  evidence.  If  these  do  not  work,  government  should  respond,  just  as 
individuals  do,  to  fears  that  are  quasi-rational,  but  real  and  by  hypothesis 
difficult  to  eradicate.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  government  could  cheaply 
undertake  a  procedure  that  would  reduce  a  tiny  risk  to  zero  –  and  equally 
important,  be  seen  to  reduce  the  relevant  risk  to  zero.  It  seems  clear  that 
government  should  take  this  step,  which  may  be  more  effective,  and  less 
expensive,  than  education  and  information.  Recall  that  fear  is  a  real  social  cost, 
and it is likely to lead to other social costs.103 If, for example, people are afraid to 

                                                 

102The mad cow disease scare is an example, producing many millions of dollars in losses. 
103My  point  here  is  not  that  all  subjective  perceptions  and  losses  should  be  counted  in  law. 
Many  people,  for  example,  like  to  discriminate  on  the  basis  of  race  and  sex,  and  they  suffer  a 
genuine  loss,  for  which  they  might  be  willing  to  pay,  as  a  result  of  the  legal  prohibition  on 
discrimination.  I  do  not  believe  that  their  loss  should  be  counted,  though  I  cannot  defend  the 
point  here.  See  Matthew  Adler  and  Eric  Posner,  Implementing  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  when 
Preferences  Are  Distorted,  in  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  269  (Matthew  Adler  and  Eric  Posner  eds. 
2001),  for  a  helpful  discussion.  Although  the  fear  discussed  in  the  text  is  not  fully  rational,  it 

 

22 

 

fly, the economy will suffer in multiple ways; so too if people are afraid to send 
or to receive mail. The reduction of even baseless fear is a social good.  

 
Even  if  it  is  clear  that  government  should  respond,  many  questions  remain. 
How and how much should government respond? The answer must depend in 
large  part  on  the  extent  of  the  fear  and  the  cost  of  the  response.  If  people  are 
extremely fearful, a substantial response is of course easier to justify; if the cost of 
response  is  very  high,  a  refusal  to  respond  might  well  make  sense.  With  this 
point, the analysis of appropriate action becomes similar to the analysis in many 
other settings. We need to know how much good, and how much harm, would 
be  done  by  the  action  in  question.  A  special  difficulty  here  consists  in  the 
problem  of  quantifying  and  monetizing  fear  and  its  consequences,  a  problem 
that has yet to be seriously engaged in the relevant literature.104 

 

V. What’s an Emotion? 

 
Thus  far  I  have  been  writing  as  if  there  is  a  clear  distinction  between 
cognition  and  emotion.  But  actually  the  distinction  is  complex  and  contested.105 
In  the  domain  of  risks,  and  most  other  places,  emotional  reactions  are  usually 
based  on  thinking;  they  are  hardly  cognition-free.  When  a  negative  emotion  is 
associated  with  a  certain  risk  –  pesticides  or  nuclear  power,  for  example  – 
cognition is playing a central role. In fact there are large debates about whether 
an  emotion  is  a  form  of  thought,  or  whether  thoughts  are  necessary  and 
sufficient  conditions  for  emotions,  or  whether  emotions  is  a  sense  precede  or 
outrun  cognition.106  But  it  is  clear  that  no  simple  line  can  be  drawn  between 
emotions and cognition in most social domains. Whatever they are, emotions can 
lead us astray; but the same is true for math, biology, and animal experiments.  

 
There  are  several  ways  to  make  progress  here.  Some  research  suggests  that 
the  brain  has  special  sectors  for  emotions,  and  that  some  types  of  emotions, 
including  some  fear-type  reactions  (my  emphasis  here),  can be triggered before 
the  more  cognitive  sectors  become  involved  at  all.107  Those  who  hear  sudden, 
unexplained  noises  are  fearful  before  they  are  able to identify the source of the 

                                                                                                                                                 
cannot be said to be invidious or vicious, and hence cannot be “impeached” in the same way as 
discriminatory preferences. 

104For a good overview, see W. Kip Viscusi, Rational Risk Regulation (2000). 
105For  varying  views,  see  Ronald  deSousa,  The  Rationality  of  Emotion  (1993);  Jon  Elster, 

Alchemies of the Mind (1999); Martha Nussbaum, Upheavals of Thought (2001). 

106See id. 
107See Joseph LeDoux, The Emotional Brain (1996). 

 

23 

 

noise.108  People  who  have  been  given  intravenous  injections  of  procaine,  which 
stimulates  the  amygdala,  report  panic  sensations.109  In  research  with  human 
beings,  electrical  stimulation  of  the  amygdala  leads  to  reported  feelings  of  fear 
and foreboding, even without any reason for these things, leading people to say, 
for  example,  that  they  feel  as  if  someone  were  chasing  them.110  It  is  not  true, 
however,  that  fear  in  human  beings  is  generally  pre-cognitive  or  noncognitive, 
and  even  if  it  is  in  some  cases,  it  is  not  clear  that  noncognitive  fear  would  be 
triggered by most of the risks faced in everyday human lives.  

 
For  purposes  of  the  analysis  here,  it  is  not  necessary  to  say  anything 
especially  controversial  about  the  nature  of  the  emotion  of  fear.  I  do  think  that 
when that emotion is involved, some kind of arousal is necessary; we would not 
say  that  someone  is  really  afraid  without  some  kind  of  arousal.111  But  if  people 
have a negative reaction to the prospect of electric shocks, or flying, or anthrax, 
thinking is emphatically involved. The only suggestion is that when emotions are 
intense, calculation is less likely to occur, or at least that form of calculation that 
involves  assessment  of  risks  in  terms  of  not  only  the  badness  but  also  the 
probability of the outcome. That point is sufficient for my arguments here. 

 

VI. Conclusion 

 
In this  Essay,  my central claim has been that the probability of harm will be 
neglected when people’s emotions are activated, especially if people are thinking 
about  the  worst-case  scenario.  If  that  scenario  is  vivid  and  easy  to  visualize, 
large-scale changes in thought and behavior are to be expected. The point helps 
explain public overreaction to highly publicized, low-probability risks, including 
those  posed  by  abandoned  hazardous  waste  dumps  and  anthrax.  Because 
rational  people  focus  on  the  probability  as  well  as  the  severity  of  harm, 
probability neglect is a form of quasi-rationality. 

 
It  follows  that  if  a  private  or  public  actor  is  seeking  to  produce  public 
attention to a neglected risk, it is best to provide vivid, even visual images of the 

                                                 

108R.B.  Zajonc,  On  the  Primacy  of  Affect,  39  Am  Psych  117  (1984);  R.B.  Zajonc,  Feeling  and 

Thinking: Preferences Need No Inferences, 35 Am Psych 151 (1980). 

109Servan-Schreiber and Perlstein, Selective Limbic Activation and its Relevance to Emotional 

Disorders, 12 Cognition & Emotion 331 (1998). 

110J.  Panksepp,  Mood  Changes,  in  Handbook  of  Clinical  Neurology  (P.J.  Vinken  et  al.  eds. 

111See  Elster,  supra  note  (urging  that  emotions  and  especially  fears  are  accompanied  by 

arousal); but see Nussbaum, supra note (denying that claim). 

1985). 

 

24 

 

worst that might happen. It also follows that government regulation, affected as 
it is by the public demand for law, will neglect probability too. At first glance, the 
government  should  not  respond  if  the  public  is  demanding  attention  to  a 
statistically  miniscule  risk,  and  doing  so  simply  because  people  are  visualizing 
the worst that can happen. The best response is information and education. But 
public  fear  is  itself  a  concern  and  sometimes  a  quite  serious  one.  If  that  fear 
cannot  be  alleviated  without risk reduction, then government should engage in 
risk reduction, at least if the relevant steps are justified by an assessment of costs 
and benefits.112  

                                                 

112I have not said anything here about the difficult issue of how to monetize public fear. 

 

25 

 

Appendix A 
 
The following provides the experimental materials for the study described in 

part IIIB. 
 
Assume that you live in an area whose drinking water contains 50 parts per billion 
of arsenic. Assume also that at this level of arsenic, 1 in 100,000 people who drink this 
water  over  a  period  of  years  will  die  of  cancer.  The  Environmental  Protection  is 
considering whether to reduce the permissible level of arsenic in drinking water from 50 
to 5 parts per billion, which would essentially eliminate the cancer risk. What is the most 
that you would be willing to pay, in increases in annual water bills, for this reduction? 

 
1) 0 
2) $25 
3) $50 
4) $100 
5) $200 
6) $400 
7) $800 or more 
 
 
Assume that you live in an area whose drinking water contains 50 parts per billion 
of arsenic. Assume also that at this level of arsenic, 1 in 1,000,000 people who drink this 
water  over  a  period  of  years  will  die  of  cancer.  The  Environmental  Protection  is 
considering whether to reduce the permissible level of arsenic in drinking water from 50 
to 5 parts per billion, which would essentially eliminate the cancer risk. What is the most 
that you would be willing to pay, in increases in annual water bills, for this reduction? 

 
3) 0 
4) $25 
3) $50 
4) $100 
5) $200 
6) $400 
7) $800 or more 
 
Assume that you live in an area whose drinking water is contaminated by 50 parts 
per billion of arsenic, a known carcinogen. Assume also that this level of arsenic will kill 
1 in 100,000 people who drink this water over a period of years. Assume finally that the 
death from arsenic-induced cancer is very gruesome and intensely painful, as the cancer 
eats away at internal organs of the body. The Environmental Protection is considering 
whether to reduce the permissible level of arsenic in drinking water from 50 to 5 parts 

 

26 

 

per billion, which would essentially eliminate the cancer risk. What is the most that you 
would be willing to pay, in increases in annual water bills, for this reduction? 

 
5) 0 
6) $25 
3) $50 
4) $100 
5) $200 
6) $400 
7) $800 or more 
 
Assume that you live in an area whose drinking water is contaminated by 50 parts 
per billion of arsenic, a known carcinogen. Assume also that this level of arsenic will kill 
1 in 1,000,000 people who drink this water over a period of years. Assume finally that 
the  death  from  arsenic-induced  cancer  is  very  gruesome  and  intensely  painful,  as  the 
cancer  eats  away  at  internal  organs  of  the  body.  The  Environmental  Protection  is 
considering whether to reduce the permissible level of arsenic in drinking water from 50 
to 5 parts per billion, which would essentially eliminate the cancer risk. What is the most 
that you would be willing to pay, in increases in annual water bills, for this reduction? 

 
1) 0 
2) $25 
3) $50 
4) $100 
5) $200 
6) $400 
7) $800 or more 
 

 

27 

 

Appendix B 

 
The following memorandum consists of a memorandum sent to a university 
community in the midst of the anthrax threat. I include it here not because it is 
idiosyncratic,  but  because  it  captures  a  kind  of  “best practices” approach at the 
time.  Note  the  breadth  of  the  concern,  calling  on  people  to  wear  latex  gloves 
while opening mail and including in the category of “suspicious mail” anything 
from  “someone  unfamiliar  to  you”  (a  large  percentage  of  the  mail  received  by 
most  people),  and  advising  those  in  receipt  of  such mail to notify the police, to 
isolate the mail, and to leave the area. 

 
Updated Procedures for Handling Mail Suspected of Anthrax Contamination 

Re: 

 
In light of recent events in which the United States mail was used to distribute anthrax, we recommend 

that you follow the up-dated guidelines below when handling mail. 

General Mail Handling 

Be observant for suspicious envelopes or packages. 

• 
•  Open all mail with a letter opener or method that is least likely to disturb contents. 
•  Open packages/envelopes with a minimum amount of movement. 
•  Do not blow into envelopes. 
•  Do not shake or pour out contents. 
•  Keep hands away from nose, and mouth while opening mail. 
•  Wash hands after handling mail. 
•  We also recommend that you wear latex gloves when opening mail. 
(If you are allergic to latex, hypoallergenic gloves are available). 
 

 

What constitutes suspicious mail or parcels? 

 
The mail or parcel is considered suspicious when it is/has: 
 

• 
• 

a powdery substance on the outside; 
excessive  postage,  tape,  a  handwritten  or  poorly  typed  address,  incorrect  titles,  or  titles  with  no 
names, or misspelling of common words; 
• 
unexpected or from someone unfamiliar to you; 
• 
from a foreign country and is not expected; 
• 
addressed to someone no longer with the organization or otherwise outdated; 
• 
no return address, or has one that cannot be verified as legitimate; 
• 
an unusual weight, given its size, or is lopsided or oddly shaped; 
•  marked with restrictive language, such as “Personal “ or “Confidential”; 
• 
• 

protruding wires, strange odors or stains;  
a postmark that does not match the return address. 

What should I do if I receive suspicious mail or a suspicious parcel?  

•  Do not handle the mail or parcel. 
•  Notify your supervisor immediately. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

28 

 

•  Make sure that the suspicious mail or parcel remains isolated. 
• 

Leave the area of the suspicious mail or parcel and do not let others into the area until appropriate 
authorities have indicated that it is safe to do so. 
Ensure  that  each  person  who  touched  the  suspicious  mail  or  parcel  washes  his  or  her  hands  with 
soap and water. 
List all persons who have touched the suspicious mail or parcel. 

• 

• 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Professor Cass R. Sustein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 
 

csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 

 

29 

 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William  M.  Landes,  Copyright  Protection  of  Letters,  Diaries  and  Other 
Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991). 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Path  to  The  T. J.  Hooper:  The  Theory  and  History  of 
Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991). 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991). 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992). 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 
1992). 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992). 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992). 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 
1992). 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A 
Quantitative Study (August 1992). 
Alan  O.  Sykes,  The  Welfare  Economics  of  Immigration  Law:  A  Theoretical 
Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992). 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992). 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993). 
J.  Mark  Ramseyer,  Credibly  Committing  to  Efficiency  Wages:  Cotton  Spinning 
Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993). 
Richard  A.  Posner,  What  Do  Judges  and  Justices  Maximize?  (The  Same  Thing 
Everyone Else Does) (April 1993). 
Lucian  Arye  Bebchuk  and  Randal  C.  Picker,  Bankruptcy  Rules,  Managerial 
Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the 
Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993). 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 

6. 
7. 
8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

18.  William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economics  of  Anticipatory 

Adjudication (September 1993). 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993). 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993). 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994). 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994). 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23.  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994). 
24. 

J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan 
(August 1994). 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994). 
Kenneth  W.  Dam,  Some  Economic  Considerations  in  the  Intellectual  Property 
Protection of Software (August 1994). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994). 

25. 
26. 

27. 

 

30 

 

David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 
1994). 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime 
Consumption (January 1995). 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995). 
Daniel  Kessler,  Thomas  Meites,  and  Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Explaining  Deviations 
from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for 
Litigation (March 1995). 
Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Das  Kapital:  Solvency  Regulation  of  the  American  Business 
Enterprise (April 1995). 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995). 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995). 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology 
(November 1995). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996). 
J.  Mark  Ramseyer  and  Eric  B.  Rasmusen,  Judicial  Independence  in  Civil  Law 
Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996). 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences 
Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996). 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996). 

41. 

39. 
40.  William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economics  of  Legal  Disputes 
Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996). 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  and  David  B.  Mustard,  Crime,  Deterrence,  and  Right-to-Carry 
Concealed Handguns (August 1996). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996). 
G.  Baird,  The  Hidden  Virtues  of  Chapter  11:  An  Overview  of  the  Law  and 
Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997). 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997). 

44. 
45.  William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay 

42. 
43. 

(March 1997). 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997). 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: 
Evidence from California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997). 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to 
the Adoption of Norms (June 1997). 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through 
the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997).  
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  and  David  Schkade,  Assessing  Punitive 
Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997).  

51.  William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: 
A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998).  
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  A  Simple  Explanation  for  Why  Campaign  Expenditures  are 
Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998).  

52. 

28. 

29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 

36. 
37. 

38. 

46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

 

31 

 

Richard  A.  Posner,  Values  and  Consequences:  An  Introduction  to  Economic 
Analysis of Law (March 1998).  
Denise  DiPasquale  and  Edward  L.  Glaeser,  Incentives  and  Social  Capital:  Are 
Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998).  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to 
Law and Economics (May 1998). 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, 
Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998). 
Cass  R.  Sunstein  and  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit,  Second-Order  Decisions  (June 
1998). 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, 
Effects  on  Firm  Value,  and  the  Impact  of  Supreme  Court  and  Congressional 
Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998). 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998). 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and 
Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 
1998) 
David  A.  Weisbach,  Line  Drawing,  Doctrine,  and  Efficiency  in  the  Tax  Law 
(November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law 
(November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 
1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A 
“Third Way” (January 1999) 
Richard  A.  Posner,  An  Economic  Approach  to  the  Law  of  Evidence  (February 
1999) 
Yannis  Bakos,  Erik  Brynjolfsson,  Douglas  Lichtman,  Shared  Information  Goods 
(February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with 
Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan  M.  Karpoff,  John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  and  Graeme  Rankine,  Environmental 
Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 

72.  Matthew  D.  Adler  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  Rethinking  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  (April 

1999) 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  and  William  M.  Landes,  Multiple  Victim  Public  Shooting, 
Bombings,  and  Right-to-Carry  Concealed  Handgun  Laws:  Contrasting  Private 
and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  

53.  

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 
71. 

73. 

 

32 

 

Lisa  Bernstein,  The  Questionable  Empirical  Basis  of  Article  2’s  Incorporation 
Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again 
(May 1999) 

76.  William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz 

Collection (May 1999) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  David  Schkade,  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Do  People  Want 
Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a 
Function of Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial 
Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic 
than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 
Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special 
Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) 
Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 
Douglas  G.  Baird  and  Edward  R.  Morrison,  Optimal  Timing  and  Legal 
Decisionmaking:  The  Case  of  the  Liquidation  Decision  in  Bankruptcy  (October 
1999) 
Gertrud  M.  Fremling  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  Market  Signaling  of  Personal 
Characteristics (November 1999) 

Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and 
Satire (November 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on 
Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen  Eggleston,  Eric  A.  Posner,  and  Richard  Zeckhauser,  Simplicity  and 
Complexity in Contracts (January 2000)  
Douglas  G.  Baird  and  Robert  K.  Rasmussen,  Boyd’s  Legacy  and  Blackstone’s 
Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: 
The Severity Shift (February 2000) 
Richard  A.  Posner  and  Eric  B.  Rasmusen,  Creating  and  Enforcing  Norms,  with 
Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 

88.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When 

74. 

75. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 

81. 

82. 
83. 

84. 
85. 
86. 

87. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

 

33 

 

97. 

98. 

99. 

Douglas  Lichtman,  Property  Rights  in  Emerging  Platform  Technologies  (April 
2000)  
Cass  R.  Sunstein  and  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit,  Solidarity in Consumption (May 
2000) 
David  A.  Weisbach,  An  Economic  Analysis  of  Anti-Tax  Avoidance  Laws  (May 
2000)  

100.  Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
101.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
102.  Robert  H.  Frank  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  and  Relative 

Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
103. 
104.  Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  
105. 

Jack  Goldsmith  and  Alan  Sykes,    The  Dormant  Commerce  Clause  and  the 
Internet (November 2000) 

106.  Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
107.  Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent 

108. 

System (November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International 
Relations:  A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 

109.  William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
110. 
111. 

Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul  Levmore,  Puzzling  Stock  Options  and  Compensation  Norms  (December 
2000) 

112.  Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious 

Liability, Class Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 

113.  William  M.  Landes,  Copyright,  Borrowed  Images  and  Appropriation  Art:    An 

Economic Approach (December 2000) 

114.  Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
115.  George  G.  Triantis,  Financial  Contract  Design  in  the  World  of  Venture  Capital 

(January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 

116. 
117.  Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer 

Finance (February 2001) 

118.  Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) 

119. 

(March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost-Benefit Analysis:  A Positive 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 

120.  Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital 

Age (April 2001) 

121.  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and 
the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 

122.  David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 

 

34 

 

123.  William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? 

124.  Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 

125.  Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The 

Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)   

126.  Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 

(May 2001) 

2001) 

2001) 

127.  Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
128.    Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
129.  Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property 

Transfer (July 2001) 

130.  Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for 

Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 

131.    Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably 

132. 
133. 

Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa  Bernstein,  Private  Commercial  Law  in  the  Cotton  Industry:    Creating 
Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 

134.  Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the 

Commons (August 2001) 

135.  Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
136. 

Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of 
Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an 
Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) 

137. 

138.  Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law 

(November 2001) 

 

 

 

35 

 

