University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2001 

Order Without Law 
Order Without Law 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Order Without Law," 68 University of Chicago Law Review 757 (2001). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

Order Without Law

Cass R. Sunsteint

Under  the leadership  of  Chief Justice William  Rehnquist, the  Su-
preme  Court  of  the  United  States  has  generally  been  minimalist,  in
the  sense  that it has  attempted  to say  no more than  is necessary  to de-
cide  the case  at  hand, without  venturing  anything  large  or  ambitious.'
To  some extent, the  Court's minimalism  appears to  have  been  a prod-
uct  of  some  of  the  justices'  conception  of  the  appropriately  limited
role  of  the  judiciary  in  American  political  life.  To  some  extent,  the
tendency  toward minimalism  has been  a product of the simple need  to
assemble  a  majority vote. If five  or more votes  are sought, the opinion
might  well  tend  in  the  direction  of  minimalism,  reflecting  judgments
and  commitments  that can  command agreement  from diverse  people.
To  be  sure,  the  Court  has  been  willing,  on  occasion,  to  be  ex-
tremely  aggressive.  In  a  number  of  cases, the  Court  has  asserted  its
own, highly  contestable  vision of  the  Constitution against  the  democ-
ratic  process. This  aggressive  strand  has  been  most  evident  in  a set  of
decisions  involving federalism;  it can  be found elsewhere  as  well.'  But
generally  these  decisions  have  been  minimalist  too. Notwithstanding
their  aggressiveness,  they  tend  to  decide  the  case  at  hand,  without
making  many  commitments  for  the future. Sometimes  those  decisions
have  even  been "subminimalist,"  in  the sense  that  they  have  said  less
than is  required to justify the particular  outcome.

4

t  Karl  N. Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor, Law  School  and  Department  of Po-
litical  Science, The  University  of Chicago.  I  am grateful  to Richard Posner  and Mary Anne  Case
for  helpful comments  on  an  earlier  draft. Apologies  for  the  title  choice  to  Professor  Robert  C.
Ellickson.  See  his  superb  (and  unrelated)  Order Without  Law: How Neighbors Settle  Disputes
(Harvard  1991).

1  For  a  general  discussion  of judicial  minimalism,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  One  Case at a

Time: Judicial Minimalism on the Supreme Court (Harvard  1999).

2  United States v  Morrison, 120  S  Ct 1740,1759  (2000)  (striking down the Violence  Against
Women  Act  as  beyond  the  power  of Congress  under the  Commerce  Clause);  City of Boerne  v
Flores, 521  US  507,  536  (1997)  (holding  that  the  Religious  Freedom  Restoration Act  exceeded
Congress's  remedial  powers  under the Fourteenth  Amendment);  United States v  Lopez, 514  US
549,  567-68  (1995)  (holding  that the prohibition  of firearm  possession  near  schools  was  outside
the  power  of Congress).

3 

Justices  Antonin  Scalia  and  Clarence Thomas  are  fairly  consistent  maximalists,  on  the
ground  that  they  favor  rule-bound  decisions.  See  Antonin  Scalia,  The  Rule of Law as a Law of
Rules,  56 U  Chi  L Rev  1175,  1178-86  (1989)  (discussing reasons  to prefer  rules over judicial dis-
cretion).
4 

See  Romer v  Evans, 517 US 620,635  (1996)  (holding law forbidding  special  government
protections  for  homosexuals  to  be  invalid  under the  Equal  Protection  Clause, without  fully  ex-
plaining  its consistency  with earlier decisions).

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 757 2001

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[68:757

In the  Court's two  decisions  involving  the 2000  presidential  elec-
tion,  minimalism was  on  full display. The  Court's unanimous  decision
in  Bush  v  Palm Beach  County  Canvassing Board was  firmly  in  the
minimalist  camp.  Here  the Court  refused  to  resolve  the  most  funda-
mental  issues  and merely  remanded  to the Florida Supreme  Court for
clarification.  The  Court's  5-4  decision  in  Bush  v Gore' was  also  mini-
malist  in  its own  way, for  it purported  to resolve  the case without  do-
ing  anything  for  the  future. But  here the  Court  effectively  ended  the
presidential  election.  It. did  so  with  rulings, on  the  merits  and  (espe-
cially)  on  the question  of remedy, that combined  hubris with minimal-
ism.

The  Court's  decision  in  Bush  v  Gore did  have  two  fundamental
virtues. First, it produced a  prompt  and decisive  conclusion  to the cha-
otic  post-election  period  of 2000.  Indeed,  it  probably  did  so  in  a  way
that  carried  more  simplicity  and  authority  than  anything  that  might
have  been  expected  from  the  United  States  Congress.  The  Court
might  even  have  avoided  a  genuine  constitutional  crisis. Second,  the
Court's  equal  protection  holding  carries  considerable  appeal.  On  its
face, that  holding  has the  potential  to  create  the  most expansive,  and
perhaps  sensible,  protection  for  voting  rights  since  the  Court's  one-
person, one-vote decisions  of mid-century.'  In  the fullness of time, that
promise  might conceivably  be realized within  the federal  courts, polic-
ing  various  inequalities  with  respect  to  voting  and  voting  technology.
But  it  is  far  more  likely  that  the  Court's  decision,  alongside  the  evi-
dent  problems  in  the  Florida  presidential  vote, will  help  to  spur  cor-
rective  action from Congress  and state  legislatures.

The Court's  decision  also had  two  large  vices. First, the  Court ef-
fectively  resolved  the presidential  election  not  unanimously, but  by  a
5-4 vote, with the  majority consisting  entirely of the Court's  most con-
servative  justices. Second,  the  Court's  rationale  was  not  only exceed-
ingly ambitious  but  also  embarrassingly  weak. However  appealing, its
equal  protection  holding  had  no  basis  in  precedent  or  in  history. It
also  raises  a host  of puzzles  for  the  future, which  the  Court appeared
to try to resolve  with its minimalist cry of "here, but nowhere  else." Far
more  problematic, as  a matter of law, was the majority's  subminimalist
decision  on the issue of remedy. By terminating  the manual  recount in

6 

5 

7 

121  S  Ct 471  (2000)  (per  curiam).
121  S  Ct 525  (2000)  (per  curiam).
See Reynolds v  Sims, 377  US 533,568  (1964)  (holding  an apportionment decision viola-
tive  of  the  Equal  Protection  Clause  because  of  the  different  weight  given  to  different  votes);
Baker  v  Carr, 369  US  186,  208-37  (1962)  (holding  state  apportionment  decision  not  to present
nonjusticiable  political  questions).

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 758 2001

2001]

Order Without Law

Florida, the  Court resolved  what it  acknowledged  to be  a question  of
Florida  law, without  giving  the  Florida  courts  the  chance  to  offer  an
interpretation  of their own  state's law.

In a  case  of this  degree  of political salience,  the  Court should  as-
sure the nation, through  its actions  and its words, that it is speaking for
the  law, and  not  for  anything  resembling  partisan  or  parochial  inter-
ests. A  unanimous  or  near-unanimous  decision  can  go  a  long  way  to-
ward  providing  that  assurance,  because  agreement  between  diverse
people suggests  that the  Court is really  speaking for the law. So too  for
an  opinion  that  is  based  on  reasoning  that, whether  or  not  unassail-
able, is  so logical  and clear  as to dispel  any doubt about  the legitimacy
of the outcome. The Court offered  no such  opinion.

From  the standpoint  of constitutional  order, the  Court  might well
have done  the nation a service. From the standpoint  of legal reasoning,
the  Court's  decision  was  very  bad. In  short,  the  Court's  decision  pro-
duced  order without law.

I.  PRELIMINARIES

Bush  v  Gore was  actually  the  fourth  intervention, by  the  United
States  Supreme  Court, in  the litigation  over  the outcome  of the  presi-
dential election  in Florida. In  sequence, the Court's  interventions  con-
sisted  of  the surprising  grant  of certiorari  on  November  24, 2000;8  the
unanimous,  minimalist  remand  on  December  4, 2000;'  the  grant  of  a
stay, and  certiorari, on December  9, 2000;1" and  the decisive  opinion  in
Bush v  Gore on December  12,2000.11

A.  The Unanimous, Minimalist  Remand

On  November  13,  Florida  Secretary  of  State  Katherine  Harris
announced  that  the  statutory  deadline  of  November  14, 2000,  was  fi-
nal, and  that  she  would  not  exercise  her  discretion  so  as  to  allow  ex-
tensions.2  On  November  21,  the  Florida  Supreme  Court  interpreted
state  law  to  require  the  Secretary  of  State  to  extend  the  statutory
deadline  for  a  manual  recount."  This  was  a  highly  controversial  inter-

Bush v Palm Beach  County  Canvassing Board, 121  S  Ct 510  (2000)  (granting first writ of

8 
certiorari).

9  Bush v Palm Beach  County  Canvassing Board, 121  S  Ct 471.
10  Bush v  Gore, 121  S  Ct 512  (2000).
11  Bush v Gore, 121  S  Ct 525.
12  See  Palm Beach  County  Canvassing Board  v Harris, 772  S2d 1220,1225-26  (Fla Nov 21,

2000), vacd  and remd as, Bush  v Palm Beach  County  Canvassing Board, 121  S Ct 471.

13  Palm Beach  County  Canvassing Board  v Harris, 772 S2d  at 1240.

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 759 2001

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[68:757

pretation  of Florida  law, and  it might  well  have  been  wrong.  At  the
time, however,  any  errors  seemed  to  raise  issues  of  state  rather  than
federal law.

16

In  seeking  certiorari,  Bush  raised  three  federal  challenges  to the
decision  of  the  Florida  Supreme  Court."  First,  he  argued  that  by
changing  state  law,  the  Florida  Court  had  violated  Article  II  of  the
United  States  Constitution,  which  provides  that  states  shall  appoint
electors  "in  such  manner  as  the  Legislature,"  and  not  any  court, may
direct.  Second,  Bush  invoked  a  federal  law  saying  that  a  state's  ap-
pointment  of  electors  is  "conclusive"  if  a  state  provides  for  the  ap-
pointment  of electors  "by  laws  enacted  prior to  the day fixed"  for the
election."  According to  Bush, the  Florida  court did  not  follow, but  in-
stead  changed,  the  law  "enacted  prior"  to  Election  Day, and  in  his
view  this  change  amounted  to a  violation  of federal  law.8 Third, Bush
argued  that  the  manual  recount  would  violate  the  Due  Process  and
Equal  Protection Clauses, because  no  clear  standards  had  been  estab-
lished  to ensure  that  similarly  situated  people  would  be  treated  simi-
larly."

At  the  time, most  observers  thought  it exceedingly  unlikely  that
the  Court would  agree  to  hear the  case. Even  if the Florida  Supreme
Court had effectively  "changed"  state law, it appeared improbable  that
the United  States  Supreme  Court could  be convinced  to say so. What-
ever the merits, the Court seemed  unlikely to intervene  into a continu-
ing  controversy  over  the  presidential  vote  in  Florida.  This  was  not
technically a "political  question,""° but it did not seem  to be  the kind of
question  that  would  warrant  Supreme  Court  involvement,  certainly
not at this preliminary  stage. To the general surprise  of most observers,
the  Court agreed  to grant certiorari,  limited  to the  first two  questions
raised  by Bush.

Bush  asked  the  United  States  Supreme  Court  to  hold  that  be-
cause  the  Florida  Supreme  Court  had  violated  the  federal  Constitu-

14  See, for  example,  Michael W. McConnell,  Two-and-a-Half Cheers for Bush v  Gore, 68 U

Chi  L  Rev 657  (2001)  (discussing  how  the  state  supreme  court's  decision  that the  law mandates
an  extension  is  wrong);  Richard  A. Posner, Bush  v  Gore: Prolegomenon to an Assessment, 68  U
Chi L  Rev 719  (2001)  (same).

15  Petition for Writ of Certiorari, Bush v  Palm Beach County Canvassing Board, No 00-836

(filed Nov  22,2000)  (available on Lexis  at 2000  US Briefs  836).

Id at  *18-20, citing US  Const Art II  § 1, cl 2.

16 
17  Petition for Writ of Certiorari  at  *12-18  (cited in note  15), citing 3  USC §  5 (1994).
18  Petition for Writ of Certiorari at  *12-18 (cited  in note  15).
19 
20  For a  discussion of  what constitutes a  nonjusticiable political  question, see Baker v  Carr,

Id  at  *20-26.

369  US  186,208-37  (1962).

21  Bush v  Palm Beach County Canvassing Board, 121  S Ct 510  (2000)  (granting certiorari).

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 760 2001

20011

Order Without Law

tion  and  federal  law, Florida's  Secretary  of  State  had  the  authority  to
certify  the  vote  as  of  November  14.  For  his  part,  Gore  wanted  the
Court  to  affirm  the  Florida  Supreme  Court  on  the  ground  that  that
court  had  merely  interpreted  the  law.2  The  United  States  Supreme
Court  refused  these  invitations  and  took  an  exceptionally  small  step,
asking the  state supreme court to clarify the basis for its decision.'  Did
the state  court  use  the  Florida  Constitution  to  override  the will  of the
Florida  legislature?  In  the  Court's view, that would  be  a  serious  prob-
lem, because  the United States  Constitution requires  state legislatures,
not  state  constitutions,  to  determine  the  manner  of  appointing  elec-
tors."  The  Supreme  Court  also  asked  the  state  court  to  address  the
federal  law requiring  electors to be  appointed under state  law enacted
"prior  to"  Election  Day.7  In  its  own  opinion,  the  Florida  Supreme
Court had said nothing about  that law.

This  was  judicial  minimalism  in  action. Why  did  the  Court  pro-
ceed  in this way?  It seems possible  that some  of the justices  refused  to
settle  the merits on principle, thinking that the federal judiciary should
insert  itself  as  little  as  possible  into  the  continuing  electoral  struggle.
But  the  most  likely  explanation  is  that  the  Court  sought  unanimity
and  found,  as groups  often  do, that unanimity  is  possible  only if as lit-
tle  as possible is decided.

B.  The  Astonishing  Stay

On  December  8, the  Florida  Supreme  Court  ruled,  by  a  vote  of
4-3,  that  a  manual  recount  was  required  by  state  law,  and  it  thus  ac-
cepted  Gore's  contest.26 This  decision  threw  the  presidential  election
into  apparent  disarray. With  the  manual  recount  beginning,  it became
quite unclear  whether Bush  or Gore  would  emerge  as the winner.

On December  9,  the Supreme  Court issued  a  stay of the  decision
of the Florida  Supreme  Court. 7 This was  the first genuinely  extraordi-
nary action  taken by  the United States  Supreme Court. It was  not only
extraordinary  but  also  a  departure  from  conventional  practice,  and

22  See  Brief  of  Respondents  Al  Gore,  Jr.,  and  Florida  Democratic  Party,  Bush  v  Palm
Beach  County Canvassing Board, No 00-836,  *13-21, 50 (filed  Nov  28,2000)  (available  on Lexis
at 2000  US Briefs 836).

23  See  Bush v  Palm Beach County  Canvassing Board, 121  S  Ct at  475  (remanding  for  fur-

ther  proceedings).
24  Id  at 474.
25 
26  Gore v  Harris, 772  S2d  1243,  1260-62  (Fla  Dec 8,2000), revd  and remd as, Bush v  Gore,

Id.

121  S Ct 525.

the Florida  Supreme  Court's decision).

27  Bush v  Gore, 121  S Ct 512  (2000)  (granting certiorari  and staying the  implementation  of

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 761 2001

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[68:757

one that  is difficult  to defend  on  conventional  legal  grounds-not  be-
cause  Bush  lacked  a substantial  probability  of success, but because  he
had shown no irreparable  harm.

To  be  sure, some  harm would  have  come  to  Bush  from  the  con-
tinuation of the manual recount. It is entirely possible that the recount
would  have  narrowed  the  gap  between  Bush  and  Gore.  This  would
have  been  an  unquestionable  harm  to  Bush,  in  the  nontrivial  sense
that  it would  have  raised  some  questions  about  the  legitimacy  of  his
ensuing  presidency,  if  it  had  subsequently  been  determined  that  the
manual  recount was  unlawful." But the question remains: How serious
and irreparable  would  this  "harm"  have  been?  If the  manual  recount
was  soon  to  be  deemed  unlawful,  would  the  Bush  presidency  really
have  been "irreparably" harmed?  This is  extremely  doubtful.

At  the  same  time, the  stay  of the  manual  recount  would  seem  to
have  worked  an  irreparable  harm  to  Gore.  For  Gore,  time  was  very
much  of  the essence, and  if the  counting was stopped, the difficulty  of
completing  it in  the  requisite  period  would  become  all the  more  seri-
ous. By itself, the Supreme  Court's stay  of the manual  recount  did not
hand  the  election  to  Bush.  But  it came  very  close  to  doing  precisely
that.

In  these  circumstances,  can  anything  be  said  on  behalf  of  the
stay?  A  reasonable  argument  is  available,  at  least  in  retrospect.  Sup-
pose  that  a  majority  of  the  Court  was  entirely  convinced  that  the
manual  recount was  unlawful, perhaps  because  in  the  absence  of  uni-
form  standards,  similarly  situated  voters  would  not  be  treated  simi-
larly. If the judgment  on the merits was clear, why should  the voting be
allowed  to continue, in light  of the fact that it would undoubtedly  have
to  be  stopped  soon  in  any  case,  and  its  continuation  in  the  interim
would  work  some  harm  to  the  legitimacy  of the  next  president?  The
question  suggests  that  if  the  ultimate  judgment  on  the  merits  was
clear, the stay would  not be so  hard  to defend. If the likelihood  of suc-
cess is  overwhelming, the plaintiff should not be required to make  the
ordinary  showing  of  irreparable  harm.29  The  problem,  then,  was  less
the  stay  than  the  Court's ambitious, poorly  reasoned  judgment on  the
merits.

28  As  emphasized by  Justice Scalia,  see  id at  512  (Scalia concurring).
29  Cuomo  v  United  States  Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission, 772  F2d  972,  974  (DC  Cir

1985).

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 762 2001

2001]

Order Without Law

A.  Merits: What the Court Said

II.  ORDER AND  LAW

On  the  merits, there  are  two  especially  striking  features  to  the
Court's  decision. The  first is  that  six justices  were  unwilling  to accept
Bush's  major submission, to the effect that the Florida  Supreme  Court
had  produced  an  unacceptable  change  in  Florida  law."  The  second  is
that  five members  of  the  Court  accepted  the  adventurous  equal  pro-
tection argument.

The  equal  protection  claim  does  have  considerable  appeal,  at
least as  a matter of common  sense. If a vote  is not counted  in one area
when  it would  be counted  in  another, something  certainly seems  to be
amiss. Suppose, for example, that  in  one  county, a  vote  will  not count
unless the  stylus goes  all the  way through, whereas in  another country,
a  vote  counts  merely  because  it contains  a  highly  visible  "dimple."  If
this is  the  situation, some voters  can  legitimately  object  that  they are
being treated  unequally for no good  reason.

In  its per curiam  opinion, the Court  spelled out  the equal  protec-

tion  rationale  in  some  detail. "In  some  cases  a  piece  of  the  card-a
chad -is  hanging, say by two corners. In other cases there is no separa-
tion  at  all, just  an  indentation."'"  The  disparate  treatment  of  these
markings  in  different  counties  was  unnecessary,  because  the  "search
for intent  can be confined  by specific  rules designed  to ensure uniform
treatment.".  In Florida, that search was not so confined, for the record
suggested  that  in  Miami-Dade  County, different  standards  had  been
applied  in  defining  legal  votes;  and  Palm  Beach  County  appeared  to
go so  far as to change  its standards  during the  process  of counting. To
this, the  Court  added  "further  concerns."33 These  included  an  absence
of specification  of "who would recount  the  ballots," leading  to a situa-
tion in which untrained  members of "ad  hoc teams" would be involved
in  the  process.4  And  "while  others  were  permitted  to  observe,  they
were  prohibited  from  objecting  during  the  recount."3  Thus  the  Court
concluded  that the  recount  process "is inconsistent with  the minimum

30 

I  will  not  discuss  that  issue  here.  In brief,  I  think  that  the  argument  becomes  less  con-
vincing the  more  one reflects  on it. To be  sure,  a  decision  by  a state  court  to disregard  state  law
would  raise  serious questions  under Article  II. And  I do  not believe  that  the  Florida  Supreme
Court  correctly  interpreted  state  law.  But  the  majority's  view  was  not  so  implausible  as  to
amount to a  change,  rather  than  an interpretation. See Bush  v Gore, 121  S Ct at 543-45  (Souter
dissenting); id at 554  (Breyer dissenting).

31 

Id at 530.
Id.

32 
33  Id at 532.
34 
35 

Id.
Id.

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 763 2001

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[68:757

procedures  necessary  to protect  the fundamental right of each voter in
the  special  instance  of  a  statewide  recount  under  the  authority  of  a
single state judicial officer."'

The  Court was  well  aware  that its  equal protection  holding  could
have  explosive  impiications  for  the  future,  throwing  much  of  state
election  law  into constitutional  doubt. Thus  the  Court emphasized  the
limited  nature  of  its  ruling:  "The  question  before  the  Court  is  not
whether  local  entities, in  the  exercise  of  their expertise,  may  develop
different  systems  for  implementing  elections.  Instead,  we  are  pre-
sented  with  a  situation where  a  state  court  with the  power  to  assure
uniformity  has  ordered  a  statewide  recount  with  minimal  procedural
safeguards."37

B.  Merits: Three Problems

There  are  three  problems  with  this  reasoning.  First,  the  Court's
decision  lacked  any  basis  in  precedent.  Second,  the  Court's  effort  to
cabin  the  reach  of  its  decision  seemed  ad  hoc  and  unprincipled-a
common  risk  with  minimalism.  And  third,  the  system  that  the  Court
let stand  seemed  at  least as  problematic, from  the  standpoint of equal
protection, as  the system that the  Court held invalid.

1.  Precedent.

Nothing in the Court's previous decisions  suggested  that constitu-
tional  questions  would  be  raised  by this  kind  of inequality. The  cases
that  the  Court  invoked  on  behalf  of  the  equal  protection  holding-
mostly  involving  one-person,  one-vote  and  the  poll  tax'  -were  en-
tirely  far  afield. To  be sure, the  absence  of precedential  support is  not
decisive;  perhaps  the  problem  had  simply  never  arisen.  But  manual
recounts  are  far  from  uncommon,  and  no  one had  ever  thought  that
the  Constitution  requires  that  they  be  administered  under  clear  and
specific  standards.

To  make  the  problem  more  vivid,  suppose  that in  1998,  a  candi-
date  for  statewide  office-say, the  position  of  attorney  general-lost
after  a  manual  recount,  and  brought  a  constitutional  challenge  on
equal protection  grounds, claiming  that county  standards  for counting
votes  were  unjustifiably  variable.  Is  there  any  chance  that  the  disap-
pointed  candidate  would  succeed  in  federal  court?  In  all  likelihood

36 

Id.
Id.

533,568  (1964).

37 
38  Harper v  Virginia Board of Elections, 383  US 663,666  (1966);  Reynolds v  Sims, 377  US

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 764 2001

20011

Order Without Law

the  constitutional  objection  would  fail;  in  most  courts,  it  would  not
even  be  taken  seriously. The  rationale  would  be  predictable,  going
roughly like  this: "No  previous decision of any court supports the view
that  the  Constitution  requires  uniformity  in  methods  for  ascertaining
the will  of the voter. There  is no violation  here  of the principle of one-
person,  one-vote. Nor  is there  any sign  of discrimination  against  poor
people  or members  of any  identifiable  group. There  is  no  demonstra-
tion  of fraud  or  favoritism  or  self-dealing. In  the  absence  of such  evi-
dence, varying  local standards, chosen  reasonably and  in good faith by
local  officials,  do  not  give  rise  to  a  violation  of the  federal  Constitu-
tion. In  addition, a  finding  of an  equal  protection violation  would  en-
tangle  federal  courts  in  what  has, for  many  decades,  been  seen  as  a
matter for state  and local government."

Of course it is  possible to think that  this equal protection  holding
would  be  wrong. Whether  the  federal  Constitution  should  be  read  to
cabin  local  discretion  in  this way is a  difficult question. The  problem is
that  in  a  case  of  such  great  public  visibility, the  Court  embraced  the
principle  with no support  in precedent, with little  consideration  of im-
plications, and  as a kind of bolt from the blue.

2.  Reach.

It is not  at all clear  how the  rationale of Bush v  Gore can be cab-
ined in the way  that the Court  sought  to do. What  is  missing from the
opinion is an  explanation  of why  the situation in the case is distinctive,
and  hence  to be treated  differently  from  countless  apparently  similar
situations  involving equal  protection  problems. The  effort to cabin the
outcome, without  a  sense  of the principle  to justify the  cabining, gives
the opinion  an unprincipled  cast.

Suppose, for  example,  that a  particular  area  in  a state  has an old
technology, one that  misses  an  unusually  high percentage  of intended
votes. Suppose  that many  areas  in that  state  have  new technology, ca-
pable  of  detecting  a far  higher percentage  of  votes. Suppose  that vot-
ers  in  that  area  urge  that the  Equal  Protection  Clause  is violated  by
the  absence  of  uniformity  in  technology. Why  doesn't  Bush  v  Gore
make  that claim quite  plausible?  Perhaps it can  be  urged  that budget-

39  One  of the  real  oddities  of the  majority  opinion  is  that  it  was joined by  two  Justices-
Scalia and Thomas-who  have insisted  in their  commitment  to "originalism"  as a method  of con-
stitutional  interpretation. There  is  no  reason  to  think  that  by  adopting  the  Equal  Protection
Clause,  the  nation  thought  that  it  was  requiring  clear  and  specific  standards  in  the  context  of
manual  recounts  in  statewide  elections.  In  fact  it  is  controversial  to  say  that  the  Fourteenth
Amendment  applies  to  voting  at  all.  The  failure  of Justices  Scalia  and Thomas  to suggest  the
relevance  of originalism, their  preferred  method, raises many puzzles.

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 765 2001

The University of Chicago Law Review

[68:757

ary  considerations,  combined  with  unobjectionable  and  longstanding
rules  of  local  autonomy, make  such  disparities  legitimate. In  the  con-
text of a  statewide  recount  administered  by  a single  judge -the  situa-
tion in  Bush v Gore-these considerations  appear less relevant. But it
is  easy  to  imagine  cases  in  which  those  considerations  do  not  seem
weighty. I will  return to these  questions  below.

3.  Arbitrariness  on all sides.

The  system  that  the  recount  was  designed  to  correct  might  well
have  been  as  arbitrary  as  the  manual  recount  that  the  Court  struck
down-and  hence  the  Court's  decision  might  well  have  created  an
even  more  severe  problem  of  inequality.  Consider  the  multiple  ine-
qualities in the certified  vote. Under that vote, some machines  counted
votes  that  were  left  uncounted  by  other  machines, simply  because  of
different  technology. Where  optical  scan  ballots were  used, for  exam-
ple,  voters  were  far  more  likely  to  have  their  votes  counted  than
where  punchcard  ballots  were  used.  In  Florida,  fifteen  of  every  one
thousand  punchcard  ballots showed no presidential  vote, whereas only
three  of every  optically  scanned  ballot  showed  no  such  vote. 4  These
disparities  might  have  been  reduced  with  a  manual  recount.  If  the
broad principle  of Bush v  Gore is correct, manual recounts might even
seem constitutionally  compelled. But  the Court's decision,  forbidding
manual  recounts, ensured  that  the  relevant  inequalities  would  not  be
corrected.

Nor were  the machine  recounts  free  from inequality. Some coun-
ties merely checked  the  arithmetic;  others  put ballots through  a  tabu-
lating machine. The  result is a  significant difference  in  the effect  of the
machine  recount.  If  the  constitutional  problem  consists  of  the  differ-
ent treatment  of  the  similarly  situated, then it seems  entirely possible
that  the  manual  recount,  under  the  admittedly  vague  "intent  of  the
voter" standard,  would  have  made  things  better  rather  than  worse -
and that  the  decision of  the United  States Supreme  Court aggravated
the problem of unjustified  inequality.

4.  Overall  evaluation.

On  the merits,  then,  the  most  reasonable  conclusion  is  not  that
the Court's decision  was  senseless-it was not-  but that it lacked  sup-
port  in  precedent  or  history, that  it  raised  many  unaddressed  issues
with respect  to scope,  and that it might  well  have  authorized  equality

40  Bush  v  Gore, 121  S  Ct at 552.

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 766 2001

20011

Order Without Law

problems  as  serious  as  those  that it prevented.  In  these ways, the ma-
jority's opinion  has  some of the  most severe  vices  of judicial  minimal-
ism. In fact this  was  a subminimalist  opinion, giving  the appearance  of
having been built for the specific  occasion.

C.  Remedy

Now  turn  to  the  Court's  decision  on  the  issue  of  remedy. If the
manual  recount  would  be  unconstitutional  without  clear  standards,
what  is  the  appropriate  federal  response?  Should  the  manual  recount
be  terminated, or  should  it  be continued  with clear standards?  At first
glance, that  would  appear  to be  a  question of Florida  law. If the  Flor-
ida  legislature  would  want  manual  recounts  to  continue,  at  the  ex-
pense  of  losing  the federal  safe  harbor,  then  manual  recounts  should
continue.  If  the  Florida  legislature  would  want  manual  recounts  to
stop,  in  order  to  preserve  the  safe  harbor,  then  manual  recounts
should stop.

Why  did  the  Supreme  Court  nonetheless  halt  the  manual  re-
count?  The  simple  answer  is  that  the  Court  thought  it  clear  that  the
Florida  Supreme  Court  would  interpret  Florida  law  so  as  to  halt  the
process. As the Court wrote,

The  Supreme  Court  of  Florida  has  said  that  the  legislature  in-
tended  the  State's  electors  to  'participate[  ]  fully  in  the  federal
electoral  process  ....  Because  it is evident  that any recount  seek-
ing to meet  the December  12 date  will be unconstitutional  for the
reasons  we  have  discussed,  we  reverse  the  judgment  of  the  Su-
preme  Court of Florida ordering  a recount  to proceed.

Thus  the  Court concluded  that  as  a matter  of Florida  law, a  con-
tinuation  of the manual  recount "could  not be  part of an  'appropriate'
order  authorized  by" Florida  law.

This  was  a  blunder. It is true  that  the Florida Supreme  Court  had
emphasized  the  importance,  for  the  Florida  legislature,  of  the  safe
harbor  provision.  But the Florida  courts had  never been  asked  to  say
whether  they  would interpret  Florida law  to  require  a  cessation  in  the
counting  of votes, if  the  consequence  of the  counting  would  be  to  ex-
tend  the  choice  of  electors  past  December  12.  In  fact  the  Florida
Court's pervasive  emphasis  on the need to  ensure the inclusion  of law-

41 

Id  at 533.
Id.

S Ct 525.

42 
43  Gore v  Harris, 772  S2d  1243,  1248  (Fla Dec  8,2000), revd  and remd  as, Bush  v  Gore, 121

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 767 2001

The University of Chicago Law Review

[68:757

ful  votes"  would  seem  to  indicate  that  if  a  choice  must  be  made  be-
tween  the safe  harbor  and the inclusion  of votes, the  latter might  have
priority. It  is  not  easy  to  explain  the  United  States  Supreme  Court's
failure  to  allow  the  Florida  Supreme  Court  to  consider  this  issue  of
Florida law.

Here, then, is the part of the United States Supreme Court's  opin-

ion that is most difficult  to defend  on  conventional  legal  grounds.

III.  ALTERNATE  HISTORY:  WHAT MIGHT HAVE HAPPENED

Might  anything  unconventional  help  to  defend  the  Court's  con-
clusion?  I have  suggested  that the Court's  decision  produced order. In
fact it  might  well  have  averted  chaos. It  is  worthwhile  to  spend  some
time on  this question, because  it provides  the  best  explanation  of the
Court's otherwise inexplicable  approach.

Let  us  briefly  imagine  what  would  have  happened  if  the  Court
had  affirmed  the  Florida  Supreme  Court, or  remanded  for  continued
counting  under  a  constitutionally  adequate  standard.  In  the  event  of
an  affirmance,  manual  counting  would  of  course  have  continued.  In
the event of a  remand, the  Florida Supreme  Court would  have  had to
sort  out  the  relationship  between  the  legislature's  desire  to preserve
the safe harbor  and its  desire to ensure  an accurate  count. That  Court
had  been  divided  4-3  on  the  question  whether  a  manual  recount
should be  required  at  all.  It  is  reasonable  to speculate  that  the  three
dissenters  would  continue  to  object to  the  manual  recount. The  ques-
tion  is  whether  any of  the  four members  of the  majority  would  con-
clude  that  the  December  12  deadline  took  precedence  over  the  con-
tinuation  of  the  contest. There  is  certainly  a  chance  that  the  Florida
Supreme  Court would  have  terminated  the  election  at  that point. But
if it failed  to do so, things would have  gotten extremely  messy.

Almost  certainly,  the  Republican-dominated  Florida  legislature
would  have  promptly  sent  a  slate  of  electors,  thus  producing  two
(identical)  slates for Bush-the November  26 certification and  the leg-
islatively  specified  choice.  The  legislative  slate  would  in  turn  have
been  certified  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  Governor  of Florida.
In  the  meantime  the  counting  would,  by  hypothesis,  have  continued,
well  after the  expiration  of the December  12  safe  harbor date. If Bush
had  won  the  manual  recount,  things  would  be  very  simple. But  sup-
pose  Gore  had  won;  what  then?  Would  the  Secretary  of  State  have
voluntarily  certified  the  new  count?  Would  the  Governor  of Florida
have  signed  off on the  certification?  It is  not at  all clear  that Florida's

44  Gore v  Harris, 772  S2d  at  1256-57.

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 768 2001

2001]

Order Without Law

executive  officials  would  do  what  the  Florida  courts  wanted  them  to
do.  And  if  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  Governor  refused,  how
would  the  Florida  courts  have  responded?  Would  they  have  threat-
ened  executive  officials  with  contempt?  How  would  they  have  re-
sponded  to the threat?  At the very least, there is  a risk here  of a minor
constitutional  crisis within Florida itself.

Suppose  that this problem  had  been solved-and  that three certi-
fied  votes from Florida  had come  before  Congress. At that point, both
houses  of  Congress,  acting  separately,  would  have  to  vote  on  which
certification  to  accept.45  Almost  certainly  the  Republican-dominated
House of Representatives  would  have  accepted  a  Bush slate. The  Sen-
ate, split  50-50,  would  be  much  harder  to  call;  perhaps  some  Democ-
rats, in  conservative  states  won  by  Bush, would  have  agreed  to accept
the  Bush  slate  from  Florida.  But  perhaps  there  would  have  been  an
even division  within the Senate. If so, Vice  President  Gore  would have
been in  a position to  cast  the deciding  vote. Suppose  that  he  did-and
that he  voted  for  the  third  Florida  slate, and  thus  for  himself, so  as  to
ensure that the House  and  the Senate would come  to  different  conclu-
sions. At that point, the outcome  is supposed  to turn on the executive's
certification.'  But which  was  that? Here  the law  provides  no clear  an-
swers. At this  point,  a  genuine  constitutional  crisis  might  have  arisen.
It  is  not  clear  how  it  would  have  been  settled.  No  doubt  the  nation
would have  survived, but things would have  gotten  very messy.

The  Court's decision  made all of these issues  academic. It averted
what  would  have  been, at  the  very  least, an  intense  partisan  struggle,
lacking  a  solution  that is  likely  to  have  been  minimally  acceptable  to
all  sides. I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  the  Supreme  Court  majority
was  correct. The  Court  owes  a  duty  of  fidelity  to  the  law. Pragmatic
concerns  are certainly  relevant  in the face  of ambiguous  law, but there
is  a  reasonable  argument  that  the  Court  abandoned  the  law  simply
because  of pragmatic  concerns. What  I hope  to have shown  is  why the
Court might have  done  the nation a big favor.

IV.  A LARGE NEW  RIGHT?

For the future, the  most important  question involves  the scope  of
the  right  recognized  in Bush  v  Gore. Notwithstanding  the  Court's  ef-
forts, that right  is  not  at all  easy  to  cabin,  at least  as a  matter  of basic
principle. On its  face,  the  Court  appears  to  have  created  the most  ex-
pansive voting right in many decades.

45  See  3 USC  §  15  (1994).
46 

Id.

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 769 2001

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[68:757

A.  A Minimalist  Reading

At  its  narrowest,  the  Court  has  held  that  in  the  context  of  a
statewide  recount  proceeding  overseen  by a  single judge, the standard
for  counting  votes  must  be  (a)  uniform  and  (b)  concrete  enough  to
ensure  that  similarly  situated  people  will  be  treated  similarly. This
holding  extends  well  beyond  the  context  of  presidential  elections;  it
applies to statewide  offices, not just federal  offices.
By  itself this is  a  substantial  renovation  of current law, since  over
thirty  states  fail  to  specify  concrete  standards  for  manual  recounts. 4
This  does  not  mean  that  state  legislatures  must  set down  clear  stan-
dards in  advance; a  decision  by state judges  should  suffice. But the  in-
evitable  effect  of the opinion will  be to increase  the pressure  for legis-
lative  reform  at  the  state  and  possibly  even  the  national  level. Any
state  legislature  would  be  well-advised  to  specify  the  standard  by
which  votes  will  be  counted  in  the  context  of  a  manual  recount.  All
this  should count,  by itself, as a gain  for sense  and rationality in the re-
count process.

B.  Equality  in Voting

It  is  hard  to understand  why  the principle  of Bush  v  Gore does
not  extend  much further  than the  case  itself, at  least in  the  context  of
voting. Consider  the following easily imaginable  cases:

1. Poor  counties  have  old  machinery  that  successfully  counts  97
percent of votes; wealthy counties  have  newer machinery  that success-
fully counts  99 percent  of  votes. Those  in poor  counties  mount  a  con-
stitutional  challenge, claiming  that the  difference in  rejection rates is a
violation of the Equal Protection Clause.

2.  Same  as  the  immediately  preceding  case,  except  the  division
does not involve  poor  and  rich counties. It is  simply the case that some
areas  use  machines  that  have  a  near-perfect  counting rate, and  others
do not. The  distribution of machines  seems quite random.

3. Ballots  differ  from  county  to  county. Some  counties  use  a  ver-
sion of the  controversial "butterfly ballot"; most do  not. It is clear  that
where  the  butterfly  ballot  is  used,  an  unusual  number  of  voters  are
confused,  and  do  not  successfully  vote  for  the  candidate  of  their
choice. Does this violate  the Equal Protection Clause?

4.  It is  a  national  election.  Citizens  in Alabama  use different  ma-
chinery  from  that  used  by  citizens  in  New  York. The  consequence  is
that  citizens  in  Alabama  are  far  more  likely  to  have  their  votes  un-

47  See Bush v Gore, 121  S Ct  at 540  n 2 (Stevens  dissenting).

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 770 2001

2001]

Order Without Law

counted than  citizens  in New York. Do they  have  a valid equal protec-
tion claim? What if the statistical  disparity is very large?

The  Bush  Court's  suggestion  that  ordinary  voting  raises  "many
complexities"  is  correct;0  but  how  do  those  complexities  justify  un-
equal  treatment  in  the  cases just  given? The  best  answer  would  point
to  two  practical  points:  budgetary  considerations  and  the  tradition  of
local  control. In  light of these  points, it might  be  difficult  for  some ar-
eas  to  have  the  same  technology  as  others. Wealthy  counties  might
prefer  to  purchase  more  expensive  machinery,  whereas  poorer  com-
munities  might devote  their  limited resources  to other problems. Per-
haps judicial caution  in  the cases just given can  be justified in this way.
But  even  if  this  is  so,  Bush v  Gore plainly  suggests  the  legitimacy  of
both  state  and  national  action  designed  to  combat  disparities  of  this
kind. It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  Court's  decision, however  narrowly
intended,  set out  a  rationale  that  might  well  create  an  extremely  im-
portant  (and  appealing)  innovation  in the law  of voting rights. Perhaps
legislatures will  respond to the invitation  if courts  refuse to do so.

C.  A General Requirement  of Rules?

In fact the  Court's rationale  might extend more broadly still. Out-
side  of the context  of voting, governments  do not  impose the  most se-
vere  imaginable  constraints  on  official  discretion. Because  discretion
exists, the similarly  situated  are  treated  differently.9  Perhaps the  most
obvious  example  is  the  "beyond  a  reasonable  doubt"  standard  for
criminal  conviction,  a  standard  that  different  juries  will  inevitably  in-
terpret in different ways. Is this unacceptable?  0

In  the  abstract,  the  question  might  seem  fanciful;  but  analogous
constitutional challenges  are hardly unfamiliar. In the 1960s  and 1970s,
there  was  an  effort  to  use  the  Due  Process  and  Equal  Protection
Clauses to try to ensure more  rule-bound  decisions, in such  contexts as
licensing  and  admission  to  public  housing.'  Plaintiffs  argued  that
without clear  criteria  to discipline  the  exercise of discretion, there was
a  risk  that  the  similarly  situated  would  not  be  treated  similarly,  and
that  this  risk  was  constitutionally  unacceptable.  But  outside  of  the

48  Bush  v Gore, 121  S  Ct  at 532.
49  This  is  the basic  theme  of Kenneth  Culp  Davis, Discretionary Justice: A  Preliminary In-

quiry (LSU  1969).

50  A possible  answer  is that  no more  rule-bound  approach  would  be  better, all  things con-
sidered. This  is  a  difference  from  Bush  v  Gore, where  it  was  easy  to  imagine  a  rule-bound  ap-
proach that would add constraints  on discretion  without sacrificing  any  important value.

51  Hornsby v  Allen, 326 F2d  605,610  (5th Cir  1964); Holmes v  New York  City Housing Au-

thority, 398 F2d  262,264-65  (2d  Cir 1968).

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 771 2001

The  University of Chicago Law Review

[68:757

most  egregious  settings, these  efforts failed, 2  apparently  on the theory
that  rule-bound  decisions  produce  arbitrariness  of  their  own,  and
courts  are  in  a  poor  position  to  know  whether  rules  are  better  than
discretionary  judgments. Does  Bush v  Gore require  courts  to  extend
the limited precedents  here?

Perhaps  it  could  be  responded  that  because  the  choice  between
rule-bound  and  more  discretionary  judgments  is  difficult  in  many
cases, judicial  deference  is  generally  appropriate-but  not  when  fun-
damental  rights, such  as the right to vote, are at  risk. If so, Bush v Gore
has a  limited  scope. But does  this mean  that methods must be  in place
to  ensure  against  differential  treatment  of  those  subject  to  capital
punishment?  To  life  imprisonment?  I  cannot  explore  these  questions
here. But  for better or for worse, the rationale  in Bush v Gore appears
to make it necessary  to consider these  issues anew.

CONCLUSION

If the  Supreme  Court  is  asked  to  intervene  in  an  electoral  con-
troversy, especially  a  presidential  election, it  should  try to avoid  even
the  slightest  appearance  that  the justices  are  speaking  for  something
other  than  the  law. Unanimity, or  near-unanimity,  can  go  a  long way
toward  providing  the  necessary  assurance. Whether  or  not this  is pos-
sible,  the  Court's  opinion  should  be  well-reasoned  and  rooted  firmly
in the existing legal  materials.

In  Bush  v Gore, the  Court  did  not  succeed  on  these  counts. The
5-4  division  was  unfortunate  enough;  it  was  still  worse  that  the  five-
member  majority  consisted  of  the most  conservative  justices. Regret-
tably, the  Court's  opinion  had  no  basis  in  precedent  or history. To  be
sure, the  equal  protection  argument  had  a  certain  appeal  in common
sense. But even  if it were correct, the natural remedy  would have  been
to  remand  to  the  Florida  Supreme  Court,  to  ask  that  court  to  say
whether  Florida  law  would  favor  the  manual  recount  over  the  safe
harbor provision, or  vice-versa. This  remedy seems  especially  sensible
in  light  of  the  fact  that  the  inequalities  that  the  Court  condemned
might  well  have  been  less  serious  than  the  inequalities  that  the  re-
count would have corrected.

Nonetheless,  there  are  two  things  to  be  said  on  behalf  of  the
Court's ruling. First, the Court brought  a chaotic situation to an abrupt
end. From  the  standpoint  of  constitutional  order, it  is  reasonable  to

52  For examples of unsuccessful  attempts to challenge  unconditioned discretion  violative of
equal  protection  in  these  contexts, see  Phelps v  Housing Authority of Woodruff, 742  F2d  816,
822-23  (4th Cir 1984); Atlanta Bowling Center, Inc v Allen, 389 F2d  713,715-17  (5th Cir  1968).

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 772 2001

20011

Order Without Law

speculate  that  any  other conclusion  would  have  been  far worse. In  all
likelihood,  the  outcome  would  have  been  resolved  in  Congress,  and
here  political  partisanship  might  well  have  spiraled  out  of  control.
Second,  the principle  behind  the equal  protection  ruling has consider-
able  appeal. In  a  statewide  recount, it is not easy  to explain  why  votes
should count in one area when they would  not count elsewhere.  In fact
the principle has even  more appeal  if understood  broadly, so as to for-
bid  similarly  situated  voters  from  being  treated  differently  because
their  votes  are  being  counted  through  different  technologies.  Under-
stood  in  that broader  way, the principle  of Bush v Gore should bring  a
range  of questionable  practices under fresh constitutional  scrutiny.

Bush v Gore is  likely to intensify  public concern  about unjustifia-
bly  aggressive  decisions  from  the  Supreme  Court,  and  perhaps  that
concern  will  give  the  Court  an  incentive  to  be  more  cautious  about
unsupportable  intrusions  into  the  democratic  arena. Far  more impor-
tant, Bush v Gore might come  to stand for a principle, in legislatures if
not  courts, that greatly  outruns  the  Court's  subminimalist  holding -a
principle  that  calls  for  an  end  to  the  many  unjustified  disparities  in
treatment  in  voting  and  perhaps  beyond.  It  would  be  a  nice  irony  if
the  Court's weak and unprecedented  opinion, properly condemned on
democratic  grounds,  led  to  significant  social  improvements  from  the
democratic  point of view.

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 773 2001

Fi-a-ft-I

HeinOnline  -- 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 774 2001

