University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2002

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

A New Executive Order for Improving Federal
Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit
Analysis
Cass R. Sunstein

Robert W. Hahn

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein & Robert W. Hahn, "A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit
Analysis" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 150, 2002).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

  

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 150 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation? 
Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis 
 
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: 
http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
 
The Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=309754

A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation?  
Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis 

Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein 

 
I. Introduction 

A. Processes and Problems 

For  over  twenty  years,  the  executive  branch  of  the  federal  government  has  required 

regulatory  agencies  to assess  the costs and  benefits  of  regulation,  and to  attempt  to  ensure that 
the benefits outweigh, or justify, the costs.1 At least in a formal sense, cost-benefit balancing is 
now the official creed of the executive branch, as demonstrated by a series of executive orders.2 

The  point  cuts  across  partisan  divisions:  President  Clinton’s  approach  differed  somewhat  from 
President Reagan’s, but it shared the fundamental commitment to cost-benefit balancing.3 

Notwithstanding  this  public  commitment,  national  regulation  has  hardly  come  into 
compliance  with  the  principles  of  cost-benefit  balancing.4  This  overall  pattern  of  imperfect 

compliance  should  raise  many  alarm  bells,  even  for  those  who  have  real  doubts  about  cost-

benefit analysis and merely want more coherence and better priority-setting. The general record 

does  show  numerous  successes,  in  the  form  of  regulations  that  promise  to  deliver  significant 
benefits  at  a  relatively  low  price.5  But  in  many  cases,  regulations  seem  to  do  more  harm  than 
good.6 Indeed, a close look at federal regulatory policy shows a wide range of problems. Perhaps 

foremost  among  them  is  exceptionally  poor  priority-setting,  with  substantial  resources 

                                                 
1 President Reagan first issued an executive order requiring agencies to use cost-benefit analysis. See Exec. Order 
No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127(1982). 
2  See  id.  (requiring  regulations  to  pass a cost-benefit test); see also Exec. Order No. 12,498, 3 C.F.R. 323 (1986) 
(requiring  agencies  to  submit  an  annual  regulatory  plan  and  to  adhere  to  cost-benefit  principles);  Exec.  Ord.  No. 
12,866, 3 C.F.R. 638(1994) (requiring agencies to assess all costs and benefits of regulatory alternatives). 
3 President Clinton’s cost-benefit approach expressly required agencies to include qualitative measures of costs and 
benefits, see Exec. Order No. 12,866, 3 C.F.R. 638, 639 (1994), while President Reagan’s approach did not specify 
which costs and benefits were to be measured, see Exec. Order No. 12,291, 3 C.F.R. 127, 128 (1982). 
4 See Eric Posner, “Controlling Agencies With Cost-Benefit Analysis”, University of Chicago Law Review, Vol. 68, 
no.4,  Fall  2001;  Robert  W.  Hahn  et  al.,  “Assessing  Regulatory  Impact  Analysis:  The  Failure  of  Agencies  To 
Comply  With  Executive  Order  12866”,  23  Harvard.  J.  L  &  PP  859  (2000)  (suggesting  that  the  absence  of 
information on net benefits in Regulatory Impact Analyses leads to the conclusion that agencies have failed to carry 
out cost-benefit analyses). 
5  See  Robert  W.  Hahn  et  al.,  Do  Federal  Regulations  Reduce  Mortality?  15-19  (2000)  (evaluating  twenty-four 
regulations whose mortality benefits constitute 90% of total benefits and concluding that nine pass a cost-benefit test 
because  their  net  cost  per  statistical  life  saved  is  less  than  $5  million);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  “Cost-Benefit  Default 
Principles”,  99  Mich.  L.  Rev.  1651,  1661  (2001)  (providing  examples  where  “cost-benefit  analysis  has  ...  led  to 
regulations that accomplish statutory goals at lower cost”). 

 

 

 

 

sometimes  going  to  small  problems,  and  with  little  attention  being  paid  to  some  serious 
problems.7 There are also unnecessarily high costs, with $146 to $229 billion being attributable 
to compliance costs each year.8  

We do not contend that an assessment of quantified costs and quantified benefits tells us 
everything that we need to know or that precise numbers are always possible9 But when the costs 

are  high  and  the  benefits  low  or  nonexistent,  something  seems  seriously  amiss,  especially 

because an absence of significant benefits signals a likely absence of significant savings in terms 

of  health,  safety,  or  the  environment.  Especially  in  a  period  in  which  economic  growth  and 

improved safety and health are among government’s highest priorities, this is a major problem. 

And indeed, the recent reports of the Office of Management and Budget (“OMB”), designed to 

capture  the  costs  and  benefits  of  a  wide  range  of  regulations,  reveal  some disturbing numbers: 

the  EPA’s  regulation  for  financial  assurance  for  municipal  solid  waste  landfills  has  monetized 
benefits of $0, but costs of $100 million, and this is expected for the next thirteen years;10 for the 

next  thirteen  years,  OSHA’s  methylene  chloride  regulation  will  have  annual  costs  of  $100 
million  and  annual  benefits  of  $40  million;11  the  cost-benefit  ratio  for  airbag  depowering 
regulation seems bad, though there is uncertainty in the data.12  

Consider Table 1, which lists some estimates of costs and benefits of recent regulations.  

 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
6  See  Hahn  et  al.,  supra  note  5,  at  23  (finding  that  over  half  of  the  twenty-four  regulations  studied  were  likely  to 
cause an increase in mortality risk). 
7  This  is  the  theme  of  Stephen  Breyer’  recent  book.  See  Stephen  Breyer,  Breaking  the  Vicious  Circle:  Toward 
Effective Risk Regulation (1993). 
8 Unless otherwise noted, year dollars are taken from the source that is cited. In this case, OMB estimates that the 
cost of social regulation as of 1999 is between $146 and $229 billion in 1996 dollars. Office of Management and 
Budget,  Office  of  Information  and  Regulatory  Affairs,  Report  to  Congress  on  the  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Federal 
Regulations tbl.4 (2000) [hereinafter OMB 2000 Report Charts]  
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/2000fedreg-charts.pdf. In an earlier report to Congress, OMB notes that the 
EPA’s Cost of Clean report in 1990 estimated the cost of environmental regulations as of 1988 to be $101 billion 
(1996 dollars). OMB used this figure as a baseline and added the cost of all major environmental regulations issued 
by  the  agencies  between  1987  and  1996  to  estimate  the  annual  cost  of  environmental  regulation  in  1997  at  $144 
billion (1996 dollars). Office of Management and Budget, Report to Congress on the Cost and Benefits of Federal 
Regulation tbl.1 (1997) at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/chap2.html. 
9  See  Kenneth  Arrow  et  al.,  Benefit-Cost  Analysis  in  Environmental,  Health  and  Safety  Regulation  8  (1996) 
(recommending  that  analysts  “give  due  consideration  to  factors  that  defy  quantification  but  are  thought  to  be 
important”), 
http://www.aei.brookings.org.publications/books/benefit_cost_analysis.pdf.  Lisa 
Heinzerling  and  Frank  Ackerman,  “Pricing  the  Priceless:  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  of  Environmental  Protection,”  U. 
Penn L. Rev. 
10 OMB 2000 Report Charts, supra note 8, tbl.12. 
11 Id.  
12 Id. 

available 

at 

1 

Table 1: Questionable Cost-Benefit Ratios13 
(Net Benefits of Regulations: in millions, adjusted to 1996 dollars) 

 

Regulation 

2000  

2005 

2010 

2015 

 

 

-60  

0 

-100 

-60 

0 

-100 

-60 

0 

-100 

-60 

0 

-100 

-150 to 0 

-150 to 0 

-150 to 0 

-150 to 0 

0 
-40 to 40 
-220 
-57 to 29 

-235 to 240 
-40 to 40 
-220 
-57 to 29 

-840 to 1190 
-40 to 40 
-220 
-57 to 29 

-9,200 to -1000 
-40 to 40 
-220 
-57 to 29 

Worker 

Exposure  to  Methylene 
Chloride 
Roadway 
Protection 
Financial  Assurance  for 
Municipal  Solid  Waste 
Landfills 
Pulp  and  Paper  Effluent 
Guidelines 
Ozone Standards 
Child Restraint System 
Vessel Response Plans 
Nitrogen Oxide Emission 
from  new  Fossil  Fuel 
Fired  Steam  Generating 
Units 
 

It  might  seem  that  existing  executive  orders  would  prevent  or  reduce  outcomes  of  this 
kind,  but  apparently  these  orders  have  not  had  a  large  effect.14  Indeed,  there  is  some  evidence 
that the existing orders have had little impact on what agencies actually do.15  

This  is  no  mere  academic  objection.  Expensive  regulation  may  well  increase  prices, 
reduce wages, and increase unemployment (and hence poverty).16 Resources now being devoted 

to small or imaginary problems might be diverted  instead to areas  where, by all accounts, they 

could produce far more good. Cost-benefit analysis is not an effort to reduce all human goods to 

                                                 
 
14 See Hahn & Litan, supra note 13. Another study suggests that roughly half of the government’s final regulations 
would not pass a cost-benefit test. See Robert W. Hahn, Regulatory Reform: Assessing the Government's Numbers 
(AEI-Brookings  Joint  Ctr.  for  Regulatory  Studies,  Working  Paper  No.  99-6,  1999);  see  also  Hahn  &  Litan,  supra 
note 13, at tbl.1. (showing that a significant number of recent regulations would fail a strict cost-benefit test). 
15  See  Posner,  supra  note  4.  For  an  examination  of  the  impact  of  the  efficiency  effects  of  the executive orders on 
regulation,  see  Scott  Farrow,  Evaluating  the  Regulatory  Process  and  Government  Performance:  Does  Executive 
Office  Oversight  Matter?  (Discussion  Paper,  Oct.  18,  1999)  http://www.epp.cmu.edu/csir/.  Farrow  finds  that 
executive  office  oversight  does  not  have  a  significant  efficiency-improving  impact  on  the  difference  between 
proposed  and  final  regulations,  or  on  the  cost  effectiveness  of  regulation.  Id.  at  2.  A  partial  reason  is  that  some 
statutes forbid cost-benefit balancing, but we believe that this is not the whole picture. 
16 To offer a few more details: If regulation increases marginal costs for firms, it is certain to lead to higher prices; if 
regulation increases a firm’s labor costs, wages will be reduced; but it is less clear whether regulation will increase 

2 

 

 

numbers,  but  to  increase  the  likelihood  that  regulation  will  actually  produce  human  good. 

According to  one study, better allocations of health expenditures could save, each year, 60,000 

additional  lives  at  no  additional  cost––and  such  allocations  could  maintain  the current  level of 
lives  saved  with  $31  billion  in  annual  savings.17  We  do  not  believe  that  cost-benefit  analysis 

should be the exclusive basis for assessing regulation, but we do believe that it is an important 

tool,  and  that  a  movement  toward  improved  balancing  is  likely  to  promote  many  social  goals, 
including  better  health  and  increased  longevity.18  This  somewhat  abstract  claim  has  been 
dramatized by repeated demonstrations that some regulations create significant substitute risks19–

–and  that  with  cheaper,  more  effective  tools,  regulation  could  achieve  its  basic  goals  while 
saving billions of dollars.20 

 

B. A Deeper and Wider Commitment to Cost-Benefit Analysis 

How can regulation be moved in more sensible directions? This is a large question, and 

we will not attempt to answer it thoroughly here. But it seems to us that much of the answer lies 

in improved institutions, and, in particular, in institutional reforms that increase the role of cost-

benefit  analysis  in  regulatory  policy  as  a  way  of  drawing  attention  to  the  likely  effects  of 

alternative courses of action. Of course statutory changes would be necessary in many cases. We 

emphasize  two  points  here.  First,  the  commitment  to  cost-benefit  analysis  has  been  far  too 

superficial,  and  in  some  ways  mostly  symbolic;  it  should  be  deepened  through  efforts  to 

strengthen  its  actual  role.  Second,  the  commitment  to  cost-benefit  analysis  has  been  far  too 

narrow; it should be widened through efforts to incorporate independent regulatory commissions 

within its reach.  

                                                                                                                                                             
unemployment, at least in the long-run. If the regulation increases the cost of capital relative to labor, employment 
might even increase. 
17  Tammy  O.  Tengs  &  John  D.  Graham,  “The  Opportunity  of  Costs  of  Haphazard  Social  Investments”  in  Life-
Saving, in Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved 167-182 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996). 
18  See  Hahn  et  al.,  supra  note  5,  at  24  (positing  that  evaluating  the  mortality  implications  of  regulatory  costs  is  a 
useful complement to cost-benefit analysis). 
19  See  Risk  versus  Risk:  Tradeoffs  in  Protecting  Health  and  the  Environment  (John  D. Graham & Jonathan Baert 
Wiener eds., 1995) (containing case studies demonstrating that risk substitution exists). 
20 See, e.g., A. Denny Ellerman et al., Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain Problem 315 (2000) (stating that 
the  emissions-trading  program  “can  both  achieve  stated  environmental  objectives  and  reduce  compliance  costs”); 
Robert N. Stavins, Market-Based Environmental Policies, in Public Policies for Environmental Protection 31, 35-41 
(Paul R. Portney & Robert N. Stavins eds., 2d ed. 2000) (demonstrating that tradable permit programs can achieve 
environmental goals and save money). 

3 

 

 

In this  Article,  we  propose  and explore  a modest but potentially significant step toward 

greater depth and width: a new executive order on federal regulation, building on lessons derived 

from the experience of the last two decades. The proposed order, designed to replace the current 

one  offers  eight  basic  innovations  over  existing  practice.  Most  of  these  address  the  issue  of 

depth; the last point goes to the issue of width. 

1.  Promoting  Compliance.  Our  proposal  attempts  to  ensure  that  agencies  will  actually 

comply  with  the  basic  principles  established  in  previous  orders,  in  part  by  explicitly  requiring 

agency  compliance  with  OMB  guidelines  for  regulatory  analysis.  This  would  be  an  extremely 
significant step, because OMB’s guidelines have been widely ignored,21 and because compliance 

with  those  guidelines  would  significantly  increase  rationality  and  coherence  in  the  regulatory 

process.  

2.  “Prompting”  Regulation.  Our  proposed  order  strengthens  the  role  of  the  Office  of 

Information  and  Regulatory  Affairs  (“OIRA”)  and  explicitly  creates  a  mechanism  by  which 

OIRA might “prompt” regulation as well as constrain it. This is an important way to ensure that 

cost-benefit  analysis  will  be  used  not  simply  to  reduce  and  limit  regulation,  but  also  to  spur 
regulation in those cases where it will do more good than harm.22 By creating a mechanism for 

prompting  regulation,  our  order  moves  cost-benefit  analysis  in  the  direction  of  service  as  a 

technical tool for improving regulation, rather than simply being a mechanism for reducing it.  

3.  Considering  Substitute  Risks  and  Not  Regulating  Trivial  Problems.  We  include 

explicit  requirements  that,  to  the  extent  permitted  by  law,  agencies  (a)  consider  the  substitute 

risks introduced by regulation and (b) do not attempt to regulate trivial or de minimis problems. 

These requirements build on some important developments within the federal courts, which have 

created  default  rules  authorizing  agencies  to  consider  substitute  risks  and  to  make  de  minimis 
exceptions  from  regulatory  requirements.23  These  default  rules  are  mirrored  in  federal 

                                                 
21 See Hahn et al., supra note 4, at 861 (concluding that agencies have ignored OMB guidelines from the fact that 
RIAs  “do  not  provide  enough  information  to  allow  regulatory  agencies  to  make  decisions  that  will  maximize  the 
efficiency or effectiveness of a rule”). 
22  Warren,  Edward  W.,  and  Gary  E.  Merchant,  “More  Good  Than  Harm:  A  First  Principle  for  Environmental 
Agencies and Reviewing Courts.” 20 Ecology Law Quarterly 379-440 (1993). 
23 See Sunstein, supra note 5, at 1669-76. 

4 

 

 

legislation, which often bars regulation of trivial risks,24 and which also calls, in many places, for 
attention to substitute risks.25  

4.  Explaining  Rationales  for  Action  When  Benefits  Do  Not  Exceed  Costs.  We  require 

that  benefits  should  generally  be  expected  to  exceed  costs,  and  ask  agencies  to  provide  a 

rationale for  proceeding with any regulation that  fails  to pass  a cost-benefit test (based on best 
quantifiable estimates).26 Some statutes explicitly require agencies to act even if the benefits fall 
short of the costs27. There may also be cases in which an agency believes that it is worthwhile to 

proceed even  though the quantifiable benefits do not exceed the quantifiable costs. Either way, 

we  believe  that  accountability  and  transparency  would  be  enhanced  if  the  head  of  an  agency 

were required to explain why a regulation is being adopted. 

   5.  Making  Underlying  Analysis  Available.  For  each  significant  regulatory  action,  we 

ask  the  appropriate  agency  to  include  an  underlying  analysis  of  the  benefits  and  costs,  so  that 

interested  parties  inside  and  outside  of  the  government  can  understand  how  the  results  were 

obtained,  and  perform  their  own  analysis  of  the  issue  if  they  so  choose.  We  believe  that  this 

requirement will also promote transparency and enhance accountability.  

   6. Formulating Regulatory Retrospective and Plan. We require each agency to create an 

annual regulatory retrospective and an annual regulatory plan. The retrospective should contain a 

general  analysis  of  the  costs  and  benefits  of  significant  regulations;  this  analysis  will  facilitate 
OMB’s statutory task of compiling an annual account for the executive branch as a whole.28 The 
annual regulatory plan, following a similar requirement in the existing executive order,29 would 

contain  an  account  of  what  the  agency  aspires  to  do  in  the  following  year.  The  purpose  of  the 

regulatory  plan  is  to  ensure  early,  rather  than  last-minute,  OIRA  involvement  in  planning,  and 

also to promote the involvement of high-level agency staff at an early stage.  

                                                 
24  This  is  the  prevailing  interpretation  of  the  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  Act,  under  both  the  toxic  substance 
provisions and the more general provisions of the Act. Indus. Union Dep’t, AFL-CIO v. Am. Petroleum Inst., 448 
U.S. 607, 639 (1980); Int’l Union, UAW v. OSHA, 37 F.3d 665, 669 (D.C. Cir. 1994). 
25 42 USC § 7411(a)(1) (1994). 
26 For a related view, see Robert W. Crandall et al., An Agenda for Federal Regulatory Reform (1997). Crandall et 
al. recommend that Congress require all regulatory agencies to report the quantifiable and non-quantifiable benefits 
of regulations. Id. at 12. In addition, the authors argue that “Congress should require that all new regulations costing 
more than $100 million annually pass a broadly defined benefit-cost test.” Id. (emphasis omitted).  
27 This could be the case, for example, where a specific performance standard for tailpipe emissions is statutorily set 
and  regulations  require  automakers  to  meet  that  standard  regardless  of  the  outcome  of  a  cost-benefit  test.  See  42 
U.S.C. 7409(b)(1). 
28 This task is required by the FY2000 Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, Pub. L. No. 106-58, § 
628(a)), 113 Stat. 472, 472-73 (1996). 

5 

 

 

 7.  Incorporating  Independent  Agencies.  For  the  first  time,  we  include  the  independent 

regulatory agencies, such as the Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), Consumer Product Safety 

Commission (“CPSC”), and Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”), within the ambit of 

the order. This is a significant departure from existing practice. We believe that the innovation is 

justified because these agencies are engaged in particularly important regulatory functions. The 
inclusion of independent agencies raises obvious legal issues, which we discuss below.30   

8. Authorizing Judicial Review. We provide for limited judicial review of the documents 

and  materials  generated  as  a  result  of  the  order.  The  goal  of  this  provision  is  to  increase  the 

likelihood  that  agencies  will  take  the  order’s  requirements  seriously.  It  also  authorizes  the 

invalidation of arbitrary and capricious agency action, to the extent that the relevant materials are 

pertinent, as a matter of law, in a test of the legality of agency conduct. 

We believe that a new executive order is probably the best way to move in the directions 

suggested  by  these  ideas.  There  are,  however,  reasonable  counterarguments.  For  well  over  a 

year, the Bush Administration has been operating under an executive order issued by President 

Clinton, and there are real virtues in a situation in which regulatory oversight under a president 

of  one  party  is  done  under  a  set  of  principles  issued  by  another.  It  is  important  to  give  such 

oversight both the reality and the appearance of nonpartisanship. A possible approach would be 

to retain the Clinton order and to issue a supplemental order that embodies some of the proposals 

described  here.  In  any  case  many  of  the  ideas  in  this  Essay  might  be  promoted  without  a  new 

order.  Greater  depth, at least, might  well be achieved simply by  a  stronger  effort, by OIRA, to 
ensure  compliance  with  existing  requirements,31  and,  indeed,  by  an  insistence  on  many  of  the 
proposals  made  here.32  If  a  new  executive  order  were  not  to  be  issued,  considerable  progress 

might  well  be  made  with  these  suggestions  in  mind.  For  those  who  lack  enthusiasm  for  our 

recommendations,  we  hope  that  the  discussion  will  nonetheless  cast  light  on  the  actual 

performance  of  the  federal  government  after  twenty  years  of  experience  under  a  (nominal) 

                                                                                                                                                             
29 See infra note 73 (describing the regulatory plan requirement of Executive Order No. 12,866). 
30 See infra Part III.G. 
31  See  John D. Graham, “Executive Regulatory Review: Surveying the Record, Making It Work,” Address Before 
the Weidenbaum Center Forum (Dec. 17, 2001), 
 http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/graham_speech121701.html  (“The  changes  we  are  making  at  OMB  are 
not headline-grabbers: No far-reaching legislative initiatives, no rhetoric-laden executive orders, and no campaigns 
of  regulatory  relief.  Yet  we  are  making  some  changes  that  we  believe  will  have  a  long-lasting  impact  on  the 
regulatory state.”) 

6 

 

 

commitment  to  cost-benefit  analysis.33  Indeed,  some  critics  will  be  pleased  to  see  the  modest 
effects of cost-benefit requirements to date.34 

This Article is organized as follows. Part I briefly outlines the development of executive 

orders on  federal regulation.  At the same time, it provides an account of what we mean by the 

still-controversial  idea  of  cost-benefit  balancing,  and  an  exploration  of  the  lessons  from  two 

decades of experience with executive orders on federal regulation. We emphasize here the extent 

to  which  the  commitment  to  cost-benefit  analysis  has  been,  too  much  of  the  time,  symbolic 

rather  than  real.  Part  II  explains  and  defends  our  innovations.  Part  III  explores  the  limits  of 

reform via executive order, and offers an account of what else might be done. Following a brief 

conclusion, the attached Appendix contains the text of our proposed executive order.  

 

II. Clarifications and Preliminaries 

A. What is Cost-Benefit Analysis? 

Before proceeding to the details, it is important to clarify our basic understanding of cost-

benefit  analysis.  We  mean  to  use  the  term  in  a  modest,  nonsectarian  way,  seeing  cost-benefit 
analysis  as  a  tool  and  a  procedure,  rather  than  as  a  rigid  formula  to  govern  outcomes.35  Thus 

understood, cost-benefit analysis requires a full accounting of the consequences of an action, in 

both quantitative and qualitative terms. Officials should have this accounting before them when 

they make decisions.  

We  do  not  insist  that  regulators  should  be  bound  by  the  “bottom-line”  numbers; 

qualitative  considerations,  and  a  sense  of  distributive  impacts  (not  themselves  considered 

“benefits”  in  the  analysis),  are  permitted  to  influence  public  officials.  But  if  regulators  are  to 

proceed, they should be prepared to explain either how the benefits exceed the costs, or if they 

do  not,  why  it  is  nonetheless  worthwhile  to  go  forward.  When  the  benefits  do  not  exceed  the 

costs, it would make sense to adopt a presumption against proceeding––a presumption that might 

                                                                                                                                                             
32  Of  course,  it  would  not  be  possible,  without  a  new  executive  order,  to  incorporate  the  independent  regulatory 
commissions under the process of OIRA review. 
33  We  do  not  deal  here  with  a  pervasive  problem:  OIRA  has  a  small  staff  (about  fifty)  and  many  regulations  to 
review (about 600 are deemed significant each year). To produce the improvements that we think desirable, it would 
obviously be important to ensure that OIRA’s staff is large enough to do the necessary work. 
34 Supra 10. 
35See Kenneth Arrow et al, supra note 9, at 3 (“Benefit-cost analysis should play an important role in informing the 
decision  making  process....”)  (emphasis  added);  Matthew  D.  Adler  &Eric  A.  Posner,  Implementing  Cost-Benefit 

7 

 

 

be  rebutted  by  showing,  for  example,  that  children  would  be  the  principal  beneficiaries  of  the 

regulation, or that poor people would  be  disproportionately benefited.  We therefore understand 

cost-benefit analysis to require a certain procedure: A quantitative and qualitative accounting of 

the effects of regulation, together with a duty to explain the grounds for action unless the benefits 

exceed  the  costs.  On  this  view,  the  antonym  to  regulation  guided  by  cost-benefit  analysis  is 

regulation  undertaken  without  anything  like  a  clear  sense  of  the  likely  consequences––or 
regulation that amounts to a stab in the dark.36  

What  are  the  arguments  for  cost-benefit  analysis,  so  understood?  We  do  not  attempt  to 
answer  this  question  in  detail37;  but  it  is  important  to  see  the  central  points.  The  standard 

response  is  economic  in  character:  Regulation  should  ordinarily  promote  social  welfare,  and 
while  social  welfare  might  be  promoted  by  regulations  that  fail  cost-benefit  analysis,38  cost-

benefit analysis is an imperfect but useful and administrable proxy for the inquiry into the social 

welfare  question.  At  the  very  least,  it  seems  clear  that  regulation  is  unlikely  to  promote  social 

welfare when its costs are very high and its benefits are very low––especially when we consider 

the fact that high costs are likely to be translated into some combination of higher prices, lower 

wages, and lower returns to capital. It is not necessary to think that government should be treated 

as some maximizing machine in order to conclude that officials should know the consequences 

of regulation before they act, and that they should be reluctant to issue regulations that promise 

to cost much and to deliver little.  

Of  course  it  is  possible  that  in  practice,  quantitative  cost-benefit  analysis  will  have 

excessive influence on government decisions, drowning out “soft variables.” Since the numbers 

are  not  all  that  matters,  any  such  effect  would  be  a  point  against  cost-benefit  analysis.  But  to 

date,  the  actual  record  does  not  support  this  concern.  To  take  just  one  example,  the  EPA’s 

                                                                                                                                                             
Analysis When Preferences Are Distorted, 29 J. Legal Studies 1105, 1106 (2000) (“CBA is properly conceptualized 
as a welfarist decision procedure....”) (emphasis added). 
36 We are assuming throughout that regulators are acting in a situation of risk (where probabilities can be assigned to 
various  outcomes)  rather  than  uncertainty  (where  no  such  probabilities  can  be  assigned).  In  a  situation  of 
uncertainty,  when  existing  knowledge  does  not  permit  regulators  to  assign probabilities to outcome other decision 
rules may be useful, because it is exceedingly hard to do cost-benefit analysis. In such circumstances, the maximin 
principle could be used (choose the policy with the best worst-case outcome). See Jon Elster, Explaining Technical 
Change 185-207 (1983), for a helpful discussion.  
37 For a discussion of the value of cost-benefit analysis, see Arrow et al, supra note 9, at 3-6; Cass R. Sunstein, Risk 
and Reason (Cambridge University Press, forthcoming 2002). 
38 See Matthew D. Adler & Eric A. Posner, “Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis,” 109 Yale L.J. 165, 245-46 (1999) 
(stating  that  “maximizing  overall  well-being  is  an  important  role  of  the  government”  and  providing  examples  of 
situations where the outcome of cost-benefit analysis should be disregarded in favor of welfarist considerations). 

8 

 

 

decision to go forward with new controls on arsenic in drinking water was supported partly on 

the ground that nonquantifiable variables tipped the balance. We will suggest that in appropriate 

cases,  distributional  considerations  should  also  count.  The  risk  that  cost-benefit  analysis  will 

drown out relevant variables is not a reason to abandon the analysis, but to take steps to ensure 

against any such effect. 

It  is  useful  to  compare  cost-benefit  analysis  with  the  “precautionary  principle,”  often 
invoked as a foundation for risk regulation and indeed as an alternative to cost-benefit analysis.39 

The precautionary principle asks government to prevent risks, even if they are quite speculative, 

on the ground that it is important to guard against large problems even if they might not come to 

fruition.  Of  course  it  is  worthwhile  to  take  some  precautions  against  serious  risks,  even  if  the 

probability  of  their  occurrence  is  well  under  100%.  We  think,  however,  that  the  precautionary 

principle is an inadequate guide to action, simply because dangers often lie on both sides of the 
equation.40  Consider  the  case  of  genetic  modification  of  food,  a  process  that  does  carry  some 

risks:  A  failure  to  allow  genetic  modification  might  well  result  in  many  deaths,  and  a  small 

probability of many  more, simply because  genetic modification might well deliver cheaper and 
healthier food.41 Doesn’t the precautionary principle require genetic modification of food at least 

as much as it prohibits it?  

Or  consider  the  question  whether  to  ban  the  use  of  DDT.  The  precautionary  principle 

might well seem to require the ban, because DDT imposes health risks for birds and mammals, 

including human beings. But the ban itself seems to be banned by the principle, because any such 

ban might lead to either unsafe or more expensive substitutes, and in either case the ban creates a 

                                                 
39  See  Risk  and  the  Precautionary  Principle  (Julian  Morris  ed.,  2000).Some  suggested  alternatives  to  cost-benefit 
analysis are nothing of the kind. For example, Lisa Heinzerling and Frank Ackerman, Pricing the Priceless: Cost-
Benefit Analysis of Environmental Protection (2002), discuss technology-based regulation and pollution trading as 
preferable  alternatives.  Id.  at  31.  But  cost-benefit  analysis,  far  from  being  an  alternative  to  technology-based 
regulation, is a tool for assessing what kind of regulation makes best sense. Pollution trading is a low-cost method of 
bringing  about  compliance  with  regulatory  goals.  But  in  any  trading  system,  it  is  necessary  to  “cap”  overall 
emissions,  and  cost-benefit  analysis  is  a  way  of  helping  to  decide  on  the  most  sensible  cap.  Heinzerling  and 
Ackerman  are  right  to  say  that  many  “regulatory  programs  have  been  a  terrific  success  without  using  cost-benefit 
analysis  to  set  pollution  limits.”  Id.  at  32.  As  we  have  suggested,  cost-benefit  analysis  helps  to  identify  the 
successes. Our claim is that we could have more successes, and better successes, and fewer failures if we attempted 
to analyze the consequences first. 
40 See Jonathan Weiner, Precaution in a Multi-Risk World, in The Risk Assessment of Environmental and Human 
Health Hazards (Dennis D. Paustenbach ed., 2d ed. 
41  Indur  Goklany,  Applying  the  Precautionary  Principle  in  a  Broader  Context,  in  Risk  and  the  Precautionary 
Principle, supra note 33, at 189, 207-220. 

9 

 

 

(speculative)  risk  of  serious  harms.42  Or  consider  an  effort  to  introduce  stringent  regulation  of 

arsenic in drinking water. It is possible to justify the regulation on the ground that low levels of 

arsenic  might  create  substantial  risks;  but  it  is  also  possible  to  complain  that  the  expensive 

regulation (costing, say, $200 million) itself creates a risk of mortality effects, a risk that would 

be forbidden by the precautionary principle. What should government do? 

The precautionary principle, taken for all that it is worth, is thus frequently paralyzing: It 

stands as an obstacle to regulation and to nonregulation, and to everything in between. Of course 

speculative  harms  often  deserve  attention.  But  we  think  that  too  much  of  the  time,  the 

precautionary principle is merely a combination of rhetoric and myopia, having force only when 

people look at an essentially arbitrary part of the picture, rather than at the whole. A competent 

cost-benefit  analysis  takes  good  account  of  what  is  sensible  in  the  precautionary  principle,  by 

asking  regulators  to  attend  to  low-probability  risks  of  significant  harms.  Cost-benefit  analysis 

subsumes  this  risk,  as  it  does  all  others,  into  the  overall  assessment  of  welfare  effects  of 
regulation.43  Indeed  the  most  sensible  understandings  of  the  precautionary  principle  emphasize 

the need for an overall assessment, and insist on exploring all of the risks at stake, including low-
probability, potentially catastrophic risks.44 

 A less familiar argument for cost-benefit analysis, growing out of our doubts about the 

precautionary  principle,  is  cognitive  in  character.  One  goal  of  cost-benefit  analysis  is  to 

overcome cognitive limitations by ensuring that people have a full, rather than limited, sense of 
what  is  at  stake.45  People  often  miss  the  systemic  effects  of  risk  regulation;46  cost-benefit 

analysis  is  a  way  of  putting  those  effects  squarely  on-screen.  At  the  same  time,  cost-benefit 

analysis  helps  overcome  the  problems  created  by  cognitive  heuristics  that  can  lead  people  to 

misunderstand the magnitude of risks, by allowing an accounting of the actual consequences of 

                                                 
42 See id. at 190-92. 
43 Obviously, it is impossible to take extra caution (or spend more) on all activities, simply because there is a finite 
budget  constraint  at  any  point  in  time.  For  a  good  overview  of  the  precautionary  principle,  see  Kimberly  M. 
Thompson et al., “Decision-analytic Refinements of the Precautionary Principle,” 4 J. of Risk Res. 127 (2001). Some 
suggested  alternatives  to  cost-benefit  analysis  are  nothing  of  the  kind.  For  example,  Lisa  Heinzerling  and  Frank 
Ackerman,  Pricing  the  Priceless:  Cost  Benefit  Analysis  of  Environmental  Protection  (2002),  discuss  technology-
based regulation and pollution trading as preferable alternatives. Id. at 31. But cost-benefit analysis, far from being 
an  alternative  to  technology-based  regulation,  is  a  tool  for  assessing  what  kind  of  regulation  makes  best  sense. 
Pollution  trading  is  a  low-cost  method  of  bringing  about  compliance  with  regulatory  goals.  But  in  any  trading 
system, it is necessary to “cap” overall emissions, and cost-benefit analysis is a way of helping to  
44 See Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle (2001). 
45 See Cass R. Sunstein, supra note 36. 

10 

 

 

current hazards  and of the effects of reducing them.47 To the extent that people’s emotions are 
getting  the  better  of  them,  by  producing  massive  concern  about  small  risks,48  cost-benefit 

analysis should help put things in perspective, and at the same time might help to calm popular 

fears. And if people are indifferent to a risk that is actually quite large, cost-benefit analysis will 

help to stir them out of their torpor. The result should be to help with cognitive distortions and to 

produce sensible priority setting.  

There  are  democratic  advantages  as  well.49  Interest  groups  often  manipulate  policy  in 

their preferred directions, sometimes by exaggerating risks, sometimes by minimizing them, and 

sometimes  by  mobilizing  public  sentiment  in  their  preferred  directions.  An  effort  to  produce  a 

fair  accounting  of  actual  dangers  should  help  to  diminish  the  danger  of  interest-group 

manipulation.  More  generally,  cost-benefit  analysis  should  increase  the  likelihood  that  citizens 

generally, and officials in particular, will be informed of what is actually at stake. By itself, this 

is a large democratic gain.  

Of  course,  interest  groups  will  also  try  to  manipulate  the  numbers  in  their  preferred 

directions.  Industry  will  tend  to  exaggerate  the  costs  and  minimize  the  risks.  Public  interest 

groups  will  do  the  opposite.  A  government  that  attempts  to  produce  cost-benefit  analysis  will 

face a formidable task; it is possible that government will lack the information necessary to do 

this  task  well.  But  if  there  is  a  degree  of  accuracy,  and  if  ranges  are  specified  where  there  is 

uncertainty,  cost-benefit  analysis  can  be  seen,  not  as  some  antidemocratic  effort  to  tyrannize 

people with numbers, but instead as an indispensable tool of democratic self-government. 

We can go further. Prospective estimates of both costs and benefits often turn out to be 
wrong.50 This is not merely because of interest group pressures. One reason is that officials lack 

the  extensive  information  that  would  permit  them  to  take  accurate  predictions;  indeed,  the 

informational  demand  on  agencies  is  overwhelmingly,  especially  because  technologies  change 

                                                                                                                                                             
46 See Dietrich Dorner, The Logic of Failure 1-10 (Rita & Robert Kimbel, trans. 1996) (introducing ways in which 
people discount risk and the potential negative consequences that follow). 
47 See Roger Noll & James Krier, “Some Implications of Cognitive Psychology for Risk Regulation,” 19 J. Legal 
Stud. 747, 762 (1990) (describing how these “pathologies” can affect estimates of risk). 
48 See George Loewenstein et al., Risk As Feelings, 127 Psychol. Bull. 267 (2001). 
49 Cf. Bruce A. Ackerman & Richard B. Stewart, “Reforming Environmental Law: The Democratic Case for Market 
Incentives,”  13  Colum.  J.  Env.  L.  171,  172-75,  178-90  (1988)  (emphasizing  the  democratic  virtues  of  economic 
incentives). 
50 See OMB, 1999 Report to Congress, at 40-43. 

11 

 

 

over time.51 An enduring problem for regulatory policy is the absence of precise information on 

the cost or benefit sides. This point should be taken, not as a criticism of cost-benefit analysis as 
such, but as a reason  for  continuous monitoring  and updating.52 Our emphasis on retrospective 

analysis  and  on  prompt  letters  is  intended  to  take  account  of  the  frequent  inadequacy  of 

prospective estimates. 

There are numerous challenges to cost-benefit analysis as a regulatory tool.53 We cannot 

discuss  those  challenges  in  this  space.  We suspect that many of them  are rooted, at bottom, in 

pragmatic  considerations-–in  a  belief  that  in  practice,  cost-benefit  analysis  will  be  used  as  an 

obstacle  to  desirable  regulation.  According  to  some  skeptics,  the  antonym  of  cost-benefit 

analysis is not the unguided stab in the dark, but regulatory protection itself. If this were so, the 

argument for cost-benefit analysis would be greatly weakened. But the evidence does not support 
this  pessimistic  prediction;54  indeed,  cost-benefit  analysis  has  helped  to  spur  regulation,  not 
merely to stop it.55 We believe that, in principle, cost-benefit analysis has a great deal of promise, 
and that when it has been used, it has often made things better rather than worse.56 Of course, the 

case for cost-benefit analysis will depend, in large part, on what people do with it in the future. 

 

B. History 

 
Since 1980, all three branches of American government have shown increased interest in 
cost-benefit balancing.57 Our emphasis here is on the actions of the executive branch, which has 

had  a  longstanding  interest  in  cost-benefit  balancing,  an  interest  that  cuts  across  partisan 
divisions.58 A brief historical review will set the stage. 

                                                 
51  See  Bradley  Karkkainen,  “Toward  a  Smarter  NEPA:  Monitoring  and  Managing  Government’s  Environmental 
Performance,” Columbia Law Review (Forthcoming 2002). 
52 See id. (urging a reform of NEPA that would call for careful attention to new information over time). 
53  See  Lisa  Heinzerling,  “Regulatory  Costs  of  Mythic  Proportions,”  107  Yale  L.J.  1981  (1998)  (noting  that  an 
assessment of the cost-effectiveness of regulating risk is dependent on subjective evaluations of discounting future 
benefit, risk assessment, and regulatory purpose). see Heinzerling and Ackerman, “Pricing the Priceless,” supra 10. 
54  For  varying  perspectives,  see  “Economic  Analysis  at  EPA”  (Richard  Morgenstern  ed.  1999);  Eric  Posner, 
University of Chicago Law Review, Volume 68, no. 4,(forthcoming 2002). 
55  For  a  discussion  of  the  role  of  economic  analysis  in  spurring  regulation  of  lead  in  gasoline  and  regulation  of 
CFCs,  destructive  of  the  ozone  layer,  see  “Economic  Analysis  at  EPA,”  supra  note  44. See also the discussion of 
prompt letters, infra Part II.B.. 
56 See “Economic Analysis at EPA,” supra note 44 
57  Within  Congress,  see  e.g.,  5  U.S.C.  §  1532,  1535  (requiring  cost-benefit  analyses  and  explanations  for  agency 
actions); within the executive branch, see supra note 2 (noting presidential directives on cost-benefit requirements). 
58 See Cass R. Sunstein, supra note 36, at ch. 1 . 

12 

 

 

 
President Nixon inaugurated the process of this general sort as long ago as 1970, with a 
mechanism for “Quality of Life” reviews of administrative action.59 President Carter introduced 

a similar process with his Regulatory Analysis Review Group, designed to conduct interagency 
analysis  of  cost-effectiveness  analysis,  required  for  “significant”  rules.60  But  the  decisive  step 

came  under  President  Reagan,  with  the  formal  creation  of  a  mechanism  for  OMB  review  of 

major regulations.  

 

The most important innovations in President Reagan’s Executive Order 12,291 were: (1) 

a  set  of  substantive  principles  for  all  agencies  to  follow,  “to  the  extent  permitted  by  law,” 

including  a  commitment  to  cost-benefit  analysis;  (2)  a  requirement  that  a  Regulatory  Impact 

Analysis,  including  cost-benefit  analysis,  accompany  all  “major”  rules;  and  (3)  a  formal 

mechanism  for  OMB  oversight,  with  a  general  understanding  that  OMB  had some  (undefined) 

substantive  control  over  what  agencies  would  actually  do.  President  Reagan  considered 

subjecting  the  independent  agencies  to  the  new  order,  but  ultimately  declined  to  do  so,  partly 

because  of  concerns  about  legal  authority,  but  mostly  because  of  fears  of  an  adverse 
congressional  reaction.61  The  independent  agencies  were  asked  voluntarily  to  comply  with 

Executive Order 12,291; all of them declined. 

Executive Order 12,291 proved extremely controversial.62 Nonetheless, President Reagan 
 
expanded on the basic idea four years later with Executive Order 12,498.63 That order established 

a requirement that agencies submit “annual regulatory plans” to OMB for review. The result was 

an annual publication, the Regulatory Program of the United States, which contains a discussion 

of  all  proposed  actions  that  might  be  either  costly  or  controversial.  Executive  Order  12,498 

served to increase the authority of agency heads over their staffs, by exposing proposals to top-

level  review  at  an  early  stage.  But  it  also  increased  the  authority  of  OMB,  by  allowing  OMB 

supervision  over  basic  plans,  and  by  making  it  hard  for  agencies  to  proceed  without  OMB 

preclearance.  

                                                 
59 See Richard R. Nathan, The Plot That Failed and the Administrative Presidency 45-49 (1975). 
60 See Richard H. Pildes & Cass R. Sunstein, “Reinventing the Regulatory State,” 62 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1, 14 (1995). 
61  See  Peter  M.  Shane  &  Harold  H.  Bruff,  The  Law  of  Presidential  Power  355-359  (1988)  (describing  and 
questioning the use of the presidential supervisory power with respect to congressional legislation). 
62 See, e.g., Thomas McGarity, Rationalizing Regulation (1990) . 
63 3 C.F.R. 323 (1985). 

13 

 

 

Under  President  George  Bush, 

 
the  Council  on 
Competitiveness, chaired by the Vice President.64 The Council engaged in occasional review of 

innovation  was 

the  principal 

agency  rules,  operating  as  a  kind  of  supervisor  of  OMB  itself.  It  also  set  out  a  number  of 
principles  and  proposals  for  regulatory  reform.65 In essence,  however, the Bush Administration 

followed  the  basic  approach  of  its  predecessor,  with  OMB  review  remaining  under  the  two 

Reagan executive orders.  

Cost-benefit  balancing  had  been  highly  controversial  when  conducted  by  Republican 

administrations.  For  this  reason,  it  was  uncertain  whether  President  Clinton  would  allow  it  to 

continue  to  play  a  role  within  the  executive  branch.  But  in  a  significant  and  dramatic  step, 

President  Clinton  endorsed  the  essential  features  of  the  Reagan-Bush  orders  in  his  Executive 
Order 12,866.66 The crucial point about Clinton’s order is that it accepted the basic commitments 

of  the  two  Reagan-Bush  orders,  by  requiring  agencies  to  assess  both  costs  and  benefits  and  to 

proceed  only  when  the  latter  justified  the  former.  At  the  same  time,  President  Clinton  offered 

several  changes  to  the  Reagan-Bush  processes,  mainly  attempting  to  create  assurances  against 

the  fear  of  industry  capture  of  the  system  of  review.  First,  he  attempted  to  diminish  public 

concerns about interest-group power over regulation, by providing a process to resolve conflicts 
and  procedures  for  greater  openness.67  Second,  he  included  references  to  “equity,”  to 

“distributive impacts,” and to qualitative as well as quantitative factors, evidently so as to ensure 

that  agencies  could  make  adjustments  in  the  process  of  decision,  and  abandon  the  cost-benefit 
assessment  where  this  seems  sensible.68  Third,  President  Clinton  moved,  in  a  modest  but 

important way, toward including independent agencies within the executive orders. He did so by 
requiring the participation of the independent agencies within the unified regulatory agenda69 and 

also by requiring independent agencies to submit their proposals for inclusion within the annual 

                                                 
64  See  Office  of  Management  and  Budget,  Regulatory  Program  of  the  United  States  Government,  April  1,  1990-
March  31,  1991  5  (1990).  Another  very  different  innovation  that  occurred  under  the  first  President  Bush  was  the 
active  promotion  of  market-based  approaches  for  protecting  the  environment--the  most  notable  example  being the 
acid rain allowance-trading program, which was the crown jewel of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. For an 
evaluation of this program, see A. Denny Ellerman et al., Markets for Clean Air (2000). 
65 See id. 
66 Id. at (1994). 
67 See id. ] 
68 Id. at  
69 Id., at §(4)(b). 

14 

 

 

regulatory  plan,  allowing  the  Vice  President  an  opportunity  to  advise  and  consult.70  We  will 

build on these initiatives here. 

Congress has been slower to support efforts to require the balancing of benefits and costs 

of major regulations. In 1982 the Senate unanimously passed such a law, but it was defeated in 
the House of Representatives.71 Two primary environmental statutes that allowed the balancing 
of  benefits  and  costs  prior  to  the  mid-1990s  are  the  Toxic  Substances  Control  Act72  and  the 
Federal  Insecticide,  Fungicide,  and  Rodenticide  Act.73  Recently,  Congress  has  shown  greater 

interest  in  emphasizing  the  balancing  of  benefits  and  costs.  Table  2  reviews  recent  regulatory 

reform initiatives, which could help improve regulation and legislation. The table suggests that 

Congress now shares the concern of the executive branch that the regulatory system is in need of 
repair and could benefit from more in the way of economic analysis.74 All reforms highlighted in 

the table emphasize a trend towards considering the benefits and costs of regulation, although the 

effectiveness of the provisions remains unclear. Perhaps because of the politicized nature of the 

debate over regulatory reform, these reform efforts have come about in a piecemeal fashion, and 
there is some overlap in the requirements for analysis.75 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                 
70 Id. at § 4(c). 
71 Id.  
72 See 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a) (1994) (describing an allowed balancing of “risk of injury to health or the environment”). 
73 See 7 U.S.C. § 136a (1994) (allowing regulation to prevent unreasonable adverse effects on the environment). 
74  Robert  W.  Crandall  et  al.,  An  Agenda  for  Federal  Regulatory  Reform  3  (1997)  (noting  that  “recent  legislative 
debates masked a broad consensus among knowledgeable observers on the need for regulatory reform”). 
75  There  has  been  some  recent  interest  in  Congress in reducing this overlap by establishing a single congressional 
agency that would have the responsibility for assessing the government regulation. This agency would be similar to 
the Congressional Budget Office, but it would have responsibility for regulation. In principle, such an agency could 
help  stimulate  better  analysis  and  review  of  agency  rules  by  providing  an  additional  source  of  information.  See 
Robert W. Hahn & Robert E. Litan, “Joint Testimony before the Committee on Governmental Affairs,” U.S. Senate, 
“The  Regulatory  Right-to-Know  Act  and  the  Congressional  Office  of  Regulatory  Analysis  Act,”  (April  1999)  at 
http://www.aei-brookings.org/publications/testimony/testimony_99_01.pdf. 

15 

 

 

 

 
Table 2: Recent Regulatory Reform Initiatives76 

Unfunded Mandates Reform 
Act of 1995 

 

 

 

16 

CBO is required to estimate the costs of laws with 
new mandates in excess of $50 million in any one 
year  on  state,  local,  and  tribal  governments,  and 
in excess of $100 million in any one year on the 
private  sector.  Likewise,  an  executive  branch 
agency  must  prepare  a  cost-benefit  analysis  of 
regulations with new mandates in excess of $100 
million in any one year on state, local, and tribal 
governments  or  the  private  sector.  The agency is 
required  to  choose  the  “least  costly,  most  cost-
effective, or least burdensome alternative,” unless 
the  provisions  are  inconsistent  with  law  or  the 
head  of  an  agency  can  explain  why  such  an 
alternative was not adopted. 
An agency must submit each final regulation and 
the  supporting  analyses  to  Congress  and  the 
General Accounting Office. Congress has at least 
sixty  calendar  days  to  review  major  regulations 
before  they  can  become  effective.  During  that 
time,  Congress  can  enact  a  joint  resolution  of 
disapproval that, if passed and then signed by the 
president, would void the regulation. In addition, 
strengthened 
judicial  review  provisions  hold 
agencies  more  accountable  for  the  impacts  of 
regulations on small entities.  
In  separate  appropriations  legislation  in  1996, 
1997,  and  1998,  Congress  required  the  Office  of 
Management and Budget to submit an assessment 
of  the  annual  benefits  and  costs  of  all  existing 
federal regulatory programs to Congress for 1997, 
1998,  and  2000,  respectively.  The  Office  of 
Management  and  Budget  already  must  review 
and  approve  analyses  submitted  by  agencies 
the  costs  and  benefits  of  major 
estimating 

Small  Business  Regulatory  Enforcement 
Fairness Act of 1996 

Regulatory  Accountability  Provision  of 
1996, 1997, and 1998  

                                                 
76  See  Robert  W.  Crandall  et  al.  An Agenda for Federal Regulatory Reform, 10-11 (1997); Robert W. Hahn, The 
Impact of Economics on Environmental Policy, 39 J. Envtl. Econ. & Mgmt 375-399 (2000).  
 

Pipeline Safety and Partnership 
Act of 1995 

Food Quality Protection Act of 1996 

Safe Drinking Water Act 
Amendments of 1996 

Truth in Regulating Act of 1999  

Biennial  Review  Provision 
Telecommunications Act of 1996. 

of 

the 

 

 

proposed  rules.  The  annual  report  provisions 
build on this review process. 
The  Secretary  of  Transportation  must  issue  a 
pipeline 
reasoned 
standard  “only  upon  a 
determination  that  the  benefits  of  the  intended 
standard justify its costs.” 
This  Act  eliminates  the  Delaney  Clause  for 
pesticides  that  set  a  zero-tolerance  standard  for 
carcinogens  from  residues  in  processed  foods. In 
setting  standards  for  raw  or  processed  foods,  the 
EPA  will  now  establish  a  tolerance  level  to 
ensure  “a  reasonable  certainty  of  no  harm”  from 
pesticide  residues.  For  pesticide  products  that 
exceed that negligible risk, the EPA may consider 
the  benefits  of  the  pesticide  to  justify  granting  a 
tolerance. 
Under the original act, the maximum contaminant 
level (MCL) was to be 
set  as  close  to  the  maximum  contaminant  level 
goal  as  “feasible.”  Feasible was defined  as  using 
the  best  technology  available  “taking  costs  into 
consideration.”  Under  the  new  act,  the  EPA 
administrator “shall publish a determination as to 
whether the benefits of the MCL justify, or do not 
justify, the costs.” 
Establishes  a  three-year  pilot  program  under 
which 
individual  agency  Regulatory  Impact 
Analyses are subject to independent evaluation by 
GAO, upon request by Congress. 
Requires  Federal  Communications  Commission: 
(1) to review biennially its regulations pertaining 
telecommunications  service  providers  and 
to 
to  determine 
broadcast  ownership;  and  (2) 
whether  economic  competition  has  made  those 
regulations  no  longer  necessary  in  the  public 
interest. 

 

     Courts,  too,  have  shown  interest  in  cost-benefit  principles,  developing  a  set  of  default rules 

that  authorize  agencies  to  minimize  costs  and  maximize  benefits,  in  the  face  of  statutory 
ambiguity.  Consider  the  following  principles,77  all  with  support  in  the  cases.  Unless  Congress 

has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be permitted to make de minimis exceptions to statutory 

                                                 
77  For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  these  principles,  see  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  “Cost-Benefit  Default  Principles,”  99 
Mich L Rev 1651 (2001). 

17 

 

 

requirements  by  exempting  small  risks  from  regulatory  controls.78  Unless  Congress  has clearly 

said  otherwise,  agencies  will  be  permitted  to  balance  the  health  risks  created  by  regulation 
against  the  health  benefits  created  by  regulation.79  Unless  Congress  has  clearly  said  otherwise, 

agencies will be permitted to take costs into account in issuing regulations. In its current form, 

this  principle  means  that  where  statutes  are  ambiguous,  agencies  will  have  the  authority  to 
consider costs as well as benefits.80 Unless Congress has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be 

permitted  to  decline  to  regulate  past  the  point  where  regulation  would  be  economically  or 
technologically feasible.81 Unless Congress has clearly said otherwise, agencies will be expected 
to balance costs against benefits in issuing regulations.82  

These principles give the executive branch a great deal of room to maneuver because they 

authorize agencies, when so inclined, to move regulation in more cost-beneficial directions. We 

will draw on some of these principles in the discussion to follow. 

 

C. The Record 

One  of  the  basic  motivations  for  reforming  the  regulatory  process  is  that  with  sensible 

reforms, regulators should be able  to achieve what everyone would consider to be better social 

outcomes at lower cost. Table 3 provides that motivation by showing the cost per statistical life 

saved  for  a  number  of  final  regulations  at  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  from  1986  to 

1994.  We  acknowledge that tables of this kind cannot tell  us everything  that  we need to know 
about  regulation;83  but  we  believe  that  enormous  disparities  of  this  sort  are  enough  to  create  a 

                                                 
78  See,  e.g.,  Coalition  on  Sensible  Transportation,  Inc.  v.  Dole,  826  F.2d  60,  72  (D.C.  Cir.  1987)  (noting  that, 
because  “[e]valuating  environmental  effects  of  major  road  building  projects  ...  is  a  long  and  arduous  process,”  in 
deciding whether statutory requirements have been met, a court cannot expect “perfection”)  
79 This principle appears to underlie American Trucking Ass’n v. EPA, 175 F.3d 1027, 1052 (1999), which states that 
the “EPA must consider positive identifiable effects of a pollutant’s presence in the ambient air in formulating air 
quality criteria”). 
80  Michigan  v.  EPA,  213  F.3d  663,  678  (D.C.  Cir.  2000)  (« [P]reclusion  of  cost  consideration  requires  a  rather 
express congressional direction. »). 
81 See Nat’l Res. Def. Council v. EPA, 824 F.2d 1146 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (“Since we cannot discern clear congressional 
intent to preclude consideration of cost ... the Administrator may consider those factors.”) 
82 Competitive Enter. Inst. v. NHTSA, 956 F.2d 321 (D.C. Cir. 1992) (remanding the case to NHTSA to make certain 
that “[w]hen the government regulates in a way that prices many of its citizens out of access to large-car safety … 
the affected citizens at least know that the government has faced up to the meaning of its choice.”. 
83 See Lisa Heinzerling, supra note 46, at 1998 (noting that a table calculating the costs of various regulations per 
life saved “is both over inclusive and under inclusive”). 

18 

strong  presumption  of  irrationality  and  incoherence  in  regulation.  In  our  view,  no  one  has 
suggested a basis for rebutting that presumption.84 

 

 

                                                 
84 Indeed, Heinzerling’s own revised table suggests considerable irrationality and incoherence. See id. at 2039, tbl.3 
(recalculating estimates of the costs of various regulations per life saved). We will not engage Heinzerling’s general 
attack on quantification, which we believe to be a useful tool for assessing regulation and ensuring cross-regulation 
consistency. 

19 

 

 

Table 3: Cost of Selected EPA Regulation Per Statistical Life Saved85 

 

 
Environmental Protection Agency Regulation 

importation, 

system––wood 

Toxicity characteristics to determine hazardous wastes 
 
Underground storage tanks: technical requirements 
 
Asbestos  prohibitions:  manufacture, 
processing and distribution in commerce (total) 
 
National  primary  and  secondary  water  regulations––
Phase II: MCLs for 38 contaminants 
 
Hazardous  waste  management 
preservatives 
 
Sewage sludge use and disposal regulations, 40 C.F.R. 
Part 503 
 
Land  disposal  restrictions  for  “third  third”  scheduled 
waste 
 
Hazardous  waste  management  system:  final  solvents 
and dioxins land disposal restrictions rule 
 
Prohibition  on land disposal of first third of scheduled 
wastes (“second sixth” proposal) 
 
Land disposal restrictions, Phase II: universal treatment 
standards  and  treatment  standards  for  organic  toxicity, 
characteristic wastes, and newly listed wastes 
 
Drinking  water 
chemicals, 
Phase V 
 
Solid  waste  disposal  facility  criteria,  40  C.F.R.  Parts 
257 and 258 
 

regulations, 

synthetic 

organic 

 
Year 

1990 
 
1988 
 
1989 
 
 
1991 
 
 
1990 
 
 
1993 
 
 
1990 
 
 
1986 
 
 
1988 
 
 
1994 
 
 
 
1992 
 
 
1991 

Net Cost per Discounted 
Statistical Life  
(millions of 2000 dollars) 
-9,400 
 
-400 
 
21 
 
 
28 
 
 
57 
 
 
215 
 
 
215 
 
 
226 
 
 
452 
 
 
1,030 
 
 
 
10,800 
 
 
40,700 

                                                 
85 Robert W. Hahn, Randall W. Lutter, and Kip Viscusi, Do Federal Regulations Reduce Mortality? (2000) (visited 
February  11,  2002)  http://www.aei-brookings.org/publications/books/hlv.pdf.  Numbers  updated  from  1995  dollars 
to 2000 dollars. 
 

20 

 

 

There  are  two  key points to note from this table. First, the cost per statistical life saved 

spans an extraordinarily wide range–from $9 billion to over $40 billion. Second, there are ample 

opportunities  to  save  more  lives  at  less  cost,  simply  because  of  these significant  differences in 

the  cost  per  statistical  life  saved.  Taking  advantage  of  these  opportunities  would  require 

reallocating  expenditures  away  from  those  regulations  that  are  least  cost-effective  and  toward 
those regulations that are most cost-effective.86 The consensus among those who study this area 

is that there is great potential to develop regulations that achieve social objectives at lower cost 

because of the differences in cost-effectiveness among regulations aimed at achieving the same 

(or  similar)  objectives.  Note  that  OIRA  appears  to  agree,  having  urged  a  number  of  new 
initiatives via the new institution of the “prompt letter,” taken up below.87 

 
Unfortunately, no institution in the federal government now has, as its primary aim, the 
goal  of  targeting  regulatory  expenditures  to  their  best  uses.88  Instead,  the  primary  instrument 

used to review the effectiveness of federal regulations is the regulatory oversight required by the 

executive  orders  discussed  above.  For  the  most  part,  this  oversight  occurs  on  a  regulation-by-
regulation basis.89 OMB’s job consists of meeting with officials and reviewing each Regulatory 
Impact  Analysis  (“RIA”)  that  is  prepared  for  economically  significant  regulations.90  Each  RIA 

                                                 
86 There is a long literature on this subject. For analysis by one of the first to make this point, see John F. Morrall, A 
Review  of  the  Record,  10  Reg.  Nov./Dec.  1986  at  25-34.  For  subsequent  efforts,  see,  e.g.,  Robert  W.  Hahn, 
“Regulatory  Reform:  What  do  the  Government’s  Numbers  Tell  Us?”,  in  Risks,  Costs,  and  Lives  Saved  208-253 
(Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996); Randall Lutter & John F. Morrall, Health and Health Analysis: A New Way to Evaluate 
Health  and  Safety  Regulation,  8  J.  Risk  Uncertainty  43-66  (1994);;  Tammy  O.  Tengs  &  John  D.  Graham,  “The 
Opportunity  Costs  of  Haphazard  Social  Investments,”  in  Life-Saving,  in  Risks,  Costs,  and  Lives  Saved  167-182 
(Robert  W.  Hahn  ed.,  1996);  Indur  M.  Goklany,  Rationing  Health  Care  While  Writing  Blank  Checks  for 
Environmental Hazards, 15 Reg. Summer 1992 at 14. For a critique of this approach, and of Morrall’s in particular, 
see Heinzerling, supra note 46. 
87 See infra at Part II.B. 
88  Stephen  Breyer  makes  this  point and suggests “establishment of new career path that would provide a group of 
civil servants with experience in health and environmental agencies, Congress, and OMB.” Breyer, supra note 8, at 
60.  
89 Executive Order 12,866 does direct the Vice President to conduct a yearly meeting with agency heads “to seek a 
common understanding of priorities and to coordinate regulatory efforts to be accomplished in the upcoming year.” 
Executive  Order  12866  ,  supra  note  3,  at  Each  agency  is  also  required  to  submit  to  OMB:  a  unified  regulatory 
agenda, which describes all regulations under development or review; a regulatory plan, which describes “the most 
important significant regulatory actions that the agency reasonably expects to issue in proposed or final form in that 
fiscal year or thereafter.” Id.. 
90 The Executive Orders require that the RIA be prepared. Agencies generally do such a regulatory analysis for each 
economically  significant  rule  whose  annual  impact  on  the  economy  exceeds  $100  million.  Typically,  the  agency 
proposing  the  regulation  performs  the  regulatory  impact  analysis,  often  with  the  help  of  outside  consultants.  The 
analysis  is  supposed  to  include  a  statement  of  the  potential  need  for  the  proposal,  an  examination  of  alternative 
approaches,  an  assessment  of  benefits  and  costs,  the  rationale  for  choosing  the  proposed  regulatory  action,  and  a 
statement of statutory authority. 

21 

 

 

provides a rich source of data for examining the costs and benefits of regulation as well as the 

cost-effectiveness of selected regulations.  

How  has  the  process  worked  in  practice?  Our  basic  answer,  documented  below,  is  that 

the  process  has  not  worked  extremely  well.  Unfortunately,  it  is  difficult  to  gauge  the 

effectiveness of federal executive regulatory oversight and the executive orders themselves. The 

basic problem is that we have very few natural experiments that provide useful information. One 

of the present authors used a data set and found that the introduction of OIRA did not appear to 
affect  the  cost-effectiveness  of  regulations,  contrary  to  his  hypothesis.91  He  is  reluctant  to 
conclude,  however,  that  OIRA  does  not  have  an  effect.92  Farrow  used  a  similar  data  set,  but 

included regulations that are rejected as well as those that are finalized. He found that the cost-
effectiveness of a rule does not have a large impact on the decision to reject or accept that rule.93 

Farrow argued that this provides evidence that OIRA has not had an impact, at least as measured 
in terms of improvements in cost-effectiveness for  those  rules  that  are  accepted.94   Eric  Posner 

reaches  similar  conclusions,  urging  that  cost-benefit  review  is  less  a  tool  for  improving 
regulation than for increasing presidential control over agencies.95 

 

Another  way  of  gauging  the  effectiveness  of  regulatory  oversight  is  to  measure  the 

quality of each RIA itself. The information provided in an RIA is often badly incomplete, and the 
level of detail and analytical sophistication varies across agencies and types of regulations.96 In 

some  cases  the  most  basic  information,  about  both  benefits  and  costs,  is  missing.  Common 

deficiencies  include  inadequate  consideration  of  alternatives,  poor  treatment  of  uncertainty, 
incomplete  estimation  of  benefits  and  costs,  as  well  as  various  methodological  errors.97 

                                                 
91 See Robert Hahn, Reviving Regulatory Reform 52 (2000).  
92 One problem with the data is that they do not directly measure any impact that OIRA might have had on changing 
the cost-effectiveness of particular regulations, which is one of OIRA’s important functions. Hahn explains that the 
insignificance of OIRA’s effect on cost-effectiveness may be due to: a lack of data in the pre-OIRA period; the fact 
that few rules were proposed or finalized following OIRA’s creation; and the methodological problem of measuring 
OIRA’s effect on unobservable, but important factors, like other bureaucrats’ treatment of potential regulations. Id.. 
93 Farrow finds that (the logarithm of) cost-per-life saved is significant but that “it may not be policy significant as 
cost  per  life  saved  must  increase  by  very  large  amounts  in  order  to  change  the  probability  of  rejection  by  a  large 
factor.” Farrow, supra note 15, at 22.  
94 Farrow finds that “The suggested impact of OIRA is either not to change or to increase the estimated cost-per-life-
saved between the proposed and final rule,” and that in general, OIRA does not impact cost-effectiveness. Id. at 23. 
95 See Posner, supra note 4. 
96 Hahn, supra note 72, at 212-14 (describing the discrepancies in RIAs across agencies); Richard D. Morgenstern & 
Marc  K.  Landy,  Economic  Analysis:  Benefits,  Costs,  Implications,  in  Economic  Analysis  at  EPA  (Richard  D. 
Morgenstern ed., 1999).  
97  Agencies  do  not  always  indicate  the year in which specified benefits and costs apply. Agencies may show such 
information  only  in  particular  years  instead  of  presenting  full  streams  of  benefits  and  costs.  Perhaps  most 

22 

 

 

Moreover,  different  assumptions  are  applied  across  regulations.98  Indeed,  comprehensive 

analyses  of  the  RIAs  suggest  that  they  lack  analytical  consistency  and  that  agencies  only 

superficially comply with the requirements in the Reagan and Clinton executive orders. A study 

of  forty-eight  major  health,  safety,  and  environmental  regulations  from  mid-1996  to  mid-1999 

provided evidence that agencies generally failed to comply with the executive order and adhere 
to the OMB guidelines.99  

 

From an evaluation of the record on executive regulatory oversight, we conclude that the 

commitment  to  cost-benefit  analysis  is  as  much  symbolic  as  real.  There  is  not  strong evidence 

that  the  Executive  Orders  or  the  oversight  process  has  made  a  substantial  difference  in  policy 

outcomes.  Moreover,  there  is  evidence  that  the  cost-benefit  analyses  included  as  part  of  the 

regulatory oversight process suffer from serious flaws. 

 
III. Proposed Innovations 

The major goal of our proposed executive order is to deepen and widen the commitment 

to cost-benefit analysis. We propose to strengthen the role of OIRA, to offer stricter and clearer 

principles and requirements, and to ensure a more transparent, coherent, and uniform process at 

the  agency  level.  We  also  propose  to  include  the  independent  agencies  within  the  process  of 

OIRA review. As we shall emphasize, an executive order,  by itself, will not  do a  great  deal to 

change the system of regulation. As suggested by the record of the last two decades, everything 

depends on matters of implementation. But a new order would itself be a strong signal of a new 

commitment both to cost-benefit balancing and to OIRA; and the suggested innovations would, 

we believe, hold out considerable promise for improving the situation. 

                                                                                                                                                             
importantly,  in  many  cases  the  agency  did  not  complete  its  quantitative  analysis  of  benefits  or  cost  savings.  See 
Hahn, supra note 72, at 212-14. 
98 For an analysis of the sensitivity of net benefit calculations to discount rate and benefit valuation assumptions, see 
id. See also Matthew Adler & Eric Posner, Implementing Cost Benefit Analysis When Preferences are Distorted, in 
Cost Benefit Analysis 269, 310 (Matthew Adler & Eric Posner eds., 2001) (listing valuations of life given by various 
administrative  agencies).  Agency  practices  are  variable  with  respect  to  the  discount  rate,  see  id.  at  311,  and these 
variations can create significant differences in otherwise similar rules. Some of the variations are extremely hard to 
defend. 
99  See  Hahn  et  al.,  supra  note  4.  In  a  comprehensive  evaluation  of  a  detailed  data  set,  the  authors  found  that 
agencies’ economic analyses typically do not provide enough information to make decisions that will maximize the 
efficiency  or  effectiveness  of  a  rule.  For  a  majority  of  the  rules,  agencies  failed  to  quantify  net  benefits,  discuss 
alternatives, or quantify costs and benefits of alternatives.  
For  OMB  guidelines,  which  comprise  a  set  of  principles  for  improving  regulatory  analysis  and  making  the 
regulatory process more transparent, See Office of Management and Budget, Office of Information and Regulatory 

23 

 

 

 
A. Promoting Compliance 

We have seen that the track record on compliance with regulatory oversight requirements 
is much less than stellar.100 There is no simple solution for the compliance problem. Political will 

on the part of high-level officials is a key component, but even with political will, agencies might 

be able to act strategically and game the system. 

Keeping  these  points  in  mind,  we  offer  two  suggestions  for  compliance:  First,  OMB 

should issue a modified set of guidelines on how to perform the analysis that is required in the 

RIA and on how to evaluate that analysis before it is submitted to OMB. If these guidelines are 

not met, then the proposed regulation should be returned to the agency until the analysis meets 

OMB’s  guidelines.  Second,  for  important  regulations,  OIRA  should  work  with  the  agency  to 
agree on a set of key assumptions and alternatives to be used in the analysis.101 If the terms of 
this  agreement  are  violated,  then  OIRA  can  elect  to  return  the  proposed  regulation.102  In  our 

approach,  the  guidelines  would  have  a  far  more  prominent  place  than  they  now  do.  For  this 

reason, we think that the guidelines should be subject to public review and comment before they 

are  finalized.  The  ordinary  process,  for  notice  and  comment  via  the  Federal  Register,  should 
suffice here, as elsewhere.103 

                                                                                                                                                             
Affairs.  M-00-08,  Guidelines  to  Standardize  Measures  of  Costs  and  Benefits  and  the  Format  of  Accounting 
Statements (2000) available at http:www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/costbenefitreport1998.pdf. 
100 See General Accounting Office, Regulatory Reform: Agencies Could Improve Development, Documentation, and 
Clarity  of  Regulatory  Economic  Analyses  (1998)  at  http://www.gao.gov/archive/1998/rc98142.pdf  (reporting  that 
significant  number  of  agencies’  economic  analyses  “did  not  incorporate  the  best  practices  set  forth  in  OMB’s 
guidance”).  For  a  comparison  of  state  and  federal  regulatory  oversight  initiatives,  see  Robert  W.  Hahn,  State  and 
Federal Regulatory Reform: A Comparative Analysis, 29 J. Legal Studies 873 (2000). 
101 For a discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of early OMB review of regulatory initiatives, see Christopher C. 
DeMuth  &  Douglas  H.  Ginsburg,  “White  House  Review  of  Agency  Rulemaking,”  99  Harv.  L.  Rev..  1075,  1080 
(1986). 
102  See  Richard  Belzer,  Comments  on  Draft  Report  to  Congress  on  the  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Federal  Regulation 
(2001).  Belzer  notes  that  agencies’ “regulatory impact analyses fall short in part because OMB’s oversight occurs 
too late to secure timely methodological corrections.” Belzer suggests that before work on an RIA begins, agencies 
should be required to consult with OMB and to agree upon the key assumptions, parameters, and components of the 
analysis. He suggests that the protocol that is developed should be subject to public comment and review. He does 
not, however, suggest an enforcement mechanism. One possibility would be for OMB to return a rule if the terms of 
the  agreement  are  not  met.  We  think  this  approach  should  be  tried  on  an  experimental  basis  at  first.  We  are 
concerned, among other things, how new knowledge could be incorporated into the decision making process. See, 
e.g., Cass R. Sunstein, “The Arithmetic of Arsenic,” Geo. L. J. (forthcoming 2002), and problems associated with 
our evolving understanding of arsenic. 
103 There are some legal issues here that we will not address in detail. OMB appears to lack the statutory authority to 
make rules and regulations governing federal regulation. On the other hand, the President has the standard authority, 
via  executive  order,  to  issue  binding  principles.  For  a  general  discussion,  see  Elena  Kagan,  “Presidential 
Administration,”  114  Harv.  L.  Rev.  2245,  2319-2331  (2001).  If  the  President  has  that  authority,  he  also  has  the 
authority to delegate that power to the Director of OMB, at least if he does so expressly via executive order. 

24 

 

 

In terms of substance, the most recent guidelines issued by OMB represent a good start, 
but we would go further.104 Specifically, the following steps would increase transparency in the 

regulatory process and improve the quality of regulatory analysis. With the exception of the last 

step,  we  have  not  listed  them  in  the  Executive  Order  itself,  on  the  theory  that  they  are  too 

specific and detailed to belong there. We believe, however, that OMB should require such steps: 

1. Agencies should post each regulatory impact analysis and supporting documents on the 

Internet  before  a  draft  proposed  or  final  regulation  can  be  considered  in  the  regulatory  review 

process; 

2.  Agency  analyses  should  include  a  clear,  brief  executive  summary  (no  more  than one 

page)  that  contains  information  on  costs,  benefits,  and  technical  information,  and  that  says 

whether  the  best  estimate  of  quantifiable  benefits  associated  with  the  regulation  is  likely  to 

exceed  the  best  estimate  of  associated  costs,  and  whether  it  can  be  expected  to  maximize  net 
benefits.105  A  summary  of  key  aspects  of  the  regulation  should  be  included  in  a  table  at  the 
beginning  of  each  RIA.106  Table  4  provides  an  example  of  a  summary  table.  This  table  could 

promote  accountability  by  allowing  OMB  and  other  interested  parties  to  evaluate  how  well 

agencies are doing in reporting different kinds of information.  

                                                 
104  For  the  most  recent  OMB  guidelines,  see  Office  of  Management  and  Budget,  supra  note  84.  In  OMB’s  draft 
review  on  benefits  and  costs in 1999, several other possible reforms are discussed, including a proposal to ensure 
that  agencies  obtain  independent,  external  peer-review  of  regulatory  analyses  “in  order  to  identify  areas  that  need 
improvement  and  stimulate  the  development  of  better  estimation  techniques  more  useful  for  assessing  existing 
regulations.” OMB, supra note 84. This is probably a good idea if the peer reviewers are chosen independently and 
are motivated to spend the time to do a good job. For some of the problems with peer review, see Linda Cohen & 
Robert Hahn, A Solution to Concerns over Public Access to Scientific Data, 285 Science 535 (1999). 
105 Some discussion of the net benefits of reasonable alternatives should also be included. The guidelines currently 
specify that analyses should “present a summary of the benefit and cost estimates for each alternative and provide a 
clear statement of the effects in a form that is easily usable by other readers of the rule.” Office of Management and 
Budget, supra note 84, at 3.  
106 For an example of a standardized format that could be used to report and summarize regulatory information, see 
Robert W. Hahn, “How Changes in the Federal Register Can Help Improve Regulatory Accountability,” 52 Admin. 
L. Rev. 927, 951-952 (2000). The regulatory summaries could provide very useful information to OMB in preparing 
its annual report on regulation. Specifically, it would enable OMB to provide some quantitative analysis of the  
extent to which various agencies were complying with its guidelines and doing good RIAs. In addition, it would be a 
good source of information for other parties interested in evaluating the overall impacts of federal regulation. 

25 

 

 

Table 4 

Regulatory Impact Summary 

I. BACKGROUND ON RULE AND AGENCY 

AGENCY AND DEPARTMENT/OFFICE NAME 

CONTACT PERSON 

TELEPHONE NUMBER 

TITLE OF THE RULE 

RIN NUMBER 

DOCKET NUMBER 

TYPE OF RULEMAKING 
(FINAL/INTERIM/PROPOSED/NOTICE) 
 
STATUTORY  AUTHORITY  FOR  THE 
RULE 

 
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE RULE 

TYPE OF RULE 
(REGULATORY/BUDGET IMPACT) 

RULEMAKING IMPETUS 

II. OVERALL IMPACT 

1.  Will the rule have an impact on the economy of $100 million or more? Yes     No  
2.  Best estimate of the present value of quantifiable benefits of the rule. $________ 
3.  Best estimate of the present value of quantifiable costs of the rule.107 $________ 
      Yes     No  
4.  Do the quantifiable benefits exceed the quantifiable costs?     
5.  Report the dollar year of costs and benefits._______________________________ 
6.  Report the discount rate used in the calculations for costs and benefits._________ 
7.  If more than one discount rate was used in calculations, please explain why. ____ 
__________________________________________________________________ 

8.  Discuss level of confidence in the benefit-cost estimates and key uncertainties. 

Include a range for costs and benefits.___________________________________   
__________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________  

9.  Identify benefits or costs that were not quantified. _________________________ 
_____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________  

                                                 
107 Costs are defined as costs minus cost savings. 

26 

 

 

Present Value 

_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 

Annual 
 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 

Years in Which 
Costs Occur 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 

III. COSTS AND BENEFITS 
Estimated Incremental Costs 
1. Costs and breakdown of quantifiable costs by type. 
 
 
Total Costs 
Compliance Costs 
Administrative Costs 
Federal Budget Costs 
Local/State Budget Costs 
Other Costs 
Notes: 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
________________________________________________________________________
2. Give a brief description of who will bear the costs. -
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
Estimated Incremental Benefits 
1. Benefits and breakdown of quantifiable benefits by type. 
Present Value 
 
 
 
_________ 
Total Benefits 
_________ 
Health Benefits 
_________ 
Environmental Benefits 
_________ 
Other Benefits 
Notes:__________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________ 
2. Give a brief description of who will benefit. 
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
IV. ALTERNATIVES TO THE REGULATION 
1. List and briefly describe the alternatives to the rule that were considered and why they 
were  rejected,  including  a  summary  of  costs  and  benefits  of  those  alternatives.  If  no 
alternatives were considered, explain why not. 
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
 

Years in Which 
Benefits Occur 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 

Annual 
 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 
_________ 

27 

 

 

3. Agencies should be required to calculate the net benefits of a regulation based on the 

best available quantitative information.108  

4.  Agencies  should  use  some  default  assumptions  for  standard  parameters  in  order  to 

facilitate comparison within and across regulations. For example, OMB should specify a default 

discount rate along with a range. Similarly, OMB should specify the value of a quality-adjusted 
life  year  and  appropriate  ranges  along  with  the  value  of  a  statistical  life  and  ranges.109  We 

recognize  that  these  values  may,  with  good  reason,  differ  across  different  regulations; 

nonetheless, there is also merit in having a methodology that is fairly standard. Agencies should 

be permitted to  use alternative assumptions where they can provide a good rationale that has a 
basis in economics.110  

5. Each federal regulatory agency should be required to produce an annual report on the 

benefits  and  costs  of  regulatory  activities.  Requiring  annual  reports  would make the regulatory 

process  more  transparent,  and  could  improve  estimates  of  the  economic  impact  of  regulatory 

activity. In addition, the agency reports would help the OMB produce its overall assessment of 
the impact of federal regulation. We add some details below.111 

 

B. Prompts and Returns 

Our  Executive  Order  also  gives  an  explicit  place  for  the  idea  of  “prompt  letters,”  an 
innovation  introduced  in  the  early  months  of  the  Bush  Administration.112  To  understand  this 

idea, some brief background is in order. 

Throughout  its history,  OIRA’s basic mission  has  been to stop unjustified rules, mainly 

through  the  use  of  “return  letters,”  which  require  agencies  to  reconsider  their  proposals.  Yet 

studies show that adding some regulations, while removing or improving others, could save tens 

                                                 
108 OMB guidelines assume that the agencies will calculate net benefits. They allude to net benefits in discussing the 
comparison of alternatives in explaining how to discount. They also say that cost-effectiveness can be used instead 
of  net  benefit  calculations  when  necessary.  The  guidelines  never  say,  however,  that  agencies  must  calculate  net 
benefits. The sample chart provided by OMB in its guidelines, in which agencies would report summary information 
about a regulation, includes costs and benefits, but not net benefits. OMB 2000 Report Charts, supra note 8, at 4-5, 
7, 8, 19-20. 
109 These values could change over time as new knowledge accrues. 
110 Agencies should be required to use the standard assumptions, as well, for ease of comparison across regulations. 
111 See infra Appendix, § 5. 
112 See Office of Management and Budget, Prompt Letters, at 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/prompt_letter.html. 

28 

 

 

of thousands of lives and millions of dollars annually.113 An important priority for the future is to 

redesign existing institutions and agencies by adding regulations that make sense, while reducing 

those  that  do  not.  One  of  our  primary  concerns  is  that  no  institution  in  government  has  yet 

vindicated  the  hopes  of  those  who  believed  that  cost-benefit  analysis  could  be  used  to  help 

promote better priority-setting, block senseless rules, and spur agency action when it is justified. 

In  2001,  OIRA  quietly  announced  a  striking,  if  overdue,  innovation:  “prompt  letters,” 

designed to encourage agencies to explore new areas in which regulation might deliver benefits 
that exceed costs.114 Not only did OIRA announce the use of prompt letters; it also issued two of 

them. One of those letters, to the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), involved mandatory 
disclosure  of  trans-fatty  acids  in  the  Nutrition  Facts  panel  of  food.115  Drawing  attention  to 

evidence that trans-fatty acids contribute to coronary heart disease (“CHD”), the letter noted that 

a  disclosure  rule  seemed  to  be  supported  by  the  FDA’s  preliminary  analysis,  which  estimated 

that, ten years after the effective date, the rule would prevent 7,600 to 17,100 cases of CHD and 

avert  2,500  to  5,600  deaths  per year. Over a 20-year period, the FDA estimated the benefits of 

such a rule would range from $25 billion to $59 billion, while the costs would be $400 million to 

$850  million.  The  prompt  letter  strongly  encouraged  the  FDA  to  issue  a  disclosure  rule  or  to 

explain its failure to do so. 

The other prompt letter, involving automatic external defibrillators (“AEDs”), was sent to 

the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, with a firm request that the agency “consider 
whether  promotion  of  AEDs  should  be  elevated  to  a  priority.”116  The  letter  referred  to  an 

editorial  in  the  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine,  noting  that  only  2%  to  5%  of  the  225,000 

persons  who  have  sudden  and  unexpected  cardiac  arrest  each  year  outside  a  hospital  are 

successfully  resuscitated  compared  to  the  17%  to  38%  success  rates  found  with  AEDs.  The 

prompt  letter  observed  that  “some  preliminary  cost-effectiveness  calculations”  showed  that 
“AEDs in the workplace might prove to be a very cost-effective intervention.” 117 Indeed AEDs, 

now  mandated  on  air  carriers  by  the  Department  of  Transportation,  are  estimated  to  save  nine 

lives per year, at the comparatively low price of $2.4 million in annual costs. The prompt letter 

                                                 
113 See supra note 16.. 
114  Office  of  Management  and  Budget,  News  Release,  at  http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/pubpress/2001-35.html 
(Sept. 18, 2001) 
115 Id. 
116 Id.  
117 Id. 

29 

 

 

suggested that OSHA should consider following the Department of Transportation’s lead. OIRA 

has  issued  a  series  of  prompt  letters  since  the  initial  announcement,  including  a  letter  to  the 

Department of Transportation and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration regarding 

frontal  offset  crash  testing,  and  a  letter  to  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  regarding 
particulate matter.118 

In our view, these “prompt letters” are an exceedingly important development. For far too 

long, the idea of cost-benefit analysis has been wrongly associated with dogmatic opposition to 

regulation. To be sure, an exploration of costs and benefits often shows that regulation cannot be 

justified.  But  cost-benefit  analyses  can  show,  and  have  shown,  that  government  action  is 

worthwhile––and  indeed  that  government  should  do  more.  Such  analyses  helped  encourage 
policymakers  to  remove  lead  from  gasoline  and  protect  the  ozone  layer.119  Prompt  letters 

promise to strengthen the hand of policy analysts in the federal government, ensuring that action 

will  be  taken  on  the  basis  of  a  careful  assessment  of  consequences,  rather  than  in  reaction  to 

interest groups or political platitudes.  

But  why––it  might  be  asked––should  prompt  letters  be  made  public?  Shouldn’t  such 

letters  be  part  of  the  informal,  behind-the-scenes  consultation  that  often  occurs  within  the 

executive branch? This is not a simple question to answer, but in some ways public disclosure of 

prompt 

letters 

is  a  great  virtue.  Public  disclosure  promotes  transparency  and  hence 

accountability.  Equally  important,  public  disclosure  increases  the  likelihood  that  OIRA’s 

concerns  will  be  taken  seriously.  In  the  end,  agencies  remain  in  charge  of their  own  priorities; 

but if OIRA’s suggestion is reasonable, public disclosure will give agencies an additional reason 

to investigate it with care. 

It  would  be  desirable  in  this  regard  for  independent  groups  to  play  a  role  in 

recommending prompt letters. OIRA’s own resources are far too limited to enable it to consider 
all promising possibilities on its own.120 Environmental groups, for example, might conduct their 

own analyses to suggest that new steps ought to be taken to control certain pollutants. Institutions 

that  investigate  regulatory  issues,  and  even  individual observers from academia  and  elsewhere, 

might  be  provided  with  a  forum  by  which  they could suggest a prompt letter  from OIRA. The 

supporting analysis might be developed privately and reviewed publicly. Steps of this sort might 

                                                 
118 Supra note 108. 
119 Economic Analysis at EPA, supra note 44. 

30 

 

 

simultaneously  increase  the  quality  of  analysis  and  the  level  of  public  participation  in  the 

regulatory process. 

In our proposed order, we have also given an explicit place to the idea of “return letters.” 

Not  only  did  OIRA  announce  the  use  of  prompt  letters;  it  also  issued  four  of  them.  But  the 

practice  of  returning  regulations 
lay  dormant  during 
the  Clinton 
Administration,121 and there is some value in making the power explicit, if only to give a clear 

last  years  of 

the 

signal that it should be exercised in appropriate circumstances. 

 

C. De Minimis Exceptions, Substitute Risks, Equity, and Distribution 

We have introduced two new principles, implicit in previous orders but deserving explicit 

recognition. We have also recast the treatment of equity and distributional effects. 

1. De Minimis Exceptions. In a series of cases, courts have authorized agencies to exempt 

trivial risks from regulation, at least when Congress has not unambiguously denied agencies that 
authority.122 This principle is a modern version of an ancient idea: de minimis non curat lex. In 

the regulatory context, the principle has special importance. When risks are trivial, it is not likely 

to  be  worthwhile  to  eliminate  them,  partly  because  the  effort  distracts  attention  from  more 

serious problems, partly because of the sheer expense of the effort. We have built the de minimis 

principle into the executive order, asking agencies not to deal with trivial problems. 

2.  Substitute  Risks.  The  last  decade  has  seen  increasing  attention  devoted  to  the 
possibility that risk regulation will produce substitute risks.123 It is well known that fuel economy 

standards for new cars could result in the production of smaller and less safe vehicles; whatever 

the extent of this danger, we think it reasonable for government to take steps to avoid it. In the 

context  of  the  EPA’s  ozone  standard,  it  was  successfully  urged  that  EPA  should  consider  the 

possibility  that  regulation  of  ground-level  ozone  could  actually  increase  health  risks,  by 

                                                                                                                                                             
120 See note supra. 
121 There were no return letters in the last three years of the Clinton Administration. See John Graham, Presidential 
Management of the Regulatory State (2001) available at  
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/graham_speech121701.html (Dec. 17, 2001). 
122  See,  e.g.,  Ala.  Power  Co.  v.  Costle,  636  F.  2d  323,  360-61  (D.C.  Cir.  1989)  (“Unless  Congress  has  been 
extraordinarily rigid, there is likely a basis for an implication of de minimis authority to provide exemption when the 
burdens of regulation yield a gain of trivial or no value.”). 
123 See Graham & Weiner, supra note 18, at 25 (defining the term “risk substitution”). 

31 

 

 

increasing  cataracts  and  skin  cancers.124  Indeed,  courts  appear  to  be  creating  a  new  default 

principle,  authorizing  agencies  to  take  account  of  the  substitute  risks  introduced  by  regulation. 

The general problem is ubiquitous, and agencies should take corrective steps. We have built into 

the executive order a specific requirement that agencies attend to the problem. 

3.  Equity  and  Distribution.  We  propose  to  allow  agencies  to  consider  the  distributional 

effects  of  regulation,  and  to  proceed  if  an  understanding  of  those  effects  justifies  a  departure 

from  the  “bottom  line”  produced  by  cost-benefit  calculations.  This  is  a  departure  from  the 
Reagan Order, which offered no reference to distributive effects.125 At the same time, we require 

agencies  to  offer  a  detailed  explanation  for  proceeding  if  the  costs  significantly  exceed  the 

benefits. This is a departure from the Clinton Order, which provided somewhat vague references 
to both “equity” and “distributive impacts.”126 To understand these points, some background is in 

order. 

      A  conventional  objection  to  cost-benefit  analysis  is  that  it  treats  society  as  if  it  were  an 

individual person, and disregards the fact that a regulation typically produces both winners and 

losers. Suppose, for example, that the costs of stricter controls on particulates are $500 million 

annually,  and  that  the  benefits  are $350  million. Does  this  mean that the  stricter  controls are a 

bad  idea?  This  is  not  so  clear.  Skeptics  might  urge  that  we  need  to  know  far  more  about  the 

identity of the winners and the losers. Does the $500 million cost mean that corporate profits will 

decline, so that high-level corporate officials will have reduced salaries? Does it mean that prices 

will increase, and if so, are luxury items involved? Will the $350 million in benefits be enjoyed 

mostly  by  poor  people?  By  children?  Of  course  a  measurement  of  benefits  in  terms  of  “life 

years” would automatically extend special concern to children. Or by people who are elderly and 

already  well  off?  Critics  of  cost-benefit  analysis  believe  that  in  order  to  know  whether  to 

proceed, it is crucial not simply to tabulate both costs and benefits, but to ask and answer such 

questions. 

      Such  critics  have  a  point,  but  there  are  many  complexities  here.  In  some  cases,  those  who 

benefit  from regulation are the  same as those who must  pay for  it,  and  hence  questions of this 

kind  need  not  arise.  The  EPA’s  decision  to  regulate  arsenic  in  drinking  water  is  a  recent 

                                                 
124 See Am. Trucking Ass’n v. EPA, 175 F.3d 1027, 1052 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (discussing the risks of varying levels of 
stratospheric versus tropospheric ozone). 
125 See Exec. Order No. 12,291, supra note 1. 
126 See Exec. Order No. 12,866, supra note 2 

32 

 

 

example.127 Often, of course, those who gain are not the same as those who lose. But it is wrong 

to  think,  as  some  people  seem  to  do,  that  regulation  typically  imposes  costs  on  wealthy 

corporations  and  delivers  benefits  to  those  in  need––and  hence  that  cost-benefit  analysis  is  an 

unfortunate method for blocking desirable redistribution. The basic reason is that regulation is a 
crude  and  often  ineffective  tool  for  redistributing  resources.128  If,  for  example,  high  costs  are 

imposed  on  those  who  buy  automobiles  or  gasoline,  the  victims  will  not  be  some  abstractions 

called  “corporations.”  On  the  contrary,  it  is  highly  likely  that  the  costs  will  be  felt  by  some 

combination of consumers (with price increases being especially hard on the poor), workers who 

must  face  lower  wages,  and  people  who  are  thrown  into  unemployment.  And  when  regulation 

provides  benefits,  there  is  no  general  reason  to  think  that  low-income  people  will  be  the 

beneficiaries.  In  short,  the  incidence  of  regulatory  benefits  and  burdens  is  not easy to untangle 

and the burdens are likely to be felt by real people, many of them far from wealthy. All that can 

be  said  for  certain  is  that  regulation  is  most  unlikely  to  transfer  resources  from  those  who  are 
well off to those who are needy.129 

       Invoking considerations of this kind, some people urge that cost-benefit analysis should be 

the exclusive basis for regulation, and that equity and distributional effects are all too likely to be 

used  as  an  all-purpose  basis  for  assistance not to those who are needy, but to powerful private 
groups.130 But we do not favor going so far as to bar consideration of distributive effects. We do 

believe that the idea of “equity” is too vague to be helpful; but in our view, agencies should be 

permitted  to  take  account  of  distributive  effects.  Certainly  they  should  do  so  when  the  context 

suggests that the benefits will go to people who are especially needy, and that the burdens will be 

imposed on people who can easily bear them––and also when the burdens would be imposed on 

the  needy  and  the  benefits  enjoyed  by  those  who  are  already  very  well  off.  Consider,  for 

example, the fact that poor people have been the disproportionate winners from regulation of air 

                                                 
127 See Cass R. Sunstein, “The Arithmetic of Arsenic,” Georgetown Law Journal (?) (forthcoming 2002). 
128 See, e.g., A. Mitchell Polinsky, “An Introduction to Law and Economics,” 7-10, 119-120 (1983). and Arrow et 
al.,  supra  note  9,  at  4  (“Too  frequently,  environmental,  health  and  safety  regulation  has  used  a  one-size-fits-all  or 
command-control approach.”). 
129  Indeed,  regulation  that  is  defended  on  equitable  grounds  sometimes  turns  out,  in  practice,  to  benefit  powerful 
private  groups  with  no  special  claim  to  governmental  assistance.  See  James  Hamilton  &  W.  Kip  Viscusi, 
Calculating  Risks  1(2000)  (examining  “risk  measures  to  cost  data  to  derive  estimates  of  Superfund  site 
remediations” in hazardous waste clean-up projects). 
130 The argument for cost-benefit analysis alone might be supported by noting that a uniform number for mortality 
and  morbidity  risks  already  contains  a  redistributive  element,  since  it  uses  the  same  figure  for  wealthy  and  poor 

33 

 

 

pollution.131 Consider also the fact that the burdens of stringent regulation of arsenic in drinking 
water  are  likely  to  be  borne  disproportionately  by  those  who  are  relatively  less  well  off.132 

Though good data will often be absent, agencies should consider effects of this sort. 

When  the  costs  are  far  higher  than  the  benefits,  however,  agencies  should  not  allow 

distributive  effects  to  be  a  kind  of  all-purpose  justification  for  proceeding.  Instead  they  should 

give a careful analysis of their approach. We believe that if the costs are grossly disproportionate 

to the benefits, there should be a strong presumption against regulation, rebuttable only in cases 

where the distributive argument is compelling. 

 

D. Requiring Explanation When Benefits Do Not Exceed Costs 

We believe that agencies should generally act only when the benefits exceed the costs. To 

be  sure,  this  is  not  meant  as  a  rigid  requirement.  Agencies  should  be  permitted,  in  unusual 

circumstances, to act even when the numbers do not support their action. But in such cases, we 

ask an agency that chooses to proceed with a regulation that does not pass a cost-benefit test to 

provide  a  rationale  for  doing  so.  By  “does  not  pass”  a  benefit-cost  test,  we  mean  that  the 

expected quantifiable costs are likely to exceed the quantifiable expected benefits, before taking 

distributional  effects  and  any  other  relevant  factor  into  account.  Of  course  there  are  typically 

large  uncertainties  in  developing  the  relevant  estimates,  and  hence  a  large  number  of 
discretionary  judgments  must  be  made  before  generating  the  numbers.133  We  think  that  OIRA 

administrator should  decide when  a proposed regulation does not pass a cost-benefit test based 

on her best judgment. OIRA administrator should be reasonably confident that the quantified net 

benefits  of  the  proposed  regulation  are  negative  before  requiring  a  rationale.  For  example,  a 

margin on the order of ten million dollars annually could be set as a minimum threshold. 

The  agency  head  should  be  allowed  to  consider  other  relevant  factors  in  her  decision-

making,  including  distributional  effects.  These  factors  should  be  quantified  to  the  extent 

possible,  even  if  they  are  not  included  in  the  cost-benefit  analysis  itself.  The  purpose  of  the 

                                                                                                                                                             
people--despite  the  fact  that  willingness  to pay is likely to vary with wealth. Of course, if willingness to pay does 
vary a narrowly defined cost-benefit analysis would take this into account.  
131 Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air Act Regulation, 24 Regulation 34 (2001). 
132  The  arsenic  rule  provides  an  interesting  case  because  the  problem  is  often  localized.  In  such  cases,  several 
authors  have  argued  for  local  standards  rather  than  national  standards.  See,  e.g.,  Jason  K.  Burnett  &  Robert  W. 
Hahn, “A Costly Benefit,” 24  Reg. Fall 2001, at 44; William A. Niskanen, “Arsenic and Old Facts,” 24 Reg. Fall 
2001, at 54. 
133 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, Geo. L. J. (forthcoming 2002). Arrow et al., supra note, at 6. 

34 

 

 

quantification is to make the analysis more transparent. We also believe that factors that cannot 

be  easily  be  quantified  should  be  factored  into  the  analysis  where  relevant.  In  providing  the 

rationale for proceeding, the agency head has an opportunity (and in our view, a duty) to provide 

a  well-reasoned  analytical  justification  for  the  decision  reached.  Requiring  a  rationale  for 

proceeding  when  expected  net  benefits  are  negative  will  give  the  regulatory  process  more 

legitimacy,  and  should  also  lend  legitimacy  to  the  use  of  cost-benefit  analysis  as  a  tool  for 

decision making. 

Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  new  regulation  of  a  certain  air  pollutant  would  have 

monetized benefits of $250 million, but monetized costs of $280 million. Suppose, too, that the 

benefits  would  come  in  the  form  of  reduced  illnesses  among  young  people,  and  also  reduced 

mortality effects for  people who would otherwise have many additional years. Suppose as well 

that  many  of  the  beneficiaries  of  the  regulation  are  poor,  and  that  the  costs  of  the  regulation 

would mainly result in higher prices for certain products (say, cars and energy). The problem is 

not  entirely  simple,  especially  because  increased  energy  prices  hit  poor  people  hardest;  but  in 

this  admittedly  stylized  example,  an  administrator  might  well  be  able  to  justify  a  decision  to 

proceed even though the monetized costs exceed the monetized benefits. 

 

E. Make Underlying Analysis Available 

There  has  been  a  controversy  over  public  access  to  data  used  in  regulatory  decision-
making.134  The  controversy  arose  when  the  Environmental  Protection  Agency  finalized  a 

regulation  on  particulate  matter  in  July  of  1997  that  gave  the  agency  new  power  to  regulate  a 

variety  of  emission  sources  ranging  from  power  plants  to  lawn  mowers  and  barbecues.  The 
regulation,  estimated  to  cost  between  9  and  37  billion  annually  in  1990  dollars,135  was  based 

partly on a study that suggested that reducing emissions of fine particles could lead to substantial 
reductions  in  premature  mortality.136  In  response  to  that  controversy,  Senator  Richard  Shelby 

                                                 
134  See  Cohen  &  Hahn,  supra  note  99;  Science,  Technology  and  Law  Program, The National Academies: Seeking 
Access  to  Research  Data  in  the  21st  Century:  An  Ongoing  Dialogue  Among  Interested  Parties  (2001),  at 
http://www4.nas.edu/pd/stl.nsf/web/data_access_workshop/;  Michael Gough & Steven Milloy, The Case for Public 
Access to Federally Funded Research Data (2000), at http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa-366es.pdf; Angela Antonelli, 
Public Access to Research Data, Public Comment (1999), at  
http://www.heritage.org/library/testimony/comment091099.pdf.  
135  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Regulatory  Impact  Analysis  for  the  Particulate  Matter  and  Ozone  National 
Ambient Air Quality Standards and Proposed Regional Haze Rule (1997). Arrow et al., supra note, at 6. 
136 See Jocelyn Kaiser, 277 Science 467 (1997). 

35 

 

 

authored  a  provision  in  the  1999  Omnibus  Spending  Bill  that  requires  data  generated  under 
federal  awards  at  universities  and  non-profit  institutions  to  be  available  to  the  public.137  OMB 
then developed a policy to implement the Shelby amendment.138 

 Our  recommendation  would  go  further  than  the  Shelby  amendment  and  would  require 
the development of a new policy by OMB.139 As a presumption, all relevant information should 

be  made  available  to  the  public  regarding  the  derivation  of  the  likely  benefits  and  costs  from 
regulations.140 OMB should address this issue through a policy in its guidelines to the agency (or 

in  a  separate  policy  statement).  The  primary  purpose  here  is  to  promote  transparency  in  the 

regulatory  process,  so  the  public  and  interested  parties  have  better  access  to  information  that 
forms the basis for decision making.141 

 

F. Adopt An Annual Regulatory Plan and Retrospective 

      If OIRA becomes involved in the process only to approve or reject regulations, it will 

necessarily have a limited role. It would be highly desirable to create a process by which OIRA, 

and cost-benefit analysis, become relevant at an early stage. President Reagan attempted to move 

in this direction with his second executive order, which required agencies to produce an annual 
regulatory plan.142 President Clinton imposed similar requirements, though little was done with 
them in practice.143 A special advantage of this approach is that it promises to increase the 

authority of agency heads over their staffs, simply by ensuring that plans will be visible before 

the stage when they are practically final. 

Our proposal in this regard is simple and straightforward. We would require every agency 

to produce an account of its planned rules and to forward that account to OIRA, which would in 

                                                 
137 Id. 
138 OMB Circular A-110, which would permit requesters to be charged a fee for the data. Office of Management and 
Budget, Circular A-110 (1999), athttp://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a110/a110.html. 
139  Our  recommendation  is  similar  to  Hahn  and  Cohen’s  recommendation  concerning  economically  significant 
regulations, but moves beyond federally funded projects. See Cohen & Hahn, supra note 99. 
140 We are sensitive to the tradeoffs involved in the production of useful information, and, thus, would not require 
that  all  information  necessarily  be  provided.  For  example,  companies  should  not  be  required  to  make  public 
proprietary  information  that  would  compromise  their  competitive  position. In many cases, however, such data can 
be  presented  in  a  form  that  does  not compromise a particular firm. The matter is somewhat more complicated for 
scholars.  See  Linda  R.  Cohen  &  Robert  W.  Hahn,  Should  Researchers  Be  Required  to  Share  Data  Used  in 
Supporting Regulatory Decisions? (1999), at http://www.aei- 
brookings.org/publications/reganalyses/reg_analysis_99_01.pdf. 
141 For very significant decisions, say, involving billions of dollars annually, we think that interested parties should 
have access not only to data, but also to the models that generate key results. 
142 Exec. Order No. 12,498, supra note 2. 

36 

 

 

turn  be  authorized  to  work  with  the  agency  to  require  compliance  with  the  principles  and 

requirements of the executive order. By calling for OIRA participation, we hope to ensure more 

coordination at an early stage than was achieved under Presidents Reagan, Bush, and Clinton. 

 

G. Incorporating Independent Agencies 

We  have  urged  that  the  process  of  OIRA  review  should  be  widened,  to  include  the 

independent agencies as well as executive agencies and departments. As a matter of policy, the 

motivation  for  this  suggestion  is  straightforward.  Independent  agencies  qualify  as  such  not 

because  of  the  substance  of  what  they  do,  but  because  Congress  has  chosen  to  limit  the 

President’s power to remove their top officials––saying, in the typical formulation, that removal 
is  acceptable  only  for  “inefficiency,  neglect  of  duty,  or  malfeasance  in  office.”144  Many  of  the 

most  important  agencies  in  government  are  independent  in  this  sense,  including  the  Federal 

Communications  Commission,  the  Federal  Trade  Commission,  the  National  Labor  Relations 

Board, the Food and Drug Administration, and the Consumer Product Safety Commission.  

      In principle, there is every reason to include independent agencies within the basic structure 

of  an  executive  order  on  federal  regulation.  Indeed,  the  argument  for  including  such  agencies 

seems  no  weaker  than  the  argument  for  including  the  conventional  executive  agencies. 

Moreover, as Table 5 shows, many of these agencies do not routinely quantify the benefits and 

costs of their proposed regulations, in part because they are not required to do so. If the goal is to 

ensure more rationality in regulation, and to devote resources to areas where they would do the 

most good, the independent agencies deserve inclusion no less than others. The real question is 

one of law, not of policy. 

                                                                                                                                                             
143 See Hahn et al., supra note 4 . 
144 See, e.g., 15 U.S.C. § 41 (1994) (concerning the FTC); 29 U.S.C. § 661(b) (1994) (concerning the Occupational 
Safety and Health Review Commission). 

37 

Table 5: Federal Regulatory Agencies’ Efforts to Catalog Benefit and Cost Information145 

 

Agency 

Estimates  of  the  Future  Benefits  and  Costs  of 
New Regulatory Activities 

Aggregate  Estimates  of  the  Benefits 
and Costs of Regulatory Activitiesa 

V. 

Executive 

Major Rulesb 

Department of Agriculture 
Department of Commerced 
Department of Energyd 
Department  of  Housing  and  Urban 
Development 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Food and Drug Administration 
National  Highway  Traffic  Safety 
Administration 
Occupational  Safety 
Administration 
 
VI. 

Independent 

and  Health 

Partial 
Partial 
Partial 
Partial 

Partial 
Partial 
Partial 

Partial 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 

Commodity 

Futures 

Trading 

No 

Consumer 

Product 

Safety 

Partial 

 
 

 

 

 

Federal Communications Commission 

No 

                                                 
145 Robert W. Hahn, Reviving Regulatory Reform: Global Perspective 62, tbls.3-11 (2000). 

Nonmajor 
Actionsc 
No evidence 
No evidence 
No evidence 
No evidence 

Partial 
Partial 
Partial 

Partial 

 
 

 

 

 

Partial 
No 
Partial 

 

No 
No 
No 
No 

No 

 
 

No 

No 

No 

Commission 

Commission 

 

                                                                                                                                                                                                  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No 

No 

Partial 

Energy 

Deposit 

Insurance 

Regulatory 

Federal 
Corporation 
Federal 
Commission 
Federal Reserve Board 
Federal Trade Commission 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
Securities and Exchange Commission 
Surface Transportation Boardd,e 
a. This category does not imply that an agency does not have enough information to estimate aggregate benefits and costs, but rather 
that an agency does not provide such information. For example, executive agencies may be able to put together a rough calculation 
of aggregate benefits and costs by compiling regulatory impact analysis estimates. 

No 
No 
Partial 
No 
No 

No 
No 
No 
No 
No 

No 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

b. All executive branch agencies are required to prepare regulatory impact analyses for major or economically significant rules. The 
analyses do not, however, always include comprehensive or complete estimates of benefits and costs. Hence, we characterize them 
as “partial.” 

c.  Some  agencies  frequently  estimate  the  benefits  and  costs  of  nonmajor  actions.  Unfortunately,  my  examination  of  the  nonmajor 
universe  is  not  exhaustive.  Thus,  we  are  not  able  to  describe  the  size  of  the  subset  of  nonmajor  rules  for  which  agencies  have 
estimated benefits and costs. For other agencies, we have found no evidence that estimates are provided for nonmajor actions. 

d. We have relied primarily on Bliley (1997) for this agency. 
e. The Surface Transportation Board replaced the Interstate Commerce Commission in 1996.  

39 

Does  the  President  have  the  legal  authority  to  do  what  we  propose?  Though  no 
President has tested the question, both the Department of Justice146 and the American Bar 
Association147 have concluded that he does. As a technical matter, the question remains 
unresolved. In the key case, Humphrey’s Executor v. United States,148 the Supreme Court 

upheld the constitutional legitimacy of the “independent” regulatory agencies, but it did 
not establish what, in particular, “independence” meant.149 Nothing in the Court’s opinion 

resolves  the  question  of  whether  the  President  has  supervisory  authority  over  the 

independent agencies. As an initial matter, the question is one of statutory interpretation: 

What authority has Congress given to the President? 

We have noted that the members of independent agencies may be removed by the 

President,  not  at  his  will,  but  only  for  “inefficiency,  neglect  of  duty,  or  malfeasance  in 
office.”150 What do these terms mean? There are two possible approaches. On a narrow 

interpretation,  the  President  is  allowed  to  discharge  independent  agency  heads  only  for 

grounds entirely unrelated to policy disagreements –-in which case the President may not 

supervise their policy choices. On this interpretation, the President may discharge people 

for corruption (“malfeasance in office”), for refusing to do their jobs (“neglect of duty”), 

or for more general dereliction in the sense of gross incompetence, chronic lateness, and 

the like (“inefficiency”). On this interpretation, application of the executive order to the 

independent agencies would indeed raise serious statutory questions. A process by which 

the President monitors such agencies for corruption and dereliction would be one thing; a 

process by which the President monitors such agencies for what he considers to be sound 

policy choices would be quite another. 

It is also important to take steps to ensure that existing regulations are subject to a 

process of continuing monitoring and oversight. We do not require any such steps in the 

proposed  order  itself,  on  the  ground  that  they  are  best  imposed  by  OMB  in  its  general 

                                                 
146 See Peter Shane & Harold Bruff, The Law of Presidential Power: Cases and Materials 355-58 (1988). 
147  See  Peter  L.  Strauss  &  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  “The  Role  of  the  President  and  OMB  in  Informal 
Rulemaking,” 38 Admin. L. Rev. 181, app. (1986) (providing excerpts to this effect from a recommendation 
by the ABA’s Administrative Law Section and from a memorandum from the Assistant Attorney General 
for the Office of Legal Counsel). 
148 295 U.S. 602 (1935), 
149 The Court did suggest, in dicta, that there would be a great deal of practical independence , suggesting 
that the Federal Trade Commission is “independent of executive authority, except in its selection.” 295 U.S 
.at 625. This idea was followed in Borders v. Reagan, 518 F. Supp. 250, 260 (D. D.C. 1981), vacated as 
moot, 732 F.2d 181 (D.C. Cir. 1982), which involved President Reagan’s effort to remove a member of the 
District of Columbia Judicial Nomination Commission. 
150 See, e.g., 15 U.S.C. § 41; 29 U.S.C. § 661(b). 
 

 

oversight  function.  But  the  key  points  are  that  prospective  analysis  of  costs  and 
benefits are often erroneous151 and that unanticipated developments can make regulations 
obsolete, too stringent, or insufficiently stringent.152 In order to assist OMB in its task of 

proposing  an  annual  report  of  the  costs  and  benefits  of  regulation,  agencies  should 

generate  numbers  reflecting  their  estimates  of  the  effects  of  their  own  most  significant 

regulations.  In  addition,  a  process  should  be  instituted  by  each  agency  to  give  a 

retrospective analysis of some of its most costly regulations, to see what kinds of effects 

they are having in actual process. OIRA might work together with the relevant agencies 

to identify the best candidates for review. 

On the other hand, a broader interpretation of the statutory terms would hardly be 

impossible  as  a  textual  matter.  The  first  point  is  that  the  narrow  interpretation  has  the 

disadvantage  of  raising  some  unresolved  constitutional  problems.  While  the  Court  has 
upheld the idea of independent regulatory commissions,153 it has never held that Congress 

can  entirely  immunize  such  commissions  from  presidential oversight.  To those who are 

skeptical  of  agency  independence  as  a  constitutional  matter,  the  narrow  interpretation 

would  be  extremely  troubling  and  should  be  avoided  if  at  all possible, so as to avoid a 

serious constitutional problem. The second point is that the relevant text is susceptible of 

a  broader  understanding.  What  counts  as  “inefficiency”?  What  counts  as  “neglect  of 

duty”? At a minimum, it seems sensible to say that the President is entitled to require the 

production  of  documents  to  ensure  that  agency  officials  are  acting  efficiently  and  in  a 
way  that  does  not  show  neglect.154  To  this  extent,  procedural  incorporation  of  the 

independent agencies-–to require them to assess both costs and benefits-–seems to be on 

firm  ground.  And  it  would  be  reasonable  to  go  further.  If  agencies  proceed  when  the 

benefits  do  not  exceed  the  costs,  they  might  reasonably  be  thought  to  be  acting 

“inefficiently”  (pun intended), and in  a way that shows a neglect of duty, at least if  the 

decision to proceed is not adequately explained. A broader interpretation does not much 

stretch the language. 

                                                 
151 See note supra. 
152  See  the  catalogue  of  the  inadequacies  of  prospective  assessments  in  Bradley  Karkkainen.  See  also 
Winston  Harrington,  Richard  D.  Morgenstern,  and  Peter  Nelson,  “On  the  Accuracy  of  Regulatory  Cost 
Estimates,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 19, no. 2, 2000, 297-322. 
153 See Humphrey’s Executor, supra note 122 (rejecting a presidential removal of a member of the FTC); 
Mistretta v. US, 488 US 361, 410-12, pn 32-35 (1989). 
154 This point also follows from the Constitution’s Opinions in Writing Clause. See U.S. Const., art. 2, § 2. 

41 

 

None of this suggests that the President, or OIRA, should be permitted to displace 

the  decisions  of  the  independent  regulatory  agencies.  But  it  does  suggest  that  a 

supervisory  role,  leaving  the  ultimate  decision  to  those  agencies,  would  be  entirely 

acceptable. To those who are skeptical of this conclusion, it might make sense to create a 

special,  weaker  system  of  oversight  for  the  independent  agencies,  limited  to  procedural 

matters  (and  hence  allowing  no  room  for  return  letters).  But  we  think  that  it  would  be 

desirable  to  keep  a  single  system  in  place  for  all  agencies,  retaining  the  idea  that  if  an 

independent  agency  ultimately  seeks  to  issue  a  regulation  notwithstanding  OIRA 
objection, it is entitled to do so.155 

If our argument seems far-fetched, consider Bowsher v. Synar.156 In Bowsher, the 

Court struck down Congress’ effort to delegate discretionary authority to the Comptroller 
General.157  In  so  doing,  the  Court  held  that  the  Comptroller  was  unduly  subject  to 

congressional  control,  and  thus  operated  as  an  agent  of  Congress,  rather  than  as  a 
genuinely independent agency.158 But what made the Comptroller an agent of Congress? 

The answer is the governing statute, which allows Congress to discharge the Comptroller 
for  “inefficiency,”  “neglect  of  duty,”  or  “malfeasance.”159  But  on  the  narrow  view, 

outlined above, these terms do not allow Congress much in the way of authority over the 

Comptroller. Rejecting the narrow view, the Court described these terms as “very broad” 

and  suggested  that  they  meant  that  Congress  “in  effect  ...  retained  control  over  the 
execution of the Act....”160 In the Court’s view, these “very broad [terms] ... could sustain 

removal of a Comptroller General for any number of actual or perceived transgressions of 
the legislative will.”161 

It  would  be  easy,  even  natural  to  take  the  Bowsher  Court’s  interpretation  of  the 

terms  governing  congressional  removal  of  the  Comptroller  General  as  authority  for  the 

proper  interpretation  of  the  terms  governing  presidential  removal  of  the  members  of 

independent  regulatory  commissions.  This  is  so  for  a  simple  reason:  the  terms  are  very 

close, indeed essentially identical. If the interpretation in Bowsher is to apply here, then 

                                                 
155  We  are  bracketing  here  the  complex  question  when  and  whether  the  President  can  ever  “block”  an 
agency head’s decision. For a good treatment, see Elena Kagan, “Presidential Administration,” 114 Harv. 
L. Rev. 2245, 2328-2331 (2001). 
156 478 U.S. 714 (1986). 
157 Id. at 734. 
158 Id. at 727-32. 
159 Id. at 729, quoting 31 U.S.C. §703(e)(1)(B)(ii)-(iv). 
160 Id. at 734. 

42 

 

matter. 

the  President’s  authority  is  also  “very  broad”  and  “could  sustain  removal”  for  a  large 

number  of  actual  or  perceived  transgressions  of  the  presidential  will.  And  if  this  is 

correct,  then the President does, in fact, have a high degree of authority over the policy 

choices  of  the  independent  agencies.  And  if  this  is  correct,  then  inclusion  of  the 

independent  agencies  within  the  executive  order  is  plainly  lawful,  simply  as  a  statutory 

We do not contend that this argument is obviously correct. Because the statutory 

language appears in different contexts, it would be possible to understand the terms in the 

Comptroller General Act differently from the terms limiting presidential power over the 

independent  regulatory  agencies.  Our  argument  would  obviously  be  strengthened  if,  as 

we  believe,  constitutional  objections  to  genuine  “independence”  of  certain  agencies 

militate  against  the  narrow  reading,  which  would,  compared  to  our  reading,  restrict 
presidential control of the agencies.162 In light of this background constitutional concern, 

the  authority  of  Bowsher,  and  the  ambiguity  of  the  statutory  text,  we  believe  that 
incorporation of the independent agencies would be lawful––a conclusion, we reiterate,163 

that has been firmly supported by both the Department of Justice and the American Bar 

Association.  

 

H. Judicial Review 

Under  Presidents  Reagan,  Bush,  and  Clinton,  executive  orders  on  federal 

regulation  were  solely  for  the  internal  management  of  the  executive  branch,  and  they 
created  no  rights  for  judicial  enforcement.164  If,  for  example,  an  agency’s  regulatory 

analysis  showed  that  the  benefits  did  not  justify  the  costs,  courts  were  not  permitted  to 

consider that fact on judicial review. To be sure, some statutes require attention to both 

costs  and  benefits,  and  when  this  is  so,  the  agency’s  analysis  of  those  factors  can  be 

challenged  as  arbitrary.  But  the  process  of  analysis  under the executive orders,  and  any 

disagreements within the executive branch, would not be topics for judicial consideration. 

                                                                                                                                                 
161 Id. at 729. 
162 See Lawrence Lessig & Cass R. Sunstein, “The President and the Administration,” 94 Colum. L. Rev. 1, 
106-08  (1994)  (analyzing  the  constitutional  concerns  raised  by  an  agency  with  “complete  independence 
from the President”). 
163 See supra notes 139-40. 
164 See, e.g., Exec. Order No. 13,112, 64 Fed. Reg. 6183, 6186 (“This order is intended only to improve the 
internal  management  of  the  executive  branch  and  is  not  intended  to  create  any  right,  benefit,  or  trust 
responsibility, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law or equity ... against the United States.”) 

43 

 

 

It is not difficult to understand why the executive branch would be skeptical of the 

idea  of  judicial  intervention.  As  a  general  rule,  it  is  not  in  the  interest  of  the  executive 

branch  to  increase  the  authority  of  the  judiciary  over  executive  officers.  To  be  sure, 

judicial review might solve an agency problem faced by the President if courts could be 

enlisted to enforce presidential prerogatives against agencies. But the apparent judgment 

of  the  executive  branch  has  been  that  the  risks  of  that  course,  prominently  including 

losses on appeal, outweigh the advantages. 

We  have  suggested  a  modest  but  significant  change,  slightly  compromising  the 

interests  of  the  executive  in  favor  of  the  interests  of  the  public  as  a  whole.  Under  our 

order, judicial review would be available of the materials generated pursuant to the order, 

but only to the extent that those materials are relevant to the agency’s decision under the 

relevant statute. This proposal would not violate current law; it would merely add to the 

set  of  materials  that  courts  examine  when  testing  the  question  whether  the  agency  has 

followed the statute or acted arbitrarily. To be sure, this innovation would add materials 

to the file for judicial review, and in that sense would complicate the judicial task. But it 
would add little beyond what courts are now considering in the regulatory context.165 

IV. What Executive Orders Can and Cannot Do: A Cautionary Note 

We believe that a new executive order on federal regulation could do a great deal 

of good. One reason is the very signal that such an order would send: By virtue of its high 

visibility,  and  because  of  its  source  (the  White  House),  a  new  order  would  suggest  a 

serious  commitment,  on  the  part  of  high-level  officials,  to  improving  regulatory 

outcomes.  Another  reason  is  that  such  an  order  could  embody  institutional  and 

substantive reforms that would reduce the problems of shallowness and narrowness. Our 

central goal has been to ensure that the commitments in previous executive orders are real 

rather  than  symbolic,  and  we  believe  that  the  steps  suggested  here  would  be  helpful  in 

promoting that goal. 

An executive order is not, however, a panacea; it is not sufficient for real change, 

and for some purposes it is not even necessary. With respect to the question of necessity, 

we  have  noted  that  OIRA  could  move  in  many  of  the  directions  we  propose  under 

                                                 
165  See,  e.g.,  Chlorine  Chemistry  Council  v.  EPA  206  F.3d  1286  (DC  Cir  2000)  (ruling  that  chloroform 
must be treated as a threshold pollutant under the Safe Drinking Water Act). 

44 

 

existing  law,  including the  existing executive order. Indeed, one of our major goals has 

been  to  outline  the  lessons  of  over  two  decades  of  experience  with  presidential 

requirements  of  cost-benefit  balancing  and  to  suggest  what  can  be  done  in  response  to 

that  experience.  If  a  new  executive  order  does  not  seem  desirable  or  feasible,  we  hope 

that  our  discussion  and  our  proposed  order  will  have  heuristic  value,  suggesting  what 
should  be  done  even  without  formal  changes.166  With  respect  to  the  insufficiency  of  a 

new order, some statutes ban cost-benefit balancing, and the executive must obey the law. 

A  thoroughgoing  reform  effort  would  require  legislative  reforms,  not  merely  executive 

action. At the executive level itself, everything depends on implementation. It is possible 
that an executive order, like a Constitution, will be a mere “parchment barrier,”167 with 

little or no effect on the real world. In fact, successful implementation probably requires 

high-level  political  support,  in  the  form,  for  example,  of  a  clear  understanding  that  the 

President or the Vice President is committed to the process inaugurated by the executive 

order.  But  an  executive  order  would  itself  be  a  step  toward  establishing  that 

understanding.  

To make the process  truly  effective, however, greater congressional support will 

probably  be  required.  This  support  will  only  come  if  the  public  sees  a  need  for  greater 

transparency and accountability in the regulatory process. The reality is that most of the 

public  is  (usually  rationally)  uninformed  on  many  regulatory  issues,  including  the  issue 
of  regulatory  oversight.168  And  legislators  do  not  typically  have  a  strong  incentive  to 

support  regulatory  reforms  that  promote  accountability.  Indeed,  many  members  of 

Congress seem to prefer to pass laws and regulations that give the appearance of fixing 
the problem––leaving it to the executive and the judiciary to sort out implementation.169 

Without stronger congressional efforts, any steps from the President will have a limited 

effect. 

supra 

formal 

Letters, 

changes. 

See  Prompt 

                                                 
166 Note in this regard that prompt letters and return letters are being issued in significant numbers without 
at 
108;  Return 
any 
http://www.whitehouse.gove/omb/inforeg/return_letter.html (archiving recent return letters). 
167  Jack  N.  Rakove,  Parchment  Barriers  and  the  Politics  of  Rights,  in  A  Culture  of  Rights:  The  Bill  of 
Rights in Philosophy, Politics, and Law--1791 and 1991 98, 129-36 (Michael J. Lacey & Knud Haakonssen 
eds., 1991). 
168  For  the  classic  discussion  of  rational  ignorance  on  the  part  of  voters,  see,  e.g.,  Anthony  Downs,  An 
Economic Theory of Democracy (1957),.  
169 On the political economy of regulation, see e.g., Roger G. Noll, Reforming Regulation (1971); Bruce M. 
Owen & Ronald Braeutigam, The Regulation Game (1978); Roger Noll, The Economics and Politics of the 
Slowdown in Regulatory Reform (1999), available at  
http://www.aei.brookings.org/publications/books/economics_and_politics.pdf. 

Letters, 

note 

45 

 

V. Conclusion 

Government  regulation  continues  to  display  a  pattern  of  “paranoia  and 
neglect.”170 Understood as a pragmatic tool for drawing attention to the likely effects of 

regulation,  cost-benefit  analysis  holds  out  considerable  promise  for  overcoming  the 

underlying  problems.  For  over  twenty  years,  executive  orders  have  attempted  to 

discipline the administrative process by requiring agencies to pay close attention to both 

costs and benefits. But the overall record  is mixed. In many cases, cost-benefit analysis 
does appear to have improved agency decisions in quite significant ways.171 At the same 

time,  the  system  for  OIRA  review  has  not  succeeded  in  fundamentally  redirecting 

regulation toward areas where it would do the most good.  

Of course there are many reasons for this mixed record.172 But part of the reason, 

we suggest, is that the executive’s commitment to cost-benefit analysis remains both too 

shallow and too narrow. It is too shallow because too much of the time agencies fail to 

take the commitment seriously, and the process of OIRA review has not ensured that they 

will do so. It is too narrow because a large number of agencies are not subject to OIRA 

review  at  all.  We  have  suggested  a  range  of  possible  responses.  To  overcome 

shallowness,  we  have  called  for  mandatory  compliance  with  OMB  guidelines  on 

regulatory analysis; formalized the ideas of “return letters” and “prompt letters;” offered 

new principles governing substitute risks and trivial risks; clarified the issue of equity and 

distributional  effects;  and  authorized  limited  judicial  review  of  the  materials  generated 

through  this  process.  To  overcome  narrowness,  we  have  included  the  independent 

agencies, which issue many of the nation’s most important regulations, within the scope 

of the order. 

As  we  have  discussed,  an  executive  order,  standing  by  itself,  will  not  do  all,  or 

even  nearly  all,  of  what  should  be  done.  A  great  deal  depends  on  personnel  and  on  a 

serious  commitment,  on  the  part  of  high-level  officials,  to  regulatory  reform. 

Congressional  support  is  also  important.  As  we  have  emphasized,  such  a  commitment 

could  accomplish  a  great  deal,  building  on  what  we  have  suggested  here,  under  the 

                                                 
170 John D. Graham, Making Sense of Risk: An Agenda for Congress, in Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved 183, 
183 (Robert W. Hahn ed., 1996). 
171 See Economic Analysis at EPA, supra note 44. 
172 One reason, mentioned above, is that Congress sometimes bans cost-benefit balancing. See Whitman v. 
American Trucking Ass’n, 531 U.S. 457, 471 (2001) (holding that the Clean Air Act “unambiguously bars 
cost considerations” when the EPA sets ambient air quality standards under the Act). 

46 

 

existing  executive order; and to reduce  the reality  and  appearance of partisanship, there 

are  clear  advantages  to  a  situation  in  which  an  administration  of  one  party  is  operating 

under principles laid down under an administration of another party. But the experience 

of the last two decades suggests that a revised and improved executive order could attract 

the  support  of  people  with  a  wide  range  of  political  commitments,  and  inaugurate 

significant improvements in the system of government regulation. 

47 

 

Appendix 
A New Executive Order 
 
The American people deserve a regulatory system that protects and improves their health, 

safety,  environment,  and  well-being  without  imposing  unacceptable  or  unreasonable 

costs  on  society.  Regulatory  policies  should  be  based  on  a  careful  assessment  of  the 

likely  consequences  of  regulation,  including  an  effort  to  assess  and  balance  both  costs 

and  benefits.  Regulatory  policies  should  use  the  lowest-cost  means  of  achieving  social 

goals. Public and private resources should be devoted to large problems, not trivial ones. 

The  general  objective  of  this  Executive  Order  is  to  ensure  that  cost-benefit  analysis, 

understood as a tool to produce better decisions, will have a far larger role in the federal 

government than it now does. The particular objectives are: to ensure that regulations are 

adopted  on  the  basis  of  an  evaluation  of  their  likely  consequences;  to  promote  sensible 

priority-setting; to increase  attention to neglected problems while reducing expenditures 

on minor or nonexistent problems; to ensure that agencies consider alternatives to costly 

regulation;  to  enhance  planning and coordination with respect to both new  and  existing 

regulations; and to make the process accessible and open to the public. In pursuing these 

objectives,  the  regulatory  process  shall  be  conducted  so  as  to  meet  applicable  statutory 

requirements and with due regard to the discretion that has been entrusted to the Federal 

agencies. 

 
Accordingly, by the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws 

of the United States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows: 

SECTION 1. STATEMENT OF REGULATORY APPROACH AND REQUIREMENTS 

(A)  Approach.  Federal  agencies  should  promulgate  only  those  regulations  that  are 

required by law, are necessary to interpret the law, or are made necessary by compelling 

public need, such as material failures of private markets to protect or improve the health 

and safety of the  public, the environment, or the well-being of the American people. In 

deciding  whether  and  how  to  regulate,  agencies  shall  assess  the  costs  and  benefits  of 

reasonable  regulatory  alternatives,  including  the  alternative  of  not regulating. Costs and 

benefits  shall  be  understood  to  include  both  quantifiable  measures  (to  the  fullest  extent 

that these  can be  usefully  estimated) and qualitative measures of costs and benefits that 

are difficult to quantify, but nevertheless essential to consider. Agencies should ordinarily 

48 

 

act  only  if  the  incremental  benefits  exceed  the  incremental  costs.  Further,  in  choosing 

among alternative regulatory  approaches, agencies should ordinarily select the approach 

that maximizes net benefits, unless a statute requires another regulatory approach. 

 
(B)  Agency  Requirements.  To  ensure  that  agency  regulations  are  consistent  with  the 

approach  set  forth  above,  agencies  shall  adhere  to  the  following  requirements,  to  the 

extent permitted by law: 

assess the significance of that problem. 

 (1)  Each  agency  shall  identify  the  problem  that  it  intends  to  address  as  well  as 

 (2)  Each  agency  shall  explain  why  the  problem  that  it  intends  to  address  is  not 

adequately handled by private markets or by state or local authorities. 

 (3)  Each  agency shall examine  whether existing regulations (or other law) have 

created,  or  contributed  to,  the  problem  that  a  new  regulation  is  intended  to  correct  and 

whether those regulations (or other law) should be modified to achieve the intended goal 

of regulation more effectively. 

 (4)  Each  agency  shall  identify  and  assess  available  alternatives  to  direct 

regulation,  including  providing  economic  incentives  to  encourage  the  desired  behavior, 

such as user fees or marketable permits, or providing information upon which choices can 

be made by the public. 

 (5)  In  setting  regulatory  priorities,  each  agency  shall  attempt  to  ensure  that  it 

addresses  serious  problems  rather  than  trivial  ones  and  shall  consider,  to  the  extent 

reasonable,  the  degree  and  nature  of  the  risks  posed  by  various  substances  or  activities 

within its jurisdiction. 

 (6)  Each  agency  shall  explore  and  explain  whether  any  regulation  will  create 

significant new risks of any kind, and if so, shall identify the extent of any new risks in 

qualitative and quantitative terms.  

 (7) When an agency determines that a regulation is the best available method of 

achieving the regulatory objective, it shall design its regulation in the most cost-effective 

manner to achieve that objective.  

 (8)  Each  agency  shall  assess  both  the  incremental  costs  and  benefits  of  the 

intended  regulation  and,  recognizing  that  some  costs  and  benefits  are  uncertain  and 

difficult to quantify, should generally propose or adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned 

determination  that  the  incremental  benefits  of  the  intended  regulation  exceed  its 

49 

 

 

incremental  costs.  If  an  agency  determines  to  proceed  even  though  the  quantifiable 

incremental  benefits  do  not  exceed  the  quantifiable  incremental  costs,  then  the  agency 

should  explain  why  it  intends  to  proceed  in  those  circumstances,  by,  for  example, 

referring to distributional effects as authorized by subsection (15) below.  

 (9)  Each  agency  shall  base  its  decisions  on  the  best  reasonably  obtainable 

scientific,  economic,  and  other  information  concerning  the  need  for,  and  consequences 

of, the intended regulation. 

 (10)  Each  agency  shall  identify  and  assess  reasonable  alternative  forms  of 

regulation, 

including  at 

least 

two  reasonable  alternatives 

to 

the  option  under 

consideration, one more stringent and one less stringent. 

 (11) Each agency shall, to the extent feasible, use performance objectives, rather 

than specifying the behavior or manner of compliance that regulated entities must adopt. 

 (12) Wherever feasible, agencies shall seek the views of those most likely to be 

affected, including appropriate state, local, and tribal officials before imposing regulatory 

requirements  that  might  significantly  or  uniquely  affect  those  governmental  entities.  As 

appropriate,  agencies  shall  seek  to  reduce  unnecessary  conflicts  between  federal 

regulatory actions  and  other law and regulation,  including  that issued by state and local 

governments.  

understand. 

 (13)  Each  agency  shall  avoid  regulations  that  are  inconsistent,  incompatible,  or 

duplicative with/of other regulations or policies. 

 (14) Each agency shall draft its regulations in language that is simple and easy to 

 (15)  Each  agency  shall  consider,  as  appropriate,  distributional  effects,  and  after 

undertaking the analysis of costs and benefits, agencies shall be permitted to take account 

of  those  distributional  effects  in  deciding  whether  to  proceed.  If  the  costs  exceed  the 

benefits by a substantial margin, agencies shall proceed only if the distributional effects 

are very clear and highly desirable.  

SECTION 2. ORGANIZATION 

An  efficient  regulatory  planning  and  review  process  is  vital  to  ensure  that  the  Federal 

Government’s regulatory system best serves the American people. 

50 

 

(A) The Office of Management and Budget. Coordinated review of agency rulemaking is 

necessary  to  ensure  that  regulations  are  consistent  with  applicable  law,  the  President’s 

priorities, and the principles set forth in this Executive Order, and that decisions made by 

one  agency  do  not  conflict  with  the  policies  or  actions  taken  or  planned  by  another 

agency.  The  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  shall  carry  out  that  review 

function. Within OMB,  the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) is the 

repository  of  expertise  concerning  regulatory  issues  and  should  thus  take  the  lead  in 

implementing this Executive order. Where appropriate, OIRA should draw heavily on the 

expertise of the Council of Economic Advisers and the Office of Science and Technology 

Policy in developing sound regulatory policy. To the extent permitted by law, OMB shall 

provide  guidance  to  agencies  and  assist  the  President,  the  Vice  President,  and  other 

regulatory policy advisors to the President in regulatory planning, and shall be the entity 

that reviews individual regulations, as provided by this Executive order.  

 
(B)  OIRA  shall  be  authorized  to  review  proposed  regulations.  To  carry  out  this  task, 

OIRA shall issue guidelines governing regulatory impact analyses. These guidelines shall 

be  issued  after  an  appropriate  period  for  comments  from  affected  agencies,  the  private 

sector,  and  any  interested  persons.  When  a  proposed  regulation  does  not,  in  OIRA’s 

view, conform to the principles set out in this Executive Order or to OIRA guidelines for 

engaging  in  regulatory  analysis,  OIRA  shall  return  the  regulation  to  the  agency  for 

reconsideration.  

 
(C)  OIRA  shall  be  authorized  to  prompt  agencies  to  undertake  actions  where  the 

incremental  benefits  exceed  the  incremental  costs.  When  OIRA  has  asked  an agency  to 

undertake such action, the agency shall, within 60 days, offer a public account of its  

intended course of action. 

 
(D) The Vice President. The Vice President is the principal advisor to the President on, 

and  shall coordinate the development and  presentation  of recommendations concerning, 

regulatory policy, planning, and review, as set forth in this Executive Order. In fulfilling 

their  responsibilities  under  this  Executive  Order,  the  President  and  the  Vice  President 

may  be  assisted  by  the  regulatory  policy  advisors  within  the  Executive  Office  of  the 

51 

President  and  by  such  agency  officials  and  personnel  as  the  President  and  the  Vice 

 

President may, from time to time, consult. 

SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS 

For purposes of this Executive order:  
 
(A) “Advisors”  refers to regulatory policy advisors consulted by the President and Vice 

President, including, among others: the Director of OMB; the Chair (or another member) 

of the Council of Economic Advisers; the Assistant to the President for Economic Policy; 

the  Assistant  to  the  President  for  Domestic  Policy;  the  Assistant  to  the  President  for 

National Security Affairs; the Assistant to the President for Science and Technology; the 

Assistant  to  the  President  for  Intergovernmental  Affairs;  the  Assistant  to  the  President 

and  Staff  Secretary;  the  Assistant  to  the  President  and  Chief  of  Staff  to  the  Vice 

President;  the  Assistant  to  the  President  and  Counsel  to  the  President;  the  Deputy 

Assistant  to  the  President  and  Director  of  the  White  House  Office  on  Environmental 

Policy;  and  the  Administrator  of  OIRA,  who  also  shall  coordinate  communications 

relating  to  this  Executive  order  among  the  agencies,  OMB,  the  other  Advisors,  and  the 

Office of the Vice President.  

 
(B) “Agency,” unless otherwise indicated, means any authority of the United States that 

is an “agency” under 44 U.S.C. § 3502(1), including those considered to be independent 

regulatory agencies, as defined in 44 U.S.C. § 3502(10).  

 
(C) “Director” means the Director of OMB.  
 
(D) “Regulation” or “rule” means an agency statement of general applicability and future 

effect, which the agency intends to have the force and effect of law, that is designed to 

implement, interpret,  or prescribe  law  or policy or to describe the procedure or practice 

requirements of an agency. It does not, however, include:  

  
(1) Regulations or rules that pertain to a military or foreign affairs function of the 

United States, other than procurement regulations and regulations involving the import or 

export of non-defense articles and services;  

(2) Regulations or rules that are limited to agency organization, management, or 

personnel matters; or  

52 

 

Administrator of OIRA.  

 (3)  Any  other  category  of  regulations  exempted  by  public  notice  of  the 

 
(E) “Regulatory action” means any substantive action by an agency (normally published 

in the Federal Register) that promulgates or is expected to lead to the promulgation of a 

final  rule  or  regulation,  including  notices  of  inquiry,  advance  notices  of  proposed 

rulemaking, and notices of proposed rulemaking. 

 
(F) “Significant regulatory action” means any regulatory action that is likely to result in a 

rule that may: 

 
 (1) Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more or adversely 

affect in a material way the economy, the environment, public health or safety; 

 (2) Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or 

planned by another agency; or 

 (3)  Materially  alter  the  budgetary  impact  of  entitlements,  grants,  user  fees,  or 

loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof. 

SECTION 4. CENTRALIZED REVIEW OF REGULATIONS 

The  guidelines  set  forth  below  shall  apply  to  all  regulatory  actions,  for  both  new  and 

existing  regulations,  by  agencies  other  than  those  agencies  specifically  exempted  by 

public notice of the Administrator of OIRA: 

 
(A) Agency Responsibilities. In addition to adhering to its own rules and procedures and 

to the requirements of applicable law, each agency shall develop its regulatory actions in 

a  timely  fashion  and  adhere  to  the  following  procedures  with  respect  to  a  regulatory 

action: 

(a) Each agency shall provide OIRA, at such times and in the manner specified by 

the  Administrator  of  OIRA,  with  a  list  of  its  planned  regulatory  actions,  indicating 

those  which  the  agency  believes  are  subject  to  review  under  this  Executive  order. 

Absent a material change in the development of the planned regulatory action, those 

not designated  as  significant  will not be  subject to  review under this section unless, 

within 10 working days of receipt of the list, the Administrator of OIRA notifies the 

agency that OIRA has determined that a planned regulation is a significant regulatory 

53 

 

action within the meaning of this Executive Order. The Administrator of OIRA may 

by  public  notice  waive  review  of  any  planned  regulatory  action  designated  by  the 

agency  as  significant,  in  which  case  the  agency  need  not  further  comply  with 

subsection (A)(2)(b) or subsection (A)(2)(c) of this section.  

(b) For each matter identified as, or determined by the Administrator of OIRA to 

be, a significant regulatory action, the issuing agency shall provide to OIRA: 

(i) The text of the draft regulatory action, together with a reasonably detailed 

description  of  the  need  for  the  regulatory  action  and  an  explanation  of  how  the 

regulatory  action  will  meet  that  need.  The  description  of  need  should  clearly 

identify  whether  the  regulation  is  designed  to  address  a  specific  failure  in  the 

functioning of markets and how it addresses that need.  

(ii) An assessment of the potential costs and benefits of the regulatory action, 

including  an  explanation  of  the  manner  in  which  the  regulatory  action  is 

consistent  with  a  statutory  mandate  and,  to  the  extent  permitted  by  law, 

maximizes net economic benefits.  

(c) For those matters identified as, or determined by the Administrator of OIRA to 

be, a significant regulatory action within the scope of section 3(F)(1), the agency shall 

also  provide  to  OIRA  the  following  additional  information  developed  as part  of the 

agency’s decision-making process (unless prohibited by law): 

(i)  An  assessment,  including  the  underlying  analysis,  of  benefits  anticipated 

from the regulatory action together with, to the extent feasible, a quantification of 

those benefits. 

those costs; and  

(ii)  An  assessment,  including  the  underlying  analysis,  of  costs  anticipated 

from the regulatory action, together with, to the extent feasible, a quantification of 

(iii) An assessment, including the underlying analysis, of costs and benefits of 

potentially  effective  and  reasonably  feasible  alternatives 

to 

the  planned 

regulation––including 

improvements 

to 

the  current  regulation  and  viable 

nonregulatory actions such as information provision––and an explanation why the 

planned regulatory action is preferable to the identified potential alternatives.  

54 

 

(d)  In  emergency  situations,  or  when  an  agency  is  obligated  by  law  to  act  more 

quickly than normal review procedures allow, the agency shall notify OIRA as soon 

as possible and, to the extent practicable, comply with subsections (A)(2)(b) and (c) 

of this section. For those regulatory actions that are governed by a statutory or court-

imposed  deadline,  the  agency  shall,  to  the  extent  practicable,  schedule  rulemaking 

proceedings  so  as  to  permit  sufficient  time  for  OIRA  to  conduct  its  review,  as  set 

forth below in subsection (B)(2) through (4) of this section. 

(e)  After  the  regulatory  action  has  been  published  in  the  Federal  Register  or 

otherwise issued to the public, the agency shall: 

(i) Make available to the public, via the Internet and through other appropriate 

means, the information set forth in subsections (A)(2)(B) and (A)(2)(C); 

(ii)  Identify  for  the  public,  in  a  complete,  clear,  and  simple  manner,  the 

substantive  changes  between  the  draft  submitted  to  OIRA  for  review  and  the 

action subsequently announced; and 

(iii)  Identify  for  the  public  those  changes  in  the  regulatory  action  that  were 

made at the suggestion or recommendation of OIRA. 

 
(B)  OIRA  Responsibilities.  The  Administrator  of  OIRA  shall  provide  meaningful 

guidance  and  oversight  so  that  each  agency’s  regulatory  actions  are  consistent  with 

applicable  law,  the  President’s  priorities,  and  the  principles  set  forth  in  this  Executive 

Order and do not conflict with the policies or actions of another agency. OIRA shall, to 

the extent permitted by law, adhere to the following guidelines: 

  

significant regulatory actions. 

(1)  OIRA  shall  review  all  actions  identified  by  the  agency  or  by  OIRA  as 

 (2) OIRA shall waive review or notify the agency in writing of the results of its 

review within the following time periods: 

(a) For any notices of inquiry, advance notices of proposed rulemaking, or other 

preliminary  regulatory  actions  prior  to  a  Notice  of Proposed Rulemaking, within  10 

working days after the date of submission of the draft action to OIRA; 

55 

 

(b)  For  all  other  regulatory  actions,  within  90  calendar  days  after  the  date  of 

submission  of  the  information  required  by  this  Order,  unless  OIRA  has  previously 

reviewed this information and, since that review, there has been no material change in 

the facts and circumstances upon which the regulatory action is based, in which case, 

OIRA shall complete its review within 60 days; and 

(c)  The  review  process  may  be  extended  either  (1)  once  by  no  more  than  30 

calendar  days  upon  the  written  approval  of  the  Director  or  (2)  at  the  request  of  the 

agency head. 

 (3)  For  each  regulatory  action  that  the  Administrator  of  OIRA  returns  to  an 

agency  for  further  consideration  of  some  or  all  of  its  provisions,  the  Administrator  of 

OIRA shall provide the issuing agency a written explanation for such return, setting forth 

the pertinent provision of this Executive Order on which OIRA is relying.  

 (4)  For  each  regulatory  action  for  which  the  Administrator  of  OIRA  issues  a 

prompt  letter,  the  Administrator  of  OIRA  shall  provide  the  issuing  agency  a  written 

explanation for such prompt, setting forth the pertinent provision of this Executive Order 

on which OIRA is relying.  

 (5)  Except  as  otherwise  provided  by  law  or  required  by  a  Court,  in  order  to 

ensure  greater  openness,  accessibility,  and  accountability  in  the  regulatory  review 

process, OIRA shall be governed by the following disclosure requirements: 

(a)  All  substantive  communications  between  OIRA  personnel  and  persons  not 

employed by the executive branch of the Federal Government regarding a regulatory 

action under review shall be governed by the following guidelines: 

(i)  A  representative  from  the  issuing  agency  shall  be  invited  to  any  meeting 

between OIRA personnel and such person(s); 

(ii)  OIRA  shall  forward  to  the  issuing  agency,  within  10  working  days  of 

receipt  of  the  communication(s),  all  written  communications,  regardless  of 

format,  between  OIRA  personnel  and  any  person  who  is  not  employed  by  the 

executive  branch  of  the  Federal  Government,  and  the  dates  and  names  of 

individuals  involved  in  all  substantive  oral  communications  (including  meetings 

to which an agency representative was invited, but did not attend, and telephone 

conversations between OIRA personnel and any such persons); and 

56 

 

(iii)  OIRA  shall  publicly  disclose  relevant 

information  about  such 

communication(s), as set forth below. 

(b) OIRA shall maintain a publicly available log that shall contain, at a minimum, 

the following information pertinent to regulatory actions under review: 

(i)  The  status  of  all  regulatory  actions,  (ii)  A  notation  of  all  written 

communications forwarded to an issuing agency; and 

(iii)  The  dates  and  names  of  individuals  involved  in  all  substantive  oral 

communications, including meetings and telephone conversations, between OIRA 

personnel  and  any  person  not  employed  by  the  executive  branch  of  the  Federal 

Government, and the subject matter discussed during such communications. 

(c)  After  the  regulatory  action  has  been  published  in  the  Federal  Register  or 

otherwise issued to the public, or after the agency has announced its decision not to 

publish  or  issue  the  regulatory  action,  OIRA  shall  make  available  to  the  public  all 

documents  exchanged  between  OIRA  and  the  agency  during  the  review  by  OIRA 

under this section. Provided, that OIRA shall make exceptions to ensure protection of 

material that is proprietary or otherwise privileged.  

 

SECTION 5: REGULATORY RETROSPECTIVE AND REGULATORY PLANNING 

 
(A) Each agency shall produce an annual report on the benefits and costs of its significant 

regulations during the past year. A draft of the annual report shall be submitted to OIRA 

to  ensure  an  adequate  period  (in  no  case  less  than  ninety  days)  for  OIRA  review  and 

comment. 

 
(B)  Each  agency  shall  produce,  by  December  31  of  each  year,  a  report  on  its  planned 

activities  for  the  following  year  (“annual  regulatory  plan”).  OIRA  shall  be  given  an 

opportunity  to  comment  on  the  annual  regulatory  plan  and  to  work  with  the  relevant 

agency to ensure compliance with the requirements and principles in this order. 

SECTION 6. RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS 

To  the  extent  permitted  by  law,  disagreements  or  conflicts  between  or  among  agency 

heads, or between OIRA and any agency, that cannot be resolved by the Administrator of 

57 

 

 

 

OIRA shall be resolved by the President, or by the Vice President acting at the request of 

the  President,  with  the  relevant  agency  head  (and,  as  appropriate,  other  interested 

government  officials).  Vice  Presidential  and  Presidential  consideration  of  such 

disagreements may be initiated only by the Director, by the head of the issuing agency, or 

by the head of an agency that has a significant interest in the regulatory action at issue. 

Such  review  will  not  be  undertaken  at  the  request  of  other  persons,  entities,  or  their 

agents. 

 
Resolution  of  such  conflicts  shall  be  informed  by  recommendations  developed  by  the 

Vice President, after consultation with the Advisors (and other executive branch officials 

or personnel  whose responsibilities  to the President include the subject matter at issue). 

The  development  of  these  recommendations  shall  be  concluded  within  60  days  after 

review has been requested. 

 
At  the  end  of  this  review  process,  the  President,  or  the  Vice  President  acting  at  the 

request of the President, shall notify the affected agency and the Administrator of OIRA 

of the President’s decision with respect to the matter. 

SECTION 7. PUBLICATION 

Except to the extent required by law, an agency shall not publish in the Federal Register 

or  otherwise  issue  to  the  public  any  regulatory  action  that  is  subject  to  review  under 

section 4 of this Executive Order until whichever of the following occurs first:  

(1)  the  Administrator  of  OIRA  notifies  the  agency  that  OIRA  has  waived  its 

review of the  

action or has completed its review without any requests for further consideration; or  

(2)  the  applicable  time  period  expires  without  OIRA  having  notified  the  agency 

that  it  is  returning  the  regulatory  action  for  further  consideration.  If  the  terms  of  the 

preceding sentence have not been satisfied and an agency wants to publish or otherwise 

issue a regulatory action, the head of that agency may request Presidential consideration 

through  the  Vice  President,  as  provided  under  section  6  of  this  Order.  Upon  receipt  of 

this request, the Vice President shall notify OIRA and the Advisors. The guidelines and 

58 

 

time period set forth in this Order shall apply to the publication of regulatory actions for 

which Presidential consideration has been sought. 

SECTION 8. JUDICIAL REVIEW 

This  Executive  order  is  intended  to  improve  the  internal  management  of  the  Federal 

Government.  Agency  analyses  generated by this Executive order shall be placed  on file 

for judicial review and, to the extent that those analyses are relevant to the legality of the 

agency’s  conduct,  the  reviewing  court  may  consider  them  in  assessing  the  legal  issues. 

This  Executive  order  does  not  otherwise  create  any  right  or  benefit,  substantive  or 

procedural, enforceable at law or equity by a party against the United States, its agencies 

or instrumentalities, its officers or employees, or any other person. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 
 

59 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 

6. 
7. 
8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William  M.  Landes,  Copyright  Protection  of  Letters,  Diaries  and  Other 
Unpublished Works: An Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Path  to  The  T.  J.  Hooper:  The  Theory  and  History  of 
Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 
1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 
1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A 
Quantitative Study (August 1992) 
Alan  O.  Sykes,  The  Welfare  Economics  of  Immigration  Law:  A  Theoretical 
Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J.  Mark  Ramseyer,  Credibly  Committing  to  Efficiency  Wages:  Cotton  Spinning 
Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard  A.  Posner,  What  Do  Judges  and  Justices  Maximize?  (The  Same  Thing 
Everyone Else Does) (April 1993) 
Lucian  Arye  Bebchuk  and  Randal  C.  Picker,  Bankruptcy  Rules,  Managerial 
Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the 
Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) 

18.  William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economics  of  Anticipatory 

Adjudication (September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23.  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
24. 

J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan 
(August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 
Kenneth  W.  Dam,  Some  Economic  Considerations  in  the  Intellectual  Property 
Protection of Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 
1994) 

25. 
26. 

27. 
28. 

60 

 

29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 

36. 
37. 

38. 

46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime 
Consumption (January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) 
Daniel  Kessler,  Thomas  Meites,  and  Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Explaining  Deviations 
from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for 
Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey  P.  Miller,  Das  Kapital:  Solvency  Regulation  of  the  American  Business 
Enterprise (April 1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology 
(November 1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 
J.  Mark  Ramseyer  and  Eric  B.  Rasmusen,  Judicial  Independence  in  Civil  Law 
Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences 
Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) 

39. 
40.  William  M.  Landes  and  Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Economics  of  Legal  Disputes 

41. 

Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  and  David  B.  Mustard,  Crime,  Deterrence,  and  Right-to-Carry 
Concealed Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G.  Baird,  The  Hidden  Virtues  of  Chapter  11:  An  Overview  of  the  Law  and 
Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 

44. 
45.  William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay 

42. 
43. 

(March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: 
Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to 
the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through 
the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997)  
Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Daniel  Kahneman,  and  David  Schkade,  Assessing  Punitive 
Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  

52. 

51.  William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: 
A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  A  Simple  Explanation  for  Why  Campaign  Expenditures  are 
Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  
Richard  A.  Posner,  Values  and  Consequences:  An  Introduction  to  Economic 
Analysis of Law (March 1998)  
Denise  DiPasquale  and  Edward  L.  Glaeser,  Incentives  and  Social  Capital:  Are 
Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998)  

53.  

54. 

61 

 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 
71. 

73. 

74. 

75. 

Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to 
Law and Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, 
Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass  R.  Sunstein  and  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit,  Second-Order  Decisions  (June 
1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, 
Effects  on  Firm  Value,  and  the  Impact  of  Supreme  Court  and  Congressional 
Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and 
Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 
1998) 
David  A.  Weisbach,  Line  Drawing,  Doctrine,  and  Efficiency  in  the  Tax  Law 
(November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law 
(November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 
1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A 
AThird Way@ (January 1999) 
Richard  A.  Posner,  An  Economic  Approach  to  the  Law  of  Evidence  (February 
1999) 
Yannis  Bakos,  Erik  Brynjolfsson,  Douglas  Lichtman,  Shared  Information  Goods 
(February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with 
Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan  M.  Karpoff,  John  R.  Lott,  Jr.,  and  Graeme  Rankine,  Environmental 
Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 

72.  Matthew  D.  Adler  and  Eric  A.  Posner,  Rethinking  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  (April 

1999) 
John  R.  Lott,  Jr.  and  William  M.  Landes,  Multiple  Victim  Public  Shooting, 
Bombings,  and  Right-to-Carry  Concealed  Handgun  Laws:  Contrasting  Private 
and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  
Lisa  Bernstein,  The  Questionable  Empirical  Basis  of  Article  2=s  Incorporation 
Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again 
(May 1999) 

76.  William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz 

Collection (May 1999) 

62 

 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 

81. 

82. 
83. 

84. 
85. 
86. 

87. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

97. 

98. 

99. 

88.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When 

Cass  R.  Sunstein,  David  Schkade,  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Do  People  Want 
Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a 
Function of Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial 
Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic 
than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 
Richard  A.  Posner,  The  Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special 
Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) 
Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 
Douglas  G.  Baird  and  Edward  R.  Morrison,  Optimal  Timing  and  Legal 
Decisionmaking:  The  Case  of  the  Liquidation  Decision  in  Bankruptcy  (October 
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal 
Characteristics (November 1999) 

Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and 
Satire (November 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on 
Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen  Eggleston,  Eric  A.  Posner,  and  Richard  Zeckhauser,  Simplicity  and 
Complexity in Contracts (January 2000)  
Douglas  G.  Baird  and  Robert  K.  Rasmussen,  Boyd=s  Legacy  and  Blackstone=s 
Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: 
The Severity Shift (February 2000) 
Richard  A.  Posner  and  Eric  B.  Rasmusen,  Creating  and  Enforcing  Norms,  with 
Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas  Lichtman,  Property  Rights  in  Emerging  Platform  Technologies  (April 
2000)  
Cass  R.  Sunstein  and  Edna  Ullmann-Margalit,  Solidarity in Consumption (May 
2000) 
David  A.  Weisbach,  An  Economic  Analysis  of  Anti-Tax  Avoidance  Laws  (May 
2000)  

100.  Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
101.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 

63 

 

102.  Robert  H.  Frank  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis  and  Relative 

Position (August 2000)  
103. 
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
104.  Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  
105. 

Jack  Goldsmith  and  Alan  Sykes,    The  Dormant  Commerce  Clause  and  the 
Internet (November 2000) 

106.  Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
107.  Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent 

108. 

System (November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International 
Relations:  A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 

109.  William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
110. 
111. 

Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul  Levmore,  Puzzling  Stock  Options  and  Compensation  Norms  (December 
2000) 

112.  Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious 

Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 

113.  William  M.  Landes,  Copyright,  Borrowed  Images  and  Appropriation  Art:    An 

Economic Approach (December 2000) 

114.  Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
115.  George  G.  Triantis,  Financial  Contract  Design  in  the  World  of  Venture  Capital 

(January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 

116. 
117.  Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer 

Finance (February 2001) 

118.  Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) 

119. 

(March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost-Benefit Analysis:  A Positive 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 

120.  Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital 

Age (April 2001) 

121.  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and 
the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 

122.  David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
123.  William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? 

124.  Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 

125.  Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The 

Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)   

126.  Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 

(May 2001) 

2001) 

2001) 

127.  Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
128.    Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 

64 

 

 

129.  Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property 

Transfer (July 2001) 

130.  Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for 

Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 

131.    Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably 

132. 
133. 

Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa  Bernstein,  Private  Commercial  Law  in  the  Cotton  Industry:    Creating 
Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 

134.  Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the 

Commons (August 2001) 

135.  Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
136. 

Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of 
Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an 
Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) 

137. 

138.  Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law 

(November 2001) 

139.  Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? 

Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
140.  Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha 

141. 

ASolution@ (February 2002) 
Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation 
(February 2002) 

142.  Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in 

Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 
2002) 

143.  Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation 

and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, forthcoming 
Journal of Legal Studies 2002) 

144.  Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended 

Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 

145.  David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, forthcoming 

146. 

Texas Law Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success 
or Failure (March 2002) 

147.  Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution 

(April 2002, forthcoming The Antitrust Bulletin) 

148.  David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, 

Coase Lecture February 2002) 

149.  Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) 
150.  Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving 

Federal Regulation?  Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 

65 

