University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

2003

Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay
Cass R. Sunstein

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 191,
2003).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 191 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
 
Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
July 2003 
 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at: 
The Chicago Working Paper Series Index: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html 
and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=421341  

 

1

Preliminary draft 7/14/03 
Forthcoming Columbia Law Review 
All rights reserved 
 

Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay 

Cass R. Sunstein* 
 
Abstract  
 

In  protecting  safety,  health,  and  the  environment,  government  has  increasingly 
relied on cost-benefit analysis. In undertaking cost-benefit analysis, the government has 
monetized risks of death through the idea of “value of a statistical life” (VSL), currently 
assessed  at  about  $6.1  million.  Many  analysts,  however,  have  suggested  that  the 
government should rely instead on the “value of a statistical life year” (VSLY), in a way 
that would likely result in significantly lower benefits calculations for elderly people, and 
significantly higher benefits calculations for children. I urge that the government should 
indeed  focus  on  statistical  life-years  rather  than  statistical  lives.  A  program  that  saves 
young people produces more welfare than one that saves old people. Nor does a focus on 
life-years  run  afoul  of  ethical  limits  on  cost-benefit  analysis.  It  is  relevant  in  this 
connection that every old person was once young, and that if all goes well, young people 
will eventually be old. In fact, a focus on statistical lives is a more plausibly a form of 
illicit discrimination than a focus on life-years, because the idea of statistical lives treats 
the years of older people as worth far more than the years of younger people. The hard 
question involves not whether to undertake this shift, but how to monetize life-years, and 
here willingness to pay (WTP), despite it many problems, is generally the place to begin. 
Discussion  is  also  devoted  to  the  uses  and  limits  of  the  willingness  to  pay  criterion  in 
regulatory  policy,  with  reference  to  the  underlying  welfare  goal  and  to  the  nature  of 
moral and distributional constraints on cost-benefit balancing. 
 

I. Introduction 

 
 
In  the  last  two  decades,  numerous  regulatory  agencies  have  conducted  cost-
benefit analysis (CBA) of proposed rules.1 To undertake this analysis, they have had to 
quantify the value of a statistical life (VSL).2 Recently the range, for that value, has been 

                                                 
*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor,  Law  School  and  Department  of  Political  Science, 
University  of  Chicago.  I  am  grateful  to  Matthew  Adler,  Carolyn  Frantz,  John  Graham,  Robert  Hahn,  C 
Christine  Jolls,  Daniel  Kahneman,  Lisa  Heinzerling,  Saul  Levmore,  Eric  Posner,  Richard  Posner,  David 
Strauss, Adrian Vermeule, W. Kip Viscusi, and Scott Walsten for helpful comments on a previous draft. I 
am also grateful to participants in an extremely helpful legal theory workshop at the University of Chicago 
Law School. Participants in two conferences provided valuable help: A Brookings Institute Conference on 
Inequality  and  Happiness  and  an  American  Enterprise  Institute/Brookings  Joint  Center  on  Regulatory 
Studies Conference on Valuing Life. Smita Singh provided excellent research assistance. 
1 See Robert Hahn, Global Regulatory Reform (2001); W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1994). 
2 See id. 

2

 

 

in the neighborhood of $6.1 million.3 But there is a conspicuous difficulty with the use of 
a  uniform  VSL.  Some  regulatory  programs  benefit  people  who  are  relatively  young; 
others  benefit  people  who  relatively  old.  If  a  program  would  prevent  fifty  deaths  of 
people  who  are  twenty,  should  it  be  treated  the  same  way  as  a  program  that  would 
prevent  fifty  deaths  of  people  who  are  seventy?  Some  people  believe  that  other  things 
being  equal,  a  program  that  protects  young  people  is  better  than  one  that  protects  old 
people,4  because  it  delivers  greater  benefits  In  their  view,  government  should  consider 
not  simply  the  number  of  lives  at  stake,  or  the  VSL;  it  should  concern  itself  also  or 
instead with the number of life-years, or the value of statistical life-years (VSLY). At the 
very least, VSLY is a more precise measure of what is at stake. 
 
At  least  since  1976,  analysts  have  suggested  the  possibility  of  focussing 
  
regulatory  policy  on  either  life-years  or  quality-adjusted  life-years  (QALYs).5  Through 
the latter measure, the issue is not merely the number of life-years saved by regulation; 
attention  is  also  paid  to  qualitative  improvements  in  health.6  An  aggregate  measure  of 
QALYs  would  catalogue  all  of  the  health-related  benefits  of  regulation.  And  for  many 
years,  some  agencies  have  experimented  with  the  idea  that  cost-benefit  analysis  should 
consider  either  QALYs  or  life-years,  not  merely  the  number  of  lives  saved.7  For 
simplicity,  my  major  focus  here  is  on  life-years,  which  imposes  lower  informational 
demands on regulators than do QALYs, and which is also less contentious in principle.8 
A moment’s reflection will show that VSLY can produce different results from VSL. If 
the beneficiaries of a regulation are mostly elderly people, then the regulation will seem 
far  less  attractive  with  the  use  of  VSLY  than  with  VSL.9  But  if  the  beneficiaries  are 

                                                 
3 See Robert Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position, 68 U. Chi. L. Rev. 
323, 334-35 (2001). For discussion of why these numbers might be too low, see Dora Costa and Matthew 
Kahn,  The  Rising  Price  of  Nonmarket  Goods,  93  American  Economic  Review  227,  229  (Papers  and 
Proceedings)  (2003)  (suggesting  a  likely  current  value  of  $12  million)  Richard  Revesz,  Environmental 
Regulation,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis,  and  the  Discounting  of  Human  Lives,  99  COL  L  REV  941  (1999) 
(suggesting the need to inflate current figures for increases in social wealth and in the particular context of 
dreaded  and  involuntary  risks);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  The  Arithmetic  of  Arsenic,  90  Geo.  L.  J.  2255  (2002) 
(discussing  plausible  reasons  to  adjust  current  figures  upwards);  Dora  L.  Costa  and  Matthew  Kahn, 
Changes  in  the  Value  of  Life:  1940-1980  (2002),  available  at  http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm? 
abstract_id=364740. For recent evidence that the current numbers are indeed too low, see W. Kip Viscusi, 
Racial  Differences  in  Labor  Market  Values  of  A  Statistical  Life  (2003),  available  on  ssrn.com  (finding 
values as high as $15.1 million in the case of white males). 
4  See,  e.g.,  Michael  J.  Moore  and  W.  Kip  Viscusi,  The  Quantity-Adjusted  Value  of  Life,  26  Economic 
Inquiry 369 (1988). 
5 Richard Zeckhauser & Donald Shepard, Where Now for Saving Lives?, Law & Contemp. Probs., Autumn 
1976, at 5. 
6 Id. 
7 For examples, see Appendix. 
8 The reason is that in assessing life-years, government need not concern itself with issues of the quality of 
life. I offer a brief discussion of QALYs below. 
9  I  am  assuming  a  relatively  uniform  value,  for  each  statistical  life  year,  and  hence  assuming  that  the 
valuation of each of the remaining years of seniors is not going to be much higher than the valuation of 
each  of  the  remaining  years  of  younger  people.  If  older  people’s  remaining  years  have  a  much  higher 
valuation, the conclusion in the text does not follow. For discussion, see below. 

 

3

mostly children, then a regulation is likely to seem far more attractive with VSLY than 
with VSL.10  
 
 
The  issue  received  a  great  deal  of  public  attention  in  connection  with  recent 
debates  within  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  and  the  Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA).11 EPA’s own assessment of the benefits of the Clean Air Act 
includes  a  calculation  of  VSLY,  using  two  estimates,  $270,000  (not  discounted)  and 
$166,000 (discounted at an annual rate of 3 percent).12 In its “Clear Skies” proposal, EPA 
estimated  benefits  both  by  using  the  $6.1  million  figure  and  by  using  an  alternative 
method  that  produced  numbers  of  $3.7  million  for  those  under  70  and  $2.3  million  for 
those  70  and  older.13  The  difference  between  $3.7  and  $2.3  million  triggered  intense 
criticism of a “senior death discount.”14 Eventually EPA abandoned the idea of varying 
VSL on the basis of age,15 perhaps as a result of public pressure, and after the Office of 
Management  and  Budget  (OMB)  found  methodological  problems  with  the  study  that 
supported the age-adjustment analysis.16 But OMB has been strongly encouraging federal 
agencies, including the EPA, to consider VSLY,17 and OMB’s draft guidelines on cost-
benefit analysis ask agencies to “consider providing estimates of both VSL and VSLY.”18  
 

Thus  OMB  has  urged  that  “agency  analysts,  when  performing  benefit-cost 
analysis,  present  results  using  both  the  VSL  and  the  VSLY  methods.”19  Relying  on 
evidence  that  older  people  show  unusually  high  VSLY,  OMB  also  suggests  “that 
agencies present analyses with larger VSLY estimates for senior citizens.”20 Building on 

                                                 
10  The  same  qualification  is  appropriate  here  as  in  note  9;  if  children’s  life-years  are  valued  in  terms  of 
WTP, and if their WTP is low, the statement in the text would not follow. 
11  For  recent  discussion,  see  Robert  H.  Hahn  and  Scott  Wallsten,  Is  Granny  Worth  $2.3  Million  or  $6.1 
Million?, http://www.aei.brookings.org/policy/page.php?id=138 
12 See Environmental Protection Agency, Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act, 1970 to 1990 (1997). 
See  the  criticism  of  this  approach  in  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Children’s  Health  Valuation 
Handbook 3-13 (2003), suggesting that “the relationship between the value of risk reductions and expected 
remaining life years is more complex than the simple discounted linear relationship . . . Current research 
does not provide a reliable method for estimating a value of a statistical life-year.” I explore this problem 
below. 
13  See  id.;  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Technical  Addendum:  Methodologies  for  the  Benefit 
Analysis  of  the  Clear  Skies  Initiatives  35-37  (2002),  relying  on  M.W.  Jones  Lee  et  al.,  The  Value  of 
Preventing  Non-Fatal  Road  Injuries;  Findings  of  a  Willingness-to-Pay  National  Sample  Survey,  TRY 
Working Paper, WP SRC2. 
14 See John Tierney, Life: The Cost-Benefit Analysis, section 4, p. 3, The New York Times, May 18, 2003. 
15 Id. 
16  See  Memorandum  of  John  D.  Graham,  Administrator,  Office  of  Information  and  Regulatory  Affairs, 
Office of Management and Budget, to the President’s Management Council 1 (May 30, 2003). 
17 See id.; Dana Wilkie, White House Continues to Push For “Age” Discount In Rulemaking, Copley News 
Service  (May  16,  2003),  available  at  https://www.lexis.com/research/retrieve?_m=b9948ff37008fac2330 
e2ce6a66f5e57&docnum=4&_fmtstr=FULL&_startdoc=1&wchp=dGLbVtz-lSlWk&_md5=aaa30b6f202f7 
e1e23717bc35a2806b1. 
18  See  Office  of  Management  and  Budget,  Draft  2003  Report  to  Congress  on  the  Costs  and  Benefits  of 
Federal Regulations, 68 Fed. Reg. 5521 (Feb. 3, 2003). 
19 See Memorandum of John Graham, supra note, at 2.  
20  Id.  I  raise  questions  about  this  recommendation  below.  In  brief,  older  people  might  be  willing  to  pay 
more  for  risk  reduction  than  younger  people,  but  the  higher  willingness  to  pay  need  not reveal a greater 
welfare gain from risk reduction.  

 

4

existing studies, one proposal would value each year of life at $273,000 for people over 
65 but at $172,000 for people who are younger.21 Because the number of remaining years 
is  a  central  part  of  the  proposed  calculus,  a  65-year  old,  with  a  life  expectancy  of  ten 
more years, would be valued at $2.7 million, whereas a 40-year old, with thirty-five years 
left, would be valued at $6 million. Thus regulations protecting people over forty would 
be  worth  less  than  they  would  under  the  $6.1  million  benchmark,  whereas  those  under 
forty would be worth more. A ten-year old, with sixty-five years left, would be valued at 
over $11 million.  

 
Would  focussing  on  life-years  make  a  large  difference  for  policy?  How  much? 
The answers depend on what it means to focus on life-years. At first glance, a decision to 
look  at  VSLY  is  highly  likely  to  reduce  the  expected  benefits  of  programs  that  mostly 
help  older  people.  This  was  the  effect  of  a  life-years  calculation  for  the  Clear  Skies 
Initiative.22 A focus on VSLY is also likely to increase the expected benefits of programs 
that protect children and young people. The extent of the increase depends on value of the 
relevant life-years and the discount rate. Suppose that a uniform number is used for the 
remaining  life-years  of  young  people.  With  no  discount  rate,  or  a  low  discount  rate,  a 
program that protects such people will be far more valuable under VSLY than VSL. With 
a high discount rate, the difference between VSLY and VSL will be compressed, but it 
will still result in higher numbers for younger people. 
 

 My simplest claim in this essay is that in terms of welfare, it is fully appropriate 
to focus on life-years, not merely lives, and that both academic and public criticisms of 
the life-years approach are misconceived. The reasons for this conclusion are simple: No 
program literally “saves” lives; life-extension is always what is at issue. If the goal is to 
promote people’s welfare by lengthening their lives, a regulation that saves 500 life-years 
(and,  let  us  say,  twenty-five  people)  is,  other  things  equal,  better  than  a  regulation  that 
saves 50 life-years (also, let us say, twenty-five people). A program that saves younger 
people is better, along every dimension, than  an otherwise identical program that saves 
older people23—a statement that seems controversial only if we see life as a snapshot in 
which people are frozen at their current points in the age distribution.  
 

Any  defense  of  relying  life-years  has  to  come  to  terms  with  some  equitable 
objections to what seems to be a form of age discrimination.24 A central goal here is to 
answer  those  objections.  Hence  I  suggest  not  only  that  more  life-years  mean  more 

                                                 
21 See Hahn and Wallsten, supra note. EPA’s current estimates are $170,000 for those under age 65 and 
$434,000 for those over age 65. See Memorandum of John Graham, supra note, at 2 note **. For a lifetime 
risk  faced  by  someone  who  is  now  40,  it  would  be  sensible  to  calculate  each  life year,  before  65,  at  the 
lower  rate,  and  to  calculate  each  life  year,  after  that  age,  at  the  higher  rate,  subject  to  the  appropriate 
discount rate. OMB says, delicately, that “[m]ore research is needed to provide a complete picture of how 
VSLY varies over the lifespan.” Id. 
22 See supra note. 
23  The  “other  things  being  equal”  proviso  is  important  here.  I  put  to  one  side  the  problem  of  transition, 
taken up below. Note also that a decision to shift from VSL to VSLY will be harmful to people who are 
now older and who did not benefit from earlier use of VSLY. 
24 See the overview in John McKie et al., The Allocation of Health Care Resources: An Ethical Evaluation 
of the QALY Approach 47-72 (1998). 

 

5

welfare,  other  things  being  equal,  but  also  that  a  focus  on  life-years  does  not  offend 
ethical constraints on the pursuit of increased welfare through regulation.25 Of course it is 
tempting, and in a sense right, to urge that each life should count for no more and no less 
than  one.  On  this  view,  a  focus  on  life-years  might  be  seen  to  violate  the  equality 
principle,  because  it  treats  elderly  people  as  if  they  were  worth  less  (literally)  than 
younger people. This argument, I suggest, is rooted in a generally sound moral intuition: 
Sometimes the pursuit of welfare should be constrained by considerations of justice. It is 
at  least  imaginable,  for  example,  that  one  hundred  white  people  would  receive  more 
welfare  from  the  elimination  of  a  risk  of  1/100,000  than  would  one  hundred  African-
Americans.  But  even  if  this  is  so,  government  should  not  create  an  “African-American 
death discount.”26 The reason is that the welfare difference—assuming that it exists—is 
at  least  partly  a  product  of  past  and  present  injustice.  By  contrast,  injustice  is  not  the 
source of the welfare difference between the protection of one hundred children and the 
protection of one hundred elderly people. Because every old person was once young, an 
emphasis on life-years does not discriminate against anyone; the very people who lose, in 
a sense, when older also gained when younger. In fact the use of statistical lives, rather 
than  life-years,  is  plausibly  taken  as  a  form  of  discrimination  against  younger  people, 
because it treats each of their anticipated years as less valuable than those of older people. 
As I shall also show, an emphasis on life-years does not run afoul of the principles that 
animate the prohibition on age discrimination. My most modest suggestion, then, is that 
in  producing  regulatory  impact  analyses,27  agencies  should  do  a  sensitivity  analysis  in 
which  they  inquire  into  life-years  as  well  as  lives—and  take  account  of  that  sensitivity 
analysis in deciding what to do.  

 
Even  if  we  agree  that  life-years  matter,  there  remains  the  separate  and  quite 
vexing question of how to turn them into monetary equivalents. For VSL, willingness-to-
pay  (WTP)  studies  are  used  to  produce  the  relevant  values.28  Economists  and 
economically oriented urge that CBA is properly based on WTP for the various benefits 
of regulation.29 Hence the real issue, an empirical one, is whether WTP varies over the 
life-cycle. If thirty-year-olds are willing to pay more (or less) to eliminate a statistical risk 
than  sixty-year-olds,  then  the  difference  should  be  reflected  in  cost-benefit  analyses  of 
regulatory  proposals.  On  this  view,  policymakers  should  use  different  values  for  old 

                                                 
25 Hence I am suggesting that for purposes of regulatory policy, the goal is to promote welfare, subject to 
justice-related  constraints.  It  might  be  urged  instead  that  here  as  elsewhere,  justice  is  part  of  the  social 
maxim  and.  I  do  not  believe  that  these  different  approaches  lead  to  different  analysis  of  the  issues  I  am 
discussing here. For a general discussion of welfare and fairness, see Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell, 
Fairness vs. Welfare (2002). Because Kaplow and Shavell use a capacious understanding of welfare, one 
that  includes  distributional  considerations,  my  identification  of  ethical  (and  in  a  sense  fairness-related) 
constraints on the promotion of welfare through regulation is not at odds with their claims.  
26  The  issue  is  complex  if  the  beneficiaries  of  regulation  must  pay  all  of  its  social  cost.  Suppose,  for 
example, that a program benefiting African-Americans would also impose costs, in the form (for example) 
of higher water bills. If so, and if the beneficiaries have full information, a lower VSLY, for them, might be 
justified in principle. Government does people no favors by requiring them to pay more than their WTP, at 
least if no information failure is involved. For discussion, see below. 
27 As required by Executive Order 12866, 3 CFR 638 (1993). 
28 See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 
29  See,  e.g., Anna Alberini et al., Does the Value of a Statistical Life Vary with Age and Health Status? 
Evidence from the United States and Canada (unpublished manuscript 2002). 

 

6

people and young people if and only if WTP studies show such a disparity.30 This view 
has been endorsed by the Office of Management and Budget itself.31 And indeed, WTP is 
the basis for current evaluations of regulatory benefits.32  

 
I do not attempt to engage the complex debate over WTP fully here. But I do urge 
that with respect to lives or life-years, the argument for relying on WTP is most secure in 
cases in which the beneficiaries of regulation have to pay all of its cost. So long as people 
have  adequate  information,  government  does  them  no  favors  by  requiring  them  to 
purchase  goods  for  which  they  are  not  willing  to  pay.  When  the  beneficiaries  of 
regulation  do  not  pay  its  full  cost,  the  argument  for  making  WTP  conclusive  is  less 
strong.  Nonetheless,  I  urge  that  there  is  no  special  reason  to  depart  from  WTP  if 
government  is  focussing  on  statistical  life-years  rather  than  statistical  lives.  My  more 
ambitious suggestion, then, is that at least in general, cost-benefit analysis (CBA) should 
be conducted with primary attention to VSLY rather than VSL. If CBA is to be used at 
all,  it  is  because  CBA  is  a  rough  way  of  testing  whether  a  regulation  will  promote 
people’s welfare, understood to mean their actual well-being in their lives.33 An inquiry 
into  VSLY  is  an  important  way  of  answering  that  question.  I  also  urge  that  agencies 
should be permitted to make adjustments from WTP when the beneficiaries of regulation 
lack information or when they would pay only a fraction of its cost. Of course there are 
hard  questions  here  about  the  relationship  between  accuracy  and  administrability. 
Lacking good information about population-wide variations in WTP, government might 
relate on uniform figures, for life-years or lives, simply because more accurate numbers 
do not exist. 

 
In principle, the choice between lives and life-years is clear and simple. It gives 
the  appearance  of  difficulty  only  because  of  a  kind  of  optical  illusion,  which  suggests 
some  choice  “between”  older  people  and  younger  ones.  But  a  discussion  of  the 
underlying  problems  provides  a  window  onto  a  much  larger  and  more  complex  set  of 
questions.  I  touch  on  three  more  general  issues.  First,  economists  and  policymakers 
should not take the willingness to pay criterion too seriously, and they are in danger of 

                                                 
30 See id.  
31 See 68 Fed. Reg. 5521 (Feb. 3, 2003), suggesting that those who endorse VSLY assume “that the public 
is willing to pay more money for a rule that saves an average of 10 life years per person than a rule that 
saves one year per person.”  
32  See,  e.g.,  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Technical  Addendum:  Methodologies  for  the  Benefit 
Analysis of the Clear Skies Initiatives 30-38 (2002); W. Kip Viscusi, Faral Tradeoffs (1993); Sunstein, The 
Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 
33 See Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis, 109 Yale L J 165 (1999). 
Throughout I use the idea of welfare in a nonsectarian sense. I do not mean to identify the idea with the 
utilitarian  account,  and  I  do  not  mean  to  reduce  welfare  to  “happiness,”  narrowly  defined.  As  I  use  the 
term,  it  is  agnostic  on  the  controversial  normative  questions.  On  utitarianism  and  consequentialism,  see 
Amartya Sen, Utilitarianism and Welfarism, 76 J Phil 463 (1979); for general discussion, see Amartya Sen, 
Development As Freedom (1999). I believe that without resolving any difficult normative questions, it is 
possible to show that VSLY is preferable to VSL, and more generally to show that WTP is an inadequate 
proxy for welfare in many circumstances. On some of the empirical issues involved in measuring welfare, 
see  Bruno  S.  Frey  and  Aliois  Stutzer,  Happiness  and  Economics  4-11  (2001);Alberto  Alesina  et  al., 
Inequality and Happiness: Are Europeans and Americans Different? (2001). 

 

7

doing  precisely  that.34  As  a  measure  of  welfare,  that  criterion  has  several  advantages, 
above all in circumstances in which regulation amounts to a forced exchange, requiring 
people to “buy” a benefit that they may or may not find it in their interest to buy. But in 
some contexts, no forced exchange is involved, because the beneficiaries of regulation do 
not  have  to  pay  for  it.  And  in  some  contexts,  willingness  to  pay  is  a  poor  proxy  for 
welfare. In such contexts, regulators should abandon it and think about welfare directly if 
they  can.35  I  attempt  to  bring  recent  work  on  people’s  mispredictions  of  the  welfare 
effects of their own choices to bear on that question,36 with the suggestion that this work 
raises doubts about the use of WTP in many situations.37 There is a large research agenda 
here. 

 
The second issue has to do with the relationship between welfare and equity in the 
context  of  government  regulation.  While  promoting  welfare  is  the  basic  goal  of 
environmental  regulation,  there  are  important  ethical  constraints  on  the  pursuit  of  that 
goal.  Those  constraints  support  some,  but  not  all,  of  the  moral  reservations  about  CBA 
and WTP that are stressed by their critics.38 As I have suggested, it would generally be 
unacceptable for government to adopt a higher VSL or VSLY for men and whites than 
for  women  and  African-Americans.39  Related  problems  infect  the  use  of  QALYs  in 
certain  circumstances.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  an  otherwise  identical  government 
intervention  could  produce  more  QALYs  if  directed  at  the  moderately  disabled  than  at 
the  severely  disabled;  is  it  so  clear  that  the  intervention  should  therefore  favor  the 
moderately  disabled?  I  do  not  believe  so.  An  understanding  of  the  nature  and  the 
weaknesses of the ethical objections to VSLY helps explain the strength of objections to 
the promotion of welfare through regulation in other settings. 

 
Finally, I hope to make some progress in clarifying the debate between those who 
emphasize  WTP  and  those  who  emphasize  life-years  and  QALYs.40  I  suggest  that 
QALYs can be used as part of a cost-effectiveness analysis; it would be fully possible to 
investigate how many QALYs can be obtained for a given investment of resources. But 
when mortality and morbidity gains are converted into monetary equivalents, QALYs are 

                                                 
34 See id. 
35 Of course this is a difficult task, and I offer some thoughts here only about the easy cases. For general 
discussion, see Daniel Kahneman, et al., Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility, 112 Q. J 
Econ 375 (1997). 
36 See id.; Daniel Kahneman, A Psychological Perspective on Economics, 93 Am. Econ. Rev. 162 (Papers 
and Proceedings) (2003); George Loewenstein and David Schkade, Wouldn’t It Be Nice? Predicting Future 
Feelings,  in  Daniel  Kahneman,  Ed  Diener,  and  Norbert  Schwarz,  eds.,  WellBeing:  The  Foundations  of 
Hedonic Psychology 85 (Russell Sage 1999). 
37  See  Jonathan  Gruber  and  Sendhil  Mullainathan,  Do  Cigarettes  Taxes  Make  Smokers  Happier?  (2003, 
available at http://www.brook.edu/comm/events/20030605.htm), for an empirical demonstration that higher 
taxes  on  cigarettes  actually  increase  the  happiness  of  smokers,  apparently  because  smoking  decreases 
happiness and taxes decrease smoking. One of the many intriguing features of this essay is this: People are 
willing  to  pay  for  cigarettes,  and  thus  in  order  to  smoke,  but  smoking  decreases  welfare  (on  almost  any 
understanding of that term) for many or most smokers.  
38 See Lisa Heinzerling and Frank Ackerman, Priceless: Human Health, the Environment, and the Limits of 
the Market (forthcoming 2004). 
39 But see note supra. 
40 For an overview, see James Hammitt, QALYs vs. WTP, Harvard Center for Risk Analysis (2002). 

 

8

insufficiently informative. Indeed they tell us nothing at all. The value of WTP is that it 
allows for the conversion. In some circumstances, affected people might be willing to pay 
a large amount for relatively few QALYs—if, for example, they are wealthy or inclined 
to spend much of their wealth on risk-reduction. In other circumstances, affected people 
might  be  willing  to  pay  a  small  amount  for  relatively  many  QALYs—if,  for  example, 
they  are  poor  or  inclined  to  spend  little  of  their  wealth  on  risk-reduction.  In  fact  this 
seemingly paradoxical result—higher WTP for few QALYs than for many—is far from 
unlikely. There is no question that other things being equal, more QALYs are better than 
fewer. But  where the beneficiaries of regulation would pay all or almost all of its cost, 
WTP is normally the appropriate starting-point for the measurement of benefits.  

 
The remainder of this essay is organized as follows. Part II discusses the choice 
between  life-years  and  lives.  Here  I  urge  that  life-years  are  an  appropriate  focus  of 
regulatory concern. I also explore ethical and distributive constraints on the promotion of 
welfare through regulation; I suggest that such constraints are real and important, but that 
the use of life-years does not run afoul of them. Part III turns to the vexing question of 
monetization.  I  suggest  that  the  use  of  WTP  does  not  raise  any  special  or  distinctive 
conceptual  issues  in  the  context  of  life-years.  Unfortunately,  current  evidence  does  not 
provide clear findings about how WTP for life-years or the remainder of life varies over 
the  lifespan.  A  constant  WTP  is  not  supported  by  existing  evidence,  and  there  is  some 
reason  to  think  that  older  people  are  willing  to  pay  more,  per  life-year,  than  younger 
people. I investigate this possibility and what might lie behind it. Part IV briefly identifies 
some options for policy. My most cautious suggestion here is that a life-years calculation 
should  be  part  of  the  analysis  that  underlies  policy  judgments.  Part  V  discusses  three 
extensions  of  the  analysis:  the  possibility  of  resolving  the  debate  over  life-years  by 
reference  to  survey  evidence;  the  choice  between  QALYs  and  WTP;  and  the  fact  that 
WTP  might  not  adequately  measure  welfare.  Part  VI 
the  conclusion. 
 

is 

II. Welfare and Equity, Lives and Life-Years 

Should government focus on statistical lives or instead statistical life-years? We 
should be clear on the nature of the opposition between the two. No regulatory program 
can eliminate death; if it is successful, it will merely extend life. If regulators focus solely 
on  statistical  lives,  they  will  be  lengthening  lives,  and  they  will  be  analyzing  the 
consequences of regulation without regard to the extent of the lengthening. In fact they 
will  be  ignoring  that  intuitively  relevant  consideration.  The  initial  question,  then,  is 
whether  regulators  should  focus  on  statistical  lives41  rather  than  life-years,  even  while 
acknowledging the fact that life extension is all that is involved.  

 
My  goal  in  this  section  is  to  show  that  a  focus  on  life-years  should  be  found 
desirable  from  a  variety  of  different  perspectives,  and  that  it  does  not  offend  justice-
related constraints on regulatory policy. I suggest that if welfare is the goal of regulatory 
policy, it  is  important  to assess  the number of life-years at stake. I suggest as well that 

                                                 
41  I  deliberately  leave  ambiguous  the  meaning  of  “a  focus.”  At  a  minimum,  I  mean  to  suggest  that 
government should assess the number of life-years at stake, and use the resulting figure when the ultimate 
decision is otherwise difficult. See Part V below. 

 

 

9

such  an  assessment  should  be  appealing  to  those  who  are  concerned  with  fairness  or 
reciprocity—and also to those who believe that as a matter of principle, regulatory policy 
should  attempt  to  ensure  citizens  with  lives  of  ordinary  lengths.  If  these  claims  are 
correct,  it  should  be  possible  to  obtain  an  incompletely  theorized  agreement42  on  the 
relevance of life-years—an agreement from a diverse set of theoretical perspectives, and 
one that does not depend on resolution of disagreements about the proper foundations of 
regulatory policy. 

 

A. Behind the Veil of Ignorance 

 
It  should  be  clear  that  an  emphasis  on  statistical  lives  neglects  highly  pertinent 
information.  Why  should  analysts  blind  themselves  to  that  information?  Other  things 
being equal, and as a matter of simple logic, the welfare gain from a program saving (say) 
1000 people between forty and sixty-five is unquestionably higher than the welfare gain 
from a program saving (say) 1000 people who are 65 and over. The former program does 
everything  that  the  latter  program  does,  and  much  else  besides.  After  all,  the  sixty-five 
year-olds were themselves forty once, and it would be astonishing if the welfare gain, to 
each  of  us,  of  ten  more  years  of  life  were  equivalent  to  the  welfare  gain  of  forty  more 
years of life.  
 
Nor  does  an  emphasis  on  life-years  disregard  or  downplay  the  welfare  of  older 
people. Once programs focussing on life-years are in place, old people will benefit from 
them  no  less  than  younger  people,  simply  because  those  programs  helped  them  at  a 
younger stage and hence increased the likelihood that they would become old.43 In this 
sense,  the  idea  that  a  life-years  approach  prefers  younger  people  over  older  people  is 
based on a kind of optical illusion—one that sees human life as a snapshot with everyone 
always at their current age, rather than a moving picture in which people age over time.44 
In any case the life-years approach considers everyone’s life-years the same, old people 
no  less  than  young  people,  and  hence  will  argue  for  careful  attention  to  risks  that  face 
significant numbers of old people. 

 
To see the claim for considering life-years, imagine that people are placed behind 
a veil of ignorance,45 in which they do not know their personal characteristics; they are 

                                                 
42 On the general idea, see Cass R. Sunstein, Legal Reasoning and Political Conflict (1996). 
43 There is one exception to this conclusion: People who became old while government used statistical lives 
but after it switches to statistical life-years. Such people could not, by hypothesis, benefit from statistical 
life-years  when  they  were  younger.  But  it  would  extremely  odd  to  invoke  this  short-term  problem  as  a 
reason to continue with the idea of statistical lives if it is obviously inferior.  
44  Note  that  a  claim  for  attention  to  life-years  does  not  mean  that  the  nation  is  devoting  too  little  or  too 
much  in  the  way  of  resources  to  protect  public  health.  Even  if  the  United  States  doubled,  tripled,  or 
quadrupled the money it spends on environmental protection, for example, it would be necessary to decide 
how that money should be spend, and here it would remain necessary to choose between statistical lives or 
statistical life-years. 
45 See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971). I am using the idea of the veil of ignorance for heuristic 
purposes,  but  not  in  the  way  Rawls  does.  Rawls  is  interested  in  issues  involving  the  basic  structure  of 
society,  and  it  is  not  at  all  clear  that  he  believes  that  the  veil  should  be  used  to  assess  the  justice  of 
particular issues that are contested on grounds of justice. Nonetheless, I believe that the veil of ignorance is 
an illuminating way of testing the legitimacy of asking about life-years. 

 

10

unaware  of  their  race,  sex,  wealth,  or  (most  pertinently)  age.  Note  that  the  veil  of 
ignorance is intended to be an extremely stringent constraint on choice, one that ensures 
that morally irrelevant factors will not play a biasing role.46 If those behind the veil would 
choose statistical life-years over statistical years, we have good reason to believe that life-
years are the appropriate focus of regulatory attention. Would people behind the veil be 
indifferent between a program that would eliminate risks that people would face at thirty 
and  one  that  would  eliminate  otherwise  identical  risks  faced  at  sixty?  If  people  do  not 
know how old they are, would they have the slightest difficulty concluding that it is better 
to eliminate a 1/50,000 risk faced by one million teenagers than a 1/50,000 risk faced by 
one  million  social  security  recipients?  At  first  glance,  the  choice  is  entirely  clear.  The 
program  that  saves  more  life-years  is  better,  because  it  provides  more  welfare  to  its 
beneficiaries, and does so without offending any ethical consideration.47 From behind a 
veil of ignorance, choosers would surely select the program that protects younger people, 
and hence would make life-years highly relevant to their own judgments. 

 
Or consider the following question: 

You do not know how long you will live. Which of the following two programs do 

you prefer: 
 

(a)  A  program  that  would  eliminate,  starting  now  and  for  the  rest  of  your  life 

after that point, a 1/200,000 risk of death.   

 
(b) A program that would eliminate, starting at sixty-five and for the rest of your 

life after that point, a 1/200,000 risk of death. 

 
It  would  be  truly  astonishing  if  most  people  did  not  prefer  Program  (a)  over 
Program  (b).  Perhaps  a  preference  for  Program  (a)  reflects,  in  part,  the  discounting  of 
future  years,  which  (rationally  or  not48)  may  not  loom  so  large  in  people’s  current 
calculations.49  But  the  difference  is  highly  likely  to  reflect  not  merely  discounting  but 
also  the  fact  that  Program  (a)  provides  more  risk-free  years.  In  answering  questions  of 
this kind, reasonable people take account of the fact that the welfare benefit of Program 
(a)  is  significantly  higher  than  the  welfare  benefit  of  Program  (b).  In  fact  Program  (a) 
literally dominates Program (b): It provides everything that Program (b) does, and more 
years of reduced risk as well. It would be easy to design questions, for those behind the 
veil  of  ignorance,  that  have  this  characteristic.  A  focus  on  statistical  life-years  allows 
choosers to select programs that are better, on every dimension, than programs that seem 
identical to those who focus on statistical lives. 

 

                                                 
46 See id. It is noteworthy here that Rawls uses the veil of ignorance as a way of challenging utilitarianism 
itself. Id. 
47 I take this point up in more detail below. 
48  On  hyberbolic  discounting,  see  David  Laibson,  Intertemporal  Decision  Making,  Encyclopedia  of 
Cognitive  Science  (forthcoming),  available  at  http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/laibson/papers 
/euler.pdf ; David Laibson and Christopher Harris, Hyberbolic Discounting and Consumption, available at 
id.; Richard Thaler, The Winner’s Curse (1993). 
49 On that issue, see Revesz, supra note. 

 

 

11

Some  cases  are  not  as  simple  as  this  one,  because  they  do  not  involve  lifetime 
risks.  We  could  imagine  a  Program  (c)  that  eliminates  a  risk  faced  mostly  by  people 
between  the  ages  of  twenty  and  twenty-five,  and  a  Program  (d)  that  eliminates  a  risk 
faced mostly by people between the ages of seventy and seventy-five. Program (c) cannot 
be  said  to  do  everything  that  Program  (d)  does,  and  more.  Program  (d)  protects  people 
who are not protected by Program (c); there is a real choice here. But Program (c) does 
provide far more life-years, and because it enables (a certain number of) people to reach 
the age  of seventy in the first place, it  is surely preferable, other things being equal, to 
Program (d).  
 

B. Discrimination, Life-Years, and Welfare 
 
 
Does a focus on life-years discriminate against older people in some invidious or 
unacceptable way? It is tempting to reach this conclusion. 50 But illicit discrimination is 
not  involved.  In  fact  it  is  the  idea  of  statistical  lives  that  is  far  more  plausibly 
discriminatory  than  the  idea  of  statistical  life-years,  because  the  former  treats  the 
remaining  life-years  of  old  people  as  more  valuable  than  the  remaining  life-years  of 
young people.51 And because every old person was once young, and (with a little luck) 
young  people  will  eventually  become  old,  an  approach  that  emphasizes  life-years  does 
not  treat  old  people  unfairly.  But  to  approach  this  question,  let  us  begin  with  cases  in 
which ethical constraints on the pursuit of welfare seem most insistent. 
 
Suppose  that  we  could  measure  welfare  directly  through  a  kind  of  hedometer. 
 
Suppose too that the hedometer does not rely on contentious conceptions of welfare; it is 
not  narrowly  limited  to  pleasure  or  happiness,  and  it  includes  the  proper  ingredients  of 
welfare however these are defined.52 Suppose too that the hedometer is able to show that 
in  a  relevant  population,  white  people  receive  more  welfare  from  their  lives  than  do 
African-Americans. Hence, let us suppose, a program that would save fifty white people 
(from cancer as a result of arsenic in drinking water, for example) will produce greater 
welfare  gains  than  a  program  that  would  save  sixty  African-Americans  (from  air 
pollution in the inner city, for example). Certainly it is not unimaginable that the welfare 
gain  is  higher  for  programs  that  protect  whites  than  for  programs  that  protect  an 
equivalent  number  of  African-Americans  (though  the  opposite  might  also  be  true). 
Gender differences are possible as well. Perhaps men flourish more than women (though 
here too the opposite might be true). If these examples seem too contentious, imagine that 
there are two social groups, the Flourishing and the Depressed. Members of both groups 
are  easily  identifiable,  and  their  present  and  future  welfare  is  captured  in  the  names  of 
their  respective  groups.  By  stipulation,  a  program  that  protects  the  lives  of  the 
Flourishing will produce more welfare than one that protects the lives of the Depressed. 
To sharpen the normative question, stipulate too that the Flourishing are responsible for 
                                                 
50 See McKie et al., supra note, at 47-72. 
51 Note that this is objectionable if, other things being equal, each person’s life-year counts for no less and 
no more than one. It is all the more objectionable if older people are seen as having a larger “stock” of life-
years and hence as comparatively “rich” in welfare terms. In that event, the life-years of younger people 
deserve higher priority on distributive grounds. I do not explore these complexities here. 
52 Hence the term eudaimeter seems to me more fitting but more unruly. See the discussion of eudaimonia 
in Marths Nussbaum, The Fragility of Goodness 142,-43, 343-72 (rev. ed. 2001). 

 

12

the depression of the Depressed; that if not for the active efforts of the Flourishing, the 
Depression would come closer to flourishing too. 
 

This example is hypothetical and we lack hedometers. For the moment, let us turn 
to willingness to pay (WTP) instead.53 W. Kip Viscusi finds that African-American males 
have a significantly lower WTP than white males: $7.7 million versus $15.1 million.54 He 
also  finds  that  African-American  females  have  a  lower  WTP  than  white  females:  $8.7 
million  versus  $11.3.55  Thus  the  overall  VSL  for  the  white  sample  is  $13.4  million, 
whereas the overall VSL for the African-American sample is $9.3 million, and the VSL 
for the male sample is $15.1, much higher than the VSL of $11.3 for the female sample.56 
If WTP is the basis for government policy, agencies should be assigning a much higher 
VSL for whites and men than for African-Americans and women. Viscusi himself does 
not reach this conclusion. He says that “because of differences in market opportunities, it 
is  inappropriate  to  attribute  the  observed  differences  to  a  greater  willingness  to  black 
workers to bear risk.”  

 
Of  course  the  WTP  numbers  do  not  show  or  even  suggest  that  when  regulatory 
programs save lives, African-Americans and women gain less, in terms of welfare, than 
whites and men. By itself, the lower WTP demonstrates no such thing; as we shall see, 
WTP is merely a proxy for welfare, and an especially crude one in the face of disparities 
in income, wealth, and opportunities. Suppose that Donald Trump is willing to pay $500 
to  eliminate  1/50,000  risk  of  having  migraine  headaches  for  the  next  year;  suppose  too 
that I am willing to pay only $25 to eliminate the same risk. The difference might well 
stem only from differences in wealth; the welfare loss, from migraine headaches, would 
be the same for the both of us. But it is certainly imaginable that some people, defined in 
demographic terms, do obtain more welfare from their lives than others. To see whether 
there are ethical constraints on the promotion of welfare through regulation, let us simply 
stipulate that this is the case. 
 

Should  government  devote  more  resources  to  the  protection  of  those  racial  or 
ethnic groups that would gain more welfare from protection? Most people would find the 
very  question  absurd.  In  cases  of  these  sorts,  there  is  an  equality-based  check  on  the 
pursuit  of  greater  welfare.  In  fact  racial  discrimination  on  this  basis  would  be 
unconstitutional.  But  what  is  the  source  of  the  equality-based  check?  In  the  context  of 
race  discrimination,  a  central  problem  is  that  if  African-Americans  receive  less  welfare 
from their lives than do white people, a large part of the reason lies in social and legal 
practices,  past  and  present,  which  help  produce  that  state  of  affairs.  This  form  of 
inequality reflects injustice. If government takes the inequality as a kind of given for the 
purposes of policy, it is compounding the injustice. In fact it is actually creating a kind of 
vicious  circle,  in  which  disparities  in  welfare  justify  increased  disparities  in  welfare, 
which in turn justify ever-increasing disparities in welfare. The ethical intuition is simple: 

                                                 
53 See W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of A Statistical Life (2003), available on 
ssrn.com. 
54 See id. at 29. 
55 Id. 
56 Id. at 25. 

 

13

Where  disparities  in  the  welfare  effects  of  regulatory  policies  are  a  product  of 
background injustice, government is properly blocked from taking those disparities into 
account.57 
 
This  point  has  implications  for  the  debate  over  the  use  of  quality-adjusted  life 
 
years in regulatory policy. Insofar as the idea of QALYs is designed to rank health gains 
along with fatalities averted, it makes a great deal of sense; reductions in curable cancers, 
asthma attacks, and chronic bronchitis surely count as gains, whoever receives them. But 
suppose  that  people  with  severe  physical  and  emotional  ailments  can  be  benefited  only 
moderately  by  protective  interventions—and  hence  that  the  number  of  QALYs,  from 
such interventions, is relatively low, simply because those who are helped cannot, in light 
of their disability, be helped much. Should government concentrate instead on programs 
for people with less severe ailments? If government should not, it is because it is unjust to 
disfavor  those  whose  aliments  are  most  serious.58  This  problem  is  not  the  same  as  the 
problem of disparities across lines of race and gender, but it raises related concerns. 
 
C. Life-Years, Fairness, and Reciprocity 
 

Thus far I have suggested that considerations of justice constrain the promotion of 
welfare  through  regulatory  controls.  But  is  the  use  of  statistical  life-years  morally 
unacceptable in the same way as a VSL that discriminates on the basis of race or gender? 
This  seems  quite  implausible.  The  initial  point  is  that  it  is  hard  to  argue  that  injustice 
accounts for the welfare disparity between protection of a thirty-year-old and protection 
of  a  sixty-year-old.  The  disparity  comes  from the  simple fact that  younger people have 
more years left. Now that disparity might itself be an injustice if social practices, or even 
nature, singled out certain groups of people and gave them shorter lives. Hence the use of 
life-years  would  indeed  be  problematic  if  it  systematically  burdened  members  of 
identifiable social groups (an issue to which I will return). But by itself, the notion of life-
years is demographically neutral in both theory and practice.59  

 
Under the life-years approach, older people are treated worse for only one reason: 
They  are  older.  This  is  not  an  injustice.  Every  old  person  was  young  once,  and  every 
young  person  will  be  old  too  (if  given  the  chance).  In  fact  an  important  form  of 
reciprocity is built into the life-years approach. If regulatory policy is based on life-years, 
every  person  will,  in  a  sense,  be  both  benefited  and  burdened,  and  in  exactly  the  same 
way.  Indeed,  every  person  will  be  both  a  beneficiary  and  a  victim  of  the  relevant 
discrimination. People—the same people—will be benefited when they are younger and 
burdened  when  they  are  older.  They  have  no  cause  to  complain  of  an  approach  from 

                                                 
57  I  am  putting  to  one  side  the  possibility  of  adopting  welfare-promoting  regulatory  policies  alongside 
redistributive tax-and-spending policies. See below. 
58 See the discussion of the natural lottery in John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1973). 
59 There is a possible qualification here if African-Americans (for example) live shorter lives, and if VSLY 
therefore ensures that African-American lives will be valued, on average, less than white lives. In theory, 
this is indeed a possible problem. But in practice, regulatory policies that use VSLY do not run into that 
problem, because they are too coarse-grained to discriminate in this fashion. 

 

14

which  they  gained  at  an  earlier  stage.60  It  is  hard  to  see  how  the  relevant  form  of 
discrimination  is  illicit.  In  fact  it  is  not  clear  that  it  is  a  form  of  discrimination  at  all. 
Everyone’s life year counts as no less and no more than one. In fact it would be possible 
to conclude that this argument from reciprocity is a free-standing justification of the life-
years approach, putting issues of welfare entirely to one side. 

 
In an important sense, a focus on statistical lives is discriminatory, not a focus on 
statistical life-years. The former discriminates against younger people, simply because it 
treats each of their years as less valuable than those of older people. A program that uses 
statistical lives accords far more value to each remaining year of an old person’s life than 
to  each  remaining  year  of  a  young  person’s  life.61  The  point  is  not  purely  semantic. 
Suppose that we conclude that lifetime well-being is what matters, and that other things 
being equal, policies should not give some people more lifetime well-being than others. 
A policy that looks solely at statistical lives will violate this principle. Compare a group 
of  people  who  die  from  a  certain risk at  fifty with  a  group  of people who die from the 
same risk at seventy. Other things being equal, the latter group has received significantly 
more  lifetime  well-being  than  the  former,  and  attention  to  statistical  lives  forces 
government  to  ignore  this  fact.  If  anything,  an  age-neutral  statistical  lives  approach  is 
subject to a claim of illicit discrimination, not an approach that focuses on life-years. 

 
A  possible  argument  would  come  from  the  criminal  law.  Those  who  kill  older 
people are not punished less harshly than those who kill younger people. In fact it would 
be  extremely  surprising  to  find  a  criminal  sentencing  policy  that  imposes  higher 
sentences on those who kill people thirty and under than on those who kill people fifty 
and over.62 If criminal punishment treats lives as equivalent, and does not make life-years 
relevant, why, it might be asked, should regulation be any different? Part of the answer 
lies in the sheer heinousness of murder. The intentional killing of another human being is, 
in  terms  of  its  consequences,  so  bad  that  the  age  of  the  victim  is  a  matter  of  relative 
indifferences.  Perhaps  the  system  of  criminal  justice  focuses  not  solely  on  social 
consequences but also on the character of the act and the perpetrator. If this is the focus, a 
murderer of a young person is unlikely to be worse than a murderer of an older person.  
 

Distinctions  among  different  kinds  of  crimes  raise  many  complexities,  and  it  is 
certainly  reasonable  to  think  that  a  murder  of  another  human  being  regulation  is  more 

                                                 
60 Arguments from reciprocity are not always convincing. Suppose, for example, that certain people were 
beneficiaries  of  racial  discrimination  in  the  past,  and  at  some  future  point  they  are  harmed  by  racial 
discrimination. At least it is not clear that the latter form of discrimination can be justified by reference to 
the former. If not, the problem is that discrimination is unjust. If my arguments in the text are correct, this 
problem does not apply to the life-years criterion, because there is no injustice.  
61  For  a  utilitarian,  this  approach  is  objectionable  because  each  life-year,  other  things  being  equal,  is  an 
equal  source  of  utility,  and  hence  a  program  should  prefer  more  life-years  rather  than  fewer.  We  could 
imagine a kind of utilitarian or consequentialist who would give higher priority to the welfare of the least 
well-off. In this context, who counts as the least well-off? In an important sense, young people fall in that 
category, because they have not yet had the opportunity to accumulate welfare; older people already have a 
large welfare “stock.” But a resolution of these complexities is not important for my analysis here. 
62  It  would  be  less  surprising  to  find  a  sentencing  policy  that  imposes  severe  punishment  on  those  who 
murder children. But here the reason for the severity would be the special vulnerability of children, not the 
fact that they have many life-years left. 

 

15

analogous  to  the  system  of  civil  damages,  which  do  seem  to  turn  on  life-years.  Many 
state courts, including several state supreme courts, have calculated damages in wrongful 
death  cases  by  assigning  a  net  value  to  each  remaining  year  the  decedent  would  likely 
have lived. These courts have used life expectancy tables and projected annual earnings 
to  determine  lost  income.63  Several  courts  have  gone  further  and  used  estimated  life 
expectancy to determine damages for loss of society or consortium.64 In these states, the 
lives of young people are presumptively more valuable than those of the elderly. In this 
respect, the use of life-years, as part of an understanding of appropriate policy, is hardly 
foreign to the legal system. 

 
Consider  another  way  to  get  at  the  issue.  On  one  view,  people  have  a  moral 
entitlement  to  have  a  chance  to  live  to  the  end  of  a  human  life  of  normal  length.65  It 
follows  that  there  is  a  special  moral  objection  if  members  of  a  relevant  population  are 
dying  at  the  age  of  thirty  or  forty,  an  objection  that  does  not  apply  if  members  of  a 
relevant  population  are  dying  at  the  age  of  seventy  or  eighty.  If  people  have  a  moral 
entitlement to avoid (excessive risks of) premature death, then government legitimately 
devotes special attention to otherwise identical risks faced at relatively early places in the 
lifespan.  Those  who  emphasize  the  importance  of  providing  people  with  ordinary 
longevity  should  find  a  focus  on  life-years  compatible  with  their  goals,  and  highly 
congenial  insofar  as  that  focus  makes  it  more  likely  that  citizens  will  have  a  chance  to 
have lives of ordinary length.66 In any case a special virtue of focussing on life-years is 
that it ensures attention to a crucial question, which is whether affected citizens have had 
an opportunity to live a number of years already.67 

 
 
 

                                                 
63 See, e.g., Payne v. Eighth Judicial Dist. Court, 60 P.3d 469, 473 (Mont. 2002); Romero v. Byers, 872 
P.2d  840,  845-46  (N.M.  1994);  Bemenderfer v. Williams, 745 N.E.2d 212, 219 (Ind. 2001); Davidson v. 
Lindsey, 104 S.W.3d 483, 493 n.2 (Tenn. 2003). 
64 See, e.g., Thomas v. Hilburn, 654 So.2d 898, 903 (Miss. 1995); Durham ex rel. Estate of Wade v. U-Haul 
Int’l, 745 N.E.2d 755, 766 (Ind. 2001). 
65  See  Martha  Nussbaum,  Women  and  Human  Development  78  (2000).  Nussbaum  lists,  as  the  first  of 
“central human functional capabilities, “Being able to live to the end of a human life of normal length; not 
dying prematurely, or before one’s life is so reduced as to be not worth living.” Complex issues are raised 
by the application of this idea to the context of social risks (and hence I do not adopt her phrasing here). 
Suppose, for example, that citizens in a population of 200 million are exposed to a median annual mortality 
risk  of  1/500,000  from  all  causes  (including,  for  example,  motor  vehicle  accidents,  cigarette  smoking, 
alcohol use, air pollution, water pollution, pesticides, occupational accidents, homicide, hunger, and much 
more). This would be an exceptionally safe population—safer, in fact, than any society in the history of the 
world. But of that population, 400 people would die each year, many of them prematurely. 
66 A focus on life-years is not, of course, the same as an effort to ensure that everyone has a chance to have 
a lifespan of ordinary length. My only suggestion is that an approach that looks at statistical lives, and does 
not look at life-years, is less likely to provide that chance than an approach that make life-years relevant.  
67 Note that this is a different question from the life-years question, though it is overlapping. Consider two 
programs. (a) Program A would remove a statistical risk from a population of people who are forty; their 
life  expectancy  is  sixty-five.  (b)  Program  B  would  remove  the  same  statistical  risk  from  a  population  of 
people  who  are  fifty;  their  life  expectancy  is  eighty.  On  the  life-years  approach,  Program  B  is  to  be 
preferred. But if we are focussing on the numbers of years that people have had already, Program A might 
be better.  

 

16

D. Literal Age Discrimination? 

 
Do  these  arguments  undermine  the  widely  acceptable  principle  against  age 
discrimination?  If  so,  the  arguments  might  be  thought  to  have  mischaracterized  the 
ethical issues involved—or to have broad and perhaps radical implications, calling for a 
rethinking of the broadly accepted prohibition on age discrimination.  

 
Under  the  Age  Discrimination  in  Employment  Act,68  employers  are  forbidden 
from discriminating against people over forty. They cannot choose a thirty-year-old over 
a  fifty-year-old.  Indeed,  they  cannot  discriminate  even  if  they  can  claim  that  they  are 
relying  on  a  statistically  sound  generalization—as  sound  as  those  on  which  employers 
and others rely every day.69 It is not acceptable for an employer to conclude that thirty-
year-old teachers are more fit, energetic, and creative than fifty-year-old teachers, even if 
this is generally true, and even if it is difficult, in individual cases, to test creativity before 
people have started to work.70 Nor would it be permissible for an employer to adapt the 
argument I have been defending here. An employer could not say that he wants to hire 
people who have a large number of life-years left—even if the employer could say, not 
implausibly,  that  he  would  like  employees  with  many  life-years  rather  than  fewer,  and 
even if he could add, also not implausibly, that a life-years approach to hiring does not, in 
a sense, discriminate against anyone. (Recall that every older person was young once and 
that every younger person, if lucky, will eventually be older too.) The question, in short, 
is  whether  it  is  possible  to  defend  the  use  of  statistical  life-years  over  statistical  lives 
while also accepting the prohibition on age discrimination in employment. I believe that 
it is. 

 
To  be  sure,  the  prohibition  on  age  discrimination  in  employment  does  not  have 
the  same  moral  standing  as 
the  corresponding  prohibitions  on  race  and  sex 
discrimination.71 But it is easy to see how the former prohibition might be justified. Some 
age  discrimination  is  undoubtedly  a  product  of  unthinking  prejudice—of  a  false  belief 
that  older  people  are  unable  to  engage  in  certain  tasks.72  If  prejudice  is  frequently 
responsible  for  age  discrimination,  perhaps  age  discrimination  should  generally  be 
banned. A supplemental rationale would be that discrimination on the basis of age inflicts 
an  unusual  kind  of  dignitary  harm—one  that  makes  it  different  from,  and  worse  than, 
most kinds of employment-related injury. If an employee is fired because he is fifty-five, 
or  not  hired  for  that  reason,  the  psychological  and  dignitary  injury  is  plausibly  worse, 
even far worse, than that faced by people who are fired or hired for other reasons. At least 
this point seems to animate the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.73 

 

                                                 
68 See 29 USC 621-34. 
69 See Samuel Estreicher and Michael C. Harper, Cases and Materials on Employment Discrimination and 
Employment  Law  445  (2000).  In  some  narrow  circumstances,  however,  age  might  be  a  bona  fide 
occupation qualification. See Western Air Lines v. Criswell, 472 US 400 (1985). 
70 See id. 
71  See  Samuel  Issacharoff  &  Erica  W.  Harris,  Is  Age  Discrimination  Really  Age  Discrimination?  The 
ADEA’s Unnatural Solution, 72 N.Y.U.L Rev. 780, 783 (1997). 
72 See Estreicher and Harper, supra note, at 444-45. 
73 See id. 

 

17

The  key  point  is  that  whether  prejudice  or  dignitary  harm  is  the  basis  of  the 
ADEA, the same problems do not raise doubts about the government’s use of statistical 
life-years.  When  government  uses  life-years,  it  is  not  because  it  is  prejudiced  against 
older  people  or  acting  on  the  basis  of  unreliable  stereotypes  about  them.  There  is  no 
overgeneralization here. Nor is it easy to show that a dignitary harm, of the sort involved 
in  the  employment  context,  is  an  issue  here.  It  is  one  thing  to  be  told,  by  a  specific 
employer, that you will be fired or not hired because you are too old. It is quite another 
thing for the government to use an approach that focuses on life-years rather than lives. 
To  be  sure,  it  is  possible  to  characterize  such  an  approach  in  a  way  that  does  inflict 
dignitary  harm.  Perhaps  some  objections  to  life-years  stem  from  a  perception  that  this 
measures  values  older  people  less,  treating  them  as  “worth”  some  fraction  of  younger 
people. But these objections rest on a highly misleading way of framing what life-years is 
all about. 

 

E. Bad Luck in the Natural Lottery (with a note on sex discrimination) 
 
 
Compare two programs: 
 

There  is,  however,  one  set  of  ethical  constraints  on  the  life-years  approach. 

(a)  Program  A  would  eliminate  a  risk  faced  by  people  who  are  ten  years  old  or 
younger, but who have a life expectancy of forty years or less, because they have 
a preexisting condition that will likely lead to premature mortality. 

(b) Program B would eliminate a risk faced by people who are thirty years old, but 
who have a life expectancy of seventy or more, because they are in good health. 

On the life-years approach, Program B is better. But is it better in principle? Note 
that if it is objectionable, it is not for the same reason as an approach that discriminates 
on the basis of race or sex. Social injustice is not responsible for the low life expectancy 
of the people who would be helped by Program A. (Let us so stipulate; if social injustice 
is  involved,  the  case  is  close  to  those  of  race  and  sex  discrimination.)  Instead  the 
problem, for the beneficiaries of Program A, is bad luck in the “natural lottery.”74 People 
whose  life  expectancy  is  low,  as  a  result  of  preexisting  conditions,  have  been  dealt  an 
unfortunate  blow  by  fate.  In  my  view,  government  should  take  reasonable  steps  to 
ameliorate such blows, and should not make them worse through social policies. A life-
years approach that is blind to the natural lottery would be unjust, 

 
This point very much bears on medical interventions and on government funding 
for medical projects. But it is rarely raised in regulatory policy. Typically government is 
deciding whether to adopt regulations that reduce pollution or otherwise increase safety 
across  large  populations.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  natural  lottery,  the  life-years 
criterion does not raise objections in the vast bulk of such cases.75 But it might well turn 

                                                 
74 See Rawls, supra note, at XX. 
75 Compare another puzzle. (1) Program A would save 1000 infants. (2) Program B would save 1000 ten-
year-olds.  On  the  life-years  approach,  Program  A  is  of  course  better,  other  things  being  equal.  On 
willingness  to  pay  grounds,  taken  up  in  part  III,  this  is  much  less  clear;  there  are  hard  empirical  and 
conceptual  questions  here.  And  there  are  theoretical  reasons  to  question  a  preference  for  Program  A. 

 

 

18

out  to  create  intriguing  questions  in  the  context  of  programs  that  disproportionately 
benefit men or women. The life expectancy of women is higher than the life expectancy 
of men. As of 2000, the average life expectancy for men at birth was 74.1, but 79.5 for 
women.76 A breast cancer prevention program might well protect more life-years than an 
otherwise identical program designed to protect men.77 In my view, a neutral use of the 
life-years  approach  should  not  be  thought  to  be  unacceptably  discriminatory  even  if  it 
produces  more  attention  to  women  than  to  men,  though  a  formal  commitment  to  sex 
equality, or to counteracting the effects of natural lottery, would raise real doubts. 

 

 

III. Monetization 

These  points  suggest  that  in  deciding  whether  to  regulate,  government  should 
consider  life-years  saved,  not  merely  lives  saved  (a  misleading  way  of  framing  the 
alternative, which is really lives extended).78 And if life-years are the focus, it would be 
possible to engage in cost-effectiveness analysis, seeing how many life-years are obtained 
for  given  investments  in  regulatory  protection.  Government  might  therefore  reallocate 
some of the resources devoted to programs protecting the elderly to programs protecting 
younger  people.79  But  suppose  that  government  seeks  to  engage  not  merely  in  cost-
effectiveness analysis but also in cost-benefit analysis. If this is what it seeks to do, it will 
have to turn life-years into monetary equivalents. For most economists, the valuation of 
regulatory benefits, and the monetization of life-years, depends on WTP.80 Should WTP 
be used here?  
 

At  first  glance,  the  use  of  WTP,  as  a  way  of  monetizing  benefits,  creates  no 
special or novel issues in the context of life-years. Under the economic framework, the 
goal  should  be  to  calculate  people’s  WTP  for  statistical  years  over  the  lifespan.  We 

                                                                                                                                                 
Because Program B would save people who have accumulated memories and experiences, the individual 
loss might be higher; and because of the investment of family and friends, the social loss might be higher as 
well.  For  relevant  discussion,  see  Ronald  Dworkin,  Life’s  Dominion  (1996).  A  full  account  would  of 
course have to come to terms with this question, which might justify further constraints on the use of life-
years. 
76 See http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/lifexpec.htm. 
77 To make the issue more concrete, compare two programs. (1) Program A would save 1000 women with a 
median age of sixty. (2) Program B would save 1000 men with a median age of sixty. Under the life-years 
approach, Program A is better, because it would protect more life-years. 
78  There  are  some  exotic  variations  that  I  do  not  deal  with  here.  Compare  two  programs.  (1) Program A 
would save 50 people who are ten years old. (2) Program B would save 100 people who are forty-six years 
old. If life expectancy is 80, then the first program would save 3500 life-years, whereas the second would 
save 3400 life-years. Is it so clear that program A is to be preferred? If not, it might be because reasonable 
people would prefer something like a weighted average of lives saved and life-years saved, so that a large 
number  of  people,  and  a  small  number  of  life-years,  would  receive  more  attention  than  life-years  alone 
suggest, just as a small number of people, and a large number of life-years, would receive less attention. I 
do not deal with that possibility here. If government concentrated on life-years for purposes of regulation, it 
is  likely  that  this  issue  would  balance  out  in  the  end.  The  area  of  medical  treatment  is  one  in  which  the 
issue might have more practical importance. 
79 This would be an extension of the reallocations aimed at in Stephen Breyer, Breaking the Vicious Circle 
(1993). 
80  See,  e.g.,  V.  Kerry  Smith,  Do  the  “Near”  Elderly  Value  Mortality  Risks  Differently?  (unpublished 
manuscript 2002). 

 

19

would want to know, for example, how much thirty-year-olds, forty-year-olds, fifty-year-
olds, and more are willing to pay to eliminate or reduce risks faced in some or all of their 
remaining  life-years.  WTP  for  statistical  life-years  would  be  compiled  by  finding  the 
relevant numbers and applying the appropriate discount rate. To be sure, this would be a 
daunting  empirical  task.81  But  in  principle,  it  is  a  conventional  application  of  the 
economic framework. It would also seem to promise greater accuracy than an approach 
that  uses  a  uniform  number  for  statistical  lives.  It  would  be  astonishing  if  that  uniform 
number  accurately  captures  the  WTP  of  people  at  diverse  points  along  the  spectrum  of 
possible ages.82 
 

I  do  not  intend  to  reach  any  final  conclusions  here  about  the  place  of  WTP  in 
regulatory policy. But I do address an evidentiary gap and a possible paradox. The gap 
consists of the absence of evidence of how VSLY varies over people’s lifespans. We do 
not know how much thirty-year-olds are willing to pay to eliminate a 1/100,000 risk of 
losing their remaining life-years, and how that amount compared with the WTP of fifty-
year-olds  to  eliminate  the  same  risk.  If  we  are  interested  in  measuring  actual  WTP,  it 
would  be  surprising  to  find  a  constant  amount  over  the  life-span.  Unfortunately,  the 
relevant amounts cannot be found in the existing literature. 
 

The paradox is the possibility that WTP would actually be higher to protect older 
people  than  younger  people—if  and  because  older  people  are  willing  to  pay  more  to 
eliminate statistical risks than younger people. This is a paradox, because it suggests that 
WTP might be higher to produce lower gains in terms of life-years. One of my goals is to 
explain how and why this might be so. I also suggest that whether for lives or for life-
years, WTP has its strongest claims in cases in which the beneficiaries of regulation must 
also pay for it. Finally, I explore an issue for which the life-years debate can be seen as an 
opening  wedge:  whether  government  should  use  a  uniform  WTP  or  instead  a  highly 
variable  one,  making  numerous  distinctions  according  to  context.  But  let  us  begin  with 
some basics. 
 

A. WTP and VSL in General 
 

Advocates of the WTP criterion urge that as a measure of welfare, WTP has the 
promise  of  administrability.83  While  it  is  not  always  simple  to  calculate  WTP,  market 
measures  and  contingent  valuation  studies  provide  a  great  deal  of  information.  The 
                                                 
81  Note  in  this  regard  that  there  are  complex  relationships  among  risks  and  the  lifespan.  Some  risks,  for 
example, might be constant over the remainder of life, so that a thirty-year-old faces (say) a 1/1,000,000 
chance of death, from that risk, for each of her remaining years. But other risks might be somewhat higher 
or  somewhat  lower  in  later  years.  If  the  calculation  were  to  seek  accuracy,  it  would  use  fine-grained 
numbers about WTP over the lifespan for different risks. Administrable numbers would of course be far 
less fine-grained.  
82 There is a vexing question about how to calculate the VSL or VSLY of children and young people, who 
lack much willingness to pay. See notes infra for discussion and references. 
83  The  point  should  not  be  overstated.  Studies  of  WTP  show  a  great  deal  of  variability.  See  Cass  R. 
Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, 90 Geo. L.J. 2255 (2002) (showing a range from $1 million to $14 
million), and a recent study, based on 1990s data, suggests that the current figure of $6.1 million might well 
be doubled. See W. Kip Viscusi, Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of A Statistical Life (2003), 
available on ssrn.com. (finding values as high as $15.1 million in the case of white males). 

 

20

government has placed heavy reliance on labor market studies, which suggest a WTP in 
the  general  range  of  $6.1  million.84  These  studies  purport  to  show  that  in  the  market, 
people  receive  a  certain  level  of  compensation  to  run  statistical  risks,  revealing  an 
ascertainable  “price”  for  potential  hazards.85  In  ordinary  markets,  there  is  a  market  for 
safety,  with  some  products  (like  Volvos)  receiving  higher  prices  partly  because  they 
reduce statistical risks. People are willing to pay specified amounts for risk reduction. On 
one view, markets provide relevant information about appropriate prices, and regulators 
should draw on that information, refusing to force people to buy more than they would (if 
well-informed).  
 
Of course it is possible to question existing studies on various grounds and to ask 
whether  real-world  data  actually  reveal  people’s  WTP  for  increases  in  safety.86  The 
government relies on twenty-six studies, finding that $6.1 million is the mean of a diverse 
area of figures—an approach that has a large degree of arbitrariness in itself.87 Contingent 
valuation  studies,  asking  people  how  much  they  are  willing  to  pay  for  such  increases, 
might  seem  to  produce  more  reliable  answers,  simply  because  the  answers  to  such 
questions are far less “noisy” than market behavior. But contingent valuation studies raise 
serious problems of their own.88 
 

Let  us  assume  that  these  difficulties  can  be  solved  and  that  existing  studies  can 
indeed  measure  people’s  WTP  for  increases  in  safety.  There  is  certainly  a  connection 
between  WTP  and  welfare.  The  more  that  someone  is  willing  to  pay  for  a  benefit,  the 
more  likely  it  is  that  the  benefit  would  actually  promote  that  person’s  welfare.  But  if 
welfare is our guide, the WTP criterion might be criticized on several grounds. Consider 
a few: 
 

1.  Willingness to pay is dependent on ability to pay. As a result, poor people might 
be unwilling to pay much for a regulatory benefit even though they would greatly 
gain  from  it,  and  wealthy  people  might  be  willing  to  pay  a  great  deal  for  a 
regulatory benefit even though they would receive very little from it.89  

2.  Some  people  lack  relevant  information,  and  hence  they  might  not  be  willing  to 
pay for goods that would, in fact, produce significant welfare benefits for them. 
They might also be willing to pay a great deal for goods that would not, in fact, 

                                                 
84 See Technical Addendum, supra note, at 32 (figure of $6.12 million); Sunstein, supra note. 
85 See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1994); W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Risks to Life and Health, 30 J 
Econ Lit 1912 (1993); W. Kip Viscusi and Joseph Aldy, The Value of A Statistical Life: A Critical Review, 
J Risk and Uncertainty (forthcoming 2003). 
86 See, e.g., William T. Dickens, Differences between Risk Premiums in Union and Nonunion Wages and 
the  Case  for  Occupational  Safety  Regulation,  74  Am  Econ  Rev  320  (1984)  (dividing  workers  between 
union  and  nonunion  sectors  and  using  the  results  to  doubt  the  idea  of  compensating  wage  differentials); 
William  T.  Dickens,  Assuming  the  Can  Opener:  Hedonic  Wage  Estimates  and  the  Value  of  Life,  in  A 
Hedonics Primer for Economists and Attorneys 145 (1992) (generally challenging those estimates); Peter 
Dorman, Markets and Mortality (1996) (same). 
87 Technical Addendum, supra, at 32. 
88 See Peter Diamond & Jerry Hausman, Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better Than No Number, 
8 J. Econ. Persp. 45, 49-52 (1994); Note, Ask A Silly Question, 105 Harv L Rev 1981 (1992). 
89 As we shall see, this point does not justify abandoning WTP in cases in which poor people must pay the 
full cost of the benefit that government is providing, at least if those people are adequately informed. 

 

21

produce significant welfare benefits for them. It is well-documented that people’s 
welfare  judgments  at  time  of  decision  (“anticipated  welfare”)  do  not  always 
match their experience (“experience welfare”).90 

3.  People’s preferences might have adapted to deprivation or injustice.91 Hence they 
might be unwilling to pay anything for goods from which they would benefit. If 
government relies on WTP, it will not engage in actions that might turn out to be 
welfare-promoting.  

4.  As  I  have  noted,  measures  of  WTP  rely  on  hedonic  pricing  or  contingent 
valuation studies that elicit monetary amounts from individuals, with the apparent 
assumption  that  such  individuals  will  be  paying  those  amounts  whether  or  not 
other people are doing so as well.92 But people care about their relative economic 
position, not simply their absolute economic position,93 and hence they would be 
likely to be willing to pay significantly more if they could be assured that others 
would  be  paying  for  the  regulatory  benefit  as  well.  The  reason  is  that  when 
everyone  is  paying  for  the  benefit,  people  can  maintain  their  relative  economic 
position  while  also  receiving  the  benefit.  Because  existing  studies  do  not  take 
account of this point, they might undervalue regulatory protections.94 

I do not intend to come to terms with these problems here; I will bracket the more 
general  challenges  to  WTP  itself  and  assess  the  questions  here  within  the  existing 
framework,  in  which  WTP  plays  a  central  role.  But  it  is  noteworthy  that  actual  agency 
use  of  WTP  does  not  run  afoul  of  most  of  these  problems.95  The  most  important  point 
here is agencies do not give a lower VSL for poor people than for rich people; they use a 
uniform figure.96  
 

B. WTP and Age: Evidence 

 
If WTP is the proper measure of VSLY, it would follow that in order to convert 
life-years into monetary equivalents, regulators should investigate how much people, at 
various  stages  of  life,  are  willing  to  pay  for  years  of  risk  reduction.  In  principle,  WTP 
might  or  might  not  vary  over  the  lifespan;  there  is  no  good  a  priori  answer  to  that 
question.  For  children,  the  elicitation  of  WTP  is  especially  vexing,  because  children 
usually do not have significant assets of their own, and because parental WTP might not 

                                                 
90 See, e.g., Daniel Kahneman and J. Snell, Predicting Changing Taste: Do People Know What They Will 
Like?, 5 J. Behavioral Decision Making 187 (1992); George Loewenstein and David Schkade, Wouldn’t It 
Be  Nice?  Predicting  Future  Feelings,  in  Daniel  Kahneman,  Ed  Diener,  and  Norbert  Schwarz,  eds, 
WellBeing: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology 85 (Russell Sage 1999). 
91  See  Jon  Elster,  Sour  Grapes  (1983);  Martha  Nussbaum,  Women  and  Human  Development  (2002); 
Amartya Sen, Commodities and Capabilities (1985). 
92 See Robert Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative Position, supra note. 
93 See Robert Frank, Luxury Fever (1999). 
94 See Frank and Sunstein, supra note.  
95 See Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are 
Distorted, in Cost-Benefit Analysis 269 (Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner eds. 2001). 
96  See id. Note that it would be reasonable to do exactly that in the context of forced exchanges. Unless 
there is some informational problem, poor people are not helped when regulation forces them to pay $200 
for a benefit that is worth only $50 to them. In such cases, perhaps government should impose regulation 
but subsidize poor people to ensure that they do not have to pay for it. I return to this point below. 

 

 

22

be a good proxy here.97 EPA relies on a single WTP as a default assumption,98 but there 
is no simple theoretical justification for this approach. And perhaps studies would show 
that  older  people  are  willing  to  pay  more  for  each  of  their  remaining  life-years  than 
younger  people  are  willing  to  pay  for  each  of  theirs—so  that  even  if  we  focus  on  life-
years, the “remainder of life” for older people is as high as or even higher than that for 
younger people. Imagine, for example, that people who are 65 and over are not willing to 
pay less to eliminate a life-time risk of 1/500,000 than are people who are 40 and under. 
We  could  speculate  about  different  possible  results  here.  Perhaps  labor  market  studies 
would  show  that  the  value  of  a  statistical  life  steadily  decreases  over  the  life-span99; 
perhaps they would show that VSL steadily increases; perhaps VSL rises to a certain age 
and  declines  thereafter.  On  one  view,  the  right  question  for  purposes  of  policy  is  what 
well-designed studies actually establish.  

 
Unfortunately,  no  studies  provide  clear  answers  to  the  key  questions.  Hence  an 
approach  that  uses  life-years  cannot  easily  translate  the  relevant  figure  into  dollar 
equivalents.  If  government  uses  a  uniform  number—say,  $172,000  per  life  year100—it 
will  not  be  tracking  actual  WTP  if  WTP  varies  across  the  lifespan  and  if  the  program 
protects  people  at  various  ages.  Perhaps  the  uniform  number  captures  the  population-
wide mean and is therefore accurate (enough). But it is possible that within the economic 
framework,  a  life-years  approach  that  uses  a  uniform  VSLY  will  produce  wildly 
inaccurate measures of benefits.  
 

Consider a recent investigation that attempts to resolve exactly that issue.101 The 
study asked respondents in the United States and Canada to state their willingness to pay 
for risk reductions of 1-in-1000 and 5-in-1000. Demographic information was collected, 
so that the authors could hold constant relevant variables (such as health and income). A 
key  finding  is  that  in  the  United  States,  age  had  no  impact  on  WTP.  In  the  1-in-1000 
condition, VSL estimates exceeded $4 million; the estimates were less than half that in 
the  5-in-1000  condition.102  But  in  both  cases,  older  people  did  not  show  a  lower  WTP 
than  younger  people.  For  Canada,  age  generally  had  no  effect,  but  with  one  exception: 
people over 70 were willing to pay about one-third less than others for risk reduction.103 
The authors conclude that in general, their results support government’s “current practice 
with regard to treatment of age,”104 because they suggest that WTP does not vary across 
the lifespan. If this study is correct, then multiplication of the number of statistical life-

                                                 
97  For  an  overview  that  turns  out  to  be  highly  tentative  and  indeterminate,  see  Environmental  Protection 
Agency, Children’s Health Valuation Handbook (2003). 
98 See id. at 3-12-3-13, referring to Environmental Protection Agency, Guidelines for Preparing Economic 
Analyses (2000). 
99 For a result in this general direction, see Viscusi and Aldy, supra note. 
100 See note supra. 
101  See  Anna  Alberini  et  al.,  Does  the  Value  of  a  Statistical  Life  Vary  with  Age  and  Health  Status? 
Evidence 
(unpublished  manuscript  2002),  available  at 
http://www.rff.org/disc_papers/PDF_files/0219.pdf. 
102 See id. at 14. 
103 See id. at 16. 
104 Id. at17. 

the  United  States  and  Canada 

from 

 

23

years  by  a  uniform  VSLY  will  produce  erroneous  numbers,  above  all  because  it  will 
understate the total WTP of older people for their remaining years. 
 

Or consider another study based on labor market data.105 The simple result is that 
older workers require significantly higher, not lower, compensation to accept increase in 
fatality  risks  on  the  job.  For  the  full  sample,  the  estimated  VSL  is  $5.31  million,  well 
within the range of existing EPA figures.106 The authors actually find that VSL increases 
with age, from $7.4 million for workers between 51 and 55, to $10.2 million for workers 
between 56 and 60, to $14 million for workers between 61 and 65.107 The implication is 
that  regulatory  policy  should  give  a  higher  monetary  value  to  statistical  risks  faced  by 
older people. Instead of a “senior death discount,” regulators should use a “youth death 
discount.” If the findings in this study are right, the “remainder of life” is actually worth 
more  to  older  people,  even  though  they  have  fewer  life-years  left.  Any  exercise  of 
multiplication—of  life-years  times  actual  VSLY  across  the  life-span—would  actually 
result in higher numbers for those who are older, notwithstanding what I have said above 
about welfare. Hence a uniform VSLY would produce real inaccuracy. 

 
I do not mean to say here whether the particular findings in these two studies are 
convincing. Other studies find that older people show a lower VSL than younger people 
do.108  This  finding  seems  intuitive,  simply  because  older  people  have  fewer  years  to 
protect. But if VSL does not decline with age, it remains to explain why.109 The simplest 
answer is that older people have less to do with their money and hence lower opportunity 
costs  (unless  the  bequest  motive  is  very  strong).  Because  fewer  years  of  life  remain, 
savings are a lower priority, and older people have less, in general, on which to use their 
resources. But the full story is somewhat speculative and certainly more complex.  

 
A possible contributing factor is wealth itself: If older people have more income 
than younger people, their WTP will be higher, and for reasons that have nothing to do 
with  welfare.  Some  of  the  studies,  finding  no  age  differences  in  WTP,  do  control  for 
income.110  But  they  do  not  control  for  wealth,  which  is  an  important  missing  variable. 
Older people have more savings even if they have lower incomes, and hence the higher 
WTP might reflect a wealth effect. (Recall that wealthy people will show a higher WTP 
simply because they have more money.) There is a complementary explanation. It might 
be that older people have a comparatively high WTP—as high as or higher than that of 
younger  people—because  they  have  fewer  years  left  in  which  to  spend.  Suppose,  for 
example, that people over sixty are willing to pay $100 to eliminate a risk of 1/50,000, 

                                                 
105 See Smith et al., supra note, available at http://www.rff.org/valuinghealthoutcomes/VHO_Readings.htm. 
106 Id. 
107 Id. at 15. 
108 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 50-53. 
109  I  am  assuming  that  well-conducted  WTP  studies  will  not  find  decreases  as  remaining  life-years 
decrease. It is possible, of course, that some such studies will find such decreases, see id., as the studies 
discussed  supra  do  not.  I  am  attempting  in  this  section  to  show  that  even  if  older  people  do  not  show  a 
lower  WTP  to  reduce  statistical  risks,  this  fact  can  be  explained  while  acknowledging  that  other  things 
being equal, a program that provides more life-years is better on welfare grounds than one that provides 
fewer.  
110 See Alberini et al., supra note. 

 

24

whereas people under forty are willing to pay only $75 to eliminate such a risk. It may be 
that  the  younger  people  want  to  use  their  disposable  income  on  other  things,  including 
savings (of less use to the elderly111), whereas for older people, the reduction of risk is a 
high  priority.  In  short,  older  people  have  lower  opportunity  costs.  Unless  the  bequest 
motive  is  powerful,  they  will  be  especially  willing  to  use  what  they  have  to  reduce 
statistical risks. 
 
This possibility is related to another one: The comparatively high WTP for older 
people might reflect the preciousness of the relatively fewer years that remain. Consider 
two questions: 
 

1.  You  are  75  years  old.  How  much  would  you  be  willing  to  pay  to  avoid  a  10 

percent chance of dying one year earlier than you otherwise would? 

2.  You  are  25  years  old.  How  much  would  you  be  willing  to  pay  to  avoid  a  10 

percent chance of dying one year earlier than you otherwise would? 

 

It  is  easily  imaginable  that  question  (a)  would  produce  a  far  higher  WTP  than 
question  (b),  for  respondents  answering  hypothetically,  and  even  more  predictably  for 
respondents  who  are  actually  75  and  25  respectively. It  may well be that  the perceived 
value  of  any  given  year  increases,  for  some  or  many,  when  the  number  of  remaining 
years declines. For people who are 25, the prospect of losing one year of life might not 
loom  terribly  large,  and  for  people  who  are  75,  that  loss  is  probably  a  matter  of  major 
importance. Undoubtedly the different answers are a product of discounting, rational or 
otherwise; but this is not all that is involved. For those with fewer years remaining, each 
particular year becomes all the more valuable. 

 
In  some  cases,  the  absence  of  age-related  differences  in  WTP  might  well  be  a 
product  of  the  contingent  valuation  setting.  Some  studies  of  contingent  valuation  show 
“scope neglect”: people are willing to pay the same to protect 1000, 10,000, and 100,000 
migratory birds.112 The absence of an age effect may reflect a similar phenomenon. It is 
possible that in contingent valuation studies or in market behavior, the number of years is 
“telescoped”  into  a  kind  of  single  unit,  called  “the  rest  of  life.”  Hence  the  amount  that 
people are willing to pay for a 1/500,000 risk of losing “the rest of life” might not much 
vary across the life-span.  

 
It  is  also  possible  that  older  people  are  generally  risk-averse,  and  differences  in 
risk preferences might help account for differences in WTP. Other things being equal, it 
is  imaginable  that  older  people  would  pay  more  to  reduce  an  annual  risk  of  1/500,000 
than younger people would, simply because younger people are more willing to run low-
probability  risks.  According  to  expected  utility  theory,  risk-related  judgments  are  made 
by multiplying the extent of the harm by its probability; but according to prospect theory, 
people  are  generally  risk-averse  with  respect  to  low-probability  risks  of  catastrophe.113 

                                                 
111 The possibility of bequests introduces some complications. 
112 See Daniel Kahneman and Jack Knetch, Valuing Public Goods, 22 J. Env Econ and Mgt. 57 (1992). 
113  See  Daniel  Kahneman  and Amos Tversky, Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk, in 
Choices, Values, and Frames 17, 20 (Daniel Kahneman ed. 2000); for a clear discussion with application to 

 

25

Perhaps  older  people  are,  with  respect  to  such  risks,  even  more  risk-averse  than  the 
population  median.  For  present  purposes,  it  is  not  necessary  to  choose  among  these 
various explanations. My central point is that there are plausible reasons that WTP might 
not decline with remaining life-years. 

 

C. Using WTP? Regulation As Forced Exchange 
 

Now  let  us  turn  to  the  central  question  of  valuation.  I  have  suggested  that 
government should focus on life-years rather than lives. But should life-years be valued 
by  using  WTP  for  them?  My  ultimate  conclusion  is  that  WTP  is,  in  principle,  a  good 
place to start. The case for using WTP for statistical life-years is not weaker than the case 
for using WTP for statistical lives. But there are a number of complexities here, and they 
illuminate some of the virtues and vices of using WTP in general. 

 
Begin  with  the  simplest  set  of  cases:  Those  in  which  the  cost  of  the  regulatory 
benefit is entirely borne by those who are supposed to benefit from it. I suggest that in 
this  set  of  cases,  WTP  is  generally  the  appropriate  measure  unless  an  informational 
problem or cognitive error is distorting people’s assessments.114  

 
To see why, compare two programs: 

A.  Program A would mostly benefit people thirty years old and under. The median 
WTP, for such people, is $50 to eliminate a lifetime statistical risk of 1/200,000.  

B.   Program B would mostly benefit people sixty-five and older. The median WTP, 

for such people, is $100 to eliminate a lifetime statistical risk of 1/200,000.  
 
Suppose that in both cases, the full cost of the benefit would be paid by those who 
receive it. I have argued that the welfare benefit of program A is higher than the welfare 
benefit  of  program  B.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  the  government  should  adopt  a  more 
expensive regulation to implement program A than to implement program B. So long as 
the beneficiaries of both programs would pay their full cost, so long as there are no third-
party effects, and so long as people’s WTP is not distorted by informational problems or 
cognitive errors, government should not impose a cost of over $50 on those who would 
benefit from program A. At the same time, it should be willing to impose a cost of up to 
$100 on those who would benefit from program B.  
 

Under the analysis I am suggesting, government should be willing to impose more 
costly and aggressive regulations in cases in which the anticipated welfare gain (on one 
side  of  the  equation)  is  lower.  Is  this  a  contradiction?  It  is  not.  Consider  two  other 
programs: 
 

 

                                                                                                                                                 
law, see Christopher Guthrie, Framing Frivolous Litigation: A Psychological Theory, 67 U. Chi. L. Rev. 
163 (2000). 
114 Or unless there is a third-party effect. 

 

 

 

26

C.  Program  C  would  eliminate  a  risk  of  1/200,000,  faced  mostly  by  poor  people, 

D.  Program D would eliminate a risk of 1/200,000, faced mostly by wealthy people, 

whose median WTP is $10. 

whose median WTP is $50. 

Under plausible assumptions, program C and program D would produce identical 
welfare gains. In the abstract, there is no reason to think that wealthy people gain more 
than do poor people from the elimination of a statistical risk. But in light of the fact that 
they  have  little  money,  the  payment  of  $10  is  worse  for  poor  people  than  for  wealthy 
people; hence the welfare loss of paying $10 is higher for them. This point explains the 
difference in WTP. Program C might well give its beneficiaries the welfare equivalent of 
program D; but insofar as program C is taking money from those same beneficiaries, it is 
removing  more  welfare,  on  a  dollar-per-dollar  basis,  than  program  D  does.  If  the 
beneficiaries of program C are being asked to pay for it, government should not require 
them to pay more than their WTP. 

 
As  a  general  rule,  the  same  conclusion  applies  to  WTP  over  the  life-span. 
Government should not require younger people to “buy” more regulatory protection than 
they believe to be in their interests. Note here that such protection is, in a sense, a form of 
insurance. If younger people are not willing to pay much for such insurance, government 
ought not to compel them to do so unless there is some kind of informational or cognitive 
problem  with  their  decisions.  Now  it  is  entirely  possible  that  some  such  problem  is  at 
work. Young people might be acting as if low-probability events are worth no concern at 
all, or they might be engaged in a form of hyberbolic discounting for risks that will come 
to fruition in what seems to be the irrelevantly distant future.115 But unless a problem of 
this kind can be identified, WTP is the appropriate measure in cases in which regulation 
is a forced exchange.  

 

D. When the Beneficiaries of Regulation Do Not Pay Its Full Cost, and Regulation 
vs. Transfers 
 
But  it  is  frequently  the  case  that  the  beneficiaries  of  regulatory  protection  pay 
little  or  none  of  its  cost.116  What  should  be  done  in  that  event117?  Here  the  analysis  is 
more complex. To see the problem, suppose that people who are under thirty would pay a 
median of $50 to eliminate a risk of 1/200,000, that the aggregate cost of eliminating that 
risk  is  $55,  but  that  the  beneficiaries  would  pay  only  $10  of  that  amount,  with  the 
remainder  of  the  cost  being  borne  by  others  (say,  consumers  and  employees).  This 
program is, by hypothesis, inefficient, because the monetized costs exceed the monetized 
benefits.  But  it  might  well  be  justified  on  grounds  of  overall  welfare;  to  answer  that 
question, we would need to measure the actual welfare effects of the program (to say the 
least,  a  difficult  task).  In  terms  of  the  welfare  of  the  possible  beneficiaries  of  the 

                                                 
115 See note supra. 
116 This is true for clean air act regulation. See, e.g., See Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air 
Act Regulation, 24 Regulation 34 (2001). 
117  For  an  extremely  valuable  discussion  in  the  related  area  of  employment  law,  see  Christine  Jolls, 
Accommodation Mandates, 53 Stan L Rev 223 (2000). 

 

 

27

regulation, the question is much easier. If they are paying only $10 for benefits valued at 
$50, they are net gainers. It follows that if social planners are particularly interested in the 
welfare of the possible beneficiaries, the program is justified.  
 

But  there  is  an  obvious  response.  To  assist  the  relevant  population,  it  would  be 
better to give them a cash subsidy rather than to provide them with a regulatory benefit 
that is, by hypothesis, less valuable to them than it is costly to those who must provide it. 
And  under  plausible  assumptions,  a  subsidy  would  indeed  be  better  than  a  regulatory 
benefit,  both  because  it  is  more  efficient  and  because  it  is  a  better  means  of 
accomplishing the redistributive goal. In the face of background injustice, or indefensible 
inequality,  the  tax  system  should  usually  be  used  as  a  corrective.118  On  a  widely  held 
view,  regulation  should  involve  maximization;  redistributive  tax  and  spending  policies, 
rather  than  regulation,  should  be  used  to  promote  redistribution.119  The  issue  is 
disputed.120 But if a redistribution is not going to come from tax and spending policies, it 
is certainly possible that provision of the regulatory benefit is preferable to the status quo 
on grounds of both welfare and distribution. Note that a uniform VSL or VSLY is itself a 
kind of redistributive strategy (imperfect to be sure).121  
 

Fortunately, it is not necessary to resolve the hard questions here. If the life-years 
approach  ends  up  valuing  younger  people  more  than  older  people  (because  they  have 
more life-years left), the older people have no claim for special government help. But we 
can  reach  some  more  general  conclusions  about  WTP  and  regulatory  policy.  If  the 
beneficiaries of regulation pay its full cost, and if there is no informational or cognitive 
problem, WTP provides the correct figure. If the beneficiaries of regulation do not pay its 
full  cost,  regulation  might  be  justified  even  if  it  exceeds  WTP.  For  purposes  of  policy, 
one problem is that in many cases, government cannot easily determine how much of the 
cost  of  regulation  is  borne  by  its  purported  beneficiaries.  With  perfect  tools,  regulators 
would have a complete sense of the incidence of regulatory costs, and an understanding 
of  the  distribution  of  benefits  and  burdens  would  be  helpful  in  making  regulatory 
choices.122 But government lacks those tools. The best approach is probably to begin with 
WTP  to  measure  the  value  of  statistical  life-years,  and  then  to  make  distributional 

                                                 
118 See, e.g., David A. Weisbach, Should Legal Rules Be Used to Redistribute Income?, 70 U. Chi L Rev 
439 (2003); Louis Kaplow and Steven Shavell, Why the Legal System Is Less Efficient Than the Income 
Tax  in  Redistributing  Income,  28  J  Legal  Stud  667  (1994);  Steven  Shavell,  A  Note  on  Efficiency  vs. 
Distributional Equity in Legal Rulemaking, 71 Am Econ Rev. 414 (1981). 
119 See Weisbach, supra note; Kenneth J. Arrow et al., Benefit-Cost Analysis in Environmental, Health, and 
Safety Regulation 8 (1996) 
120  See  Chris  Sanchirico,  Deconstructing  the  New  Efficiency  Rationale,  86  Cornell  L  Rev  1003,  1069 
(2001; Chris Sanchirico, Taxes versus Legal Rules as Instruments for Equity: A More Equitable View, 29 J 
Legal Stud 797, 820 (2000). 
121 See W. Kip Viscusi, Risk Equity, in Cost-Benefit Analysis 7 (Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner eds. 
2001);  see  also  Kahn,  supra  note.  In  the  racial  context,  a  uniform  VSL  can  even  be  seen  as  a  form  of 
affirmative action, in the sense that it gives a “boost” to African-American VSL because of a perception of 
past social discrimination. Note that the boost also results in a reduction of white VSL, at least if regulators 
use the median VSL. 
122 Note that in its recent draft guidelines, OMB asks regulators to try to assess the distributional effects of 
regulation.  See  Office  of  Management  and  Budget,  Draft  2003  Report  to  Congress  on  the  Costs  and 
Benefits of Federal Regulations, 68 Fed. Reg. 5521 (Feb. 3, 2003). 

 

28

adjustments  in  appropriate  cases.123  Along  these  dimensions,  the  analysis  of  statistical 
life-years does not differ from the analysis of statistical lives. 
 
 
Of  course  government  does  not  lack  control  over  the  distributional  incidence  of 
efforts  to  protect  safety,  health,  and  the  environment.  Government  might  provide  a 
benefit for free, perhaps by accompanying regulation with a cash payment to those who 
are supposed to benefit. But an analysis of this possibility would take me well beyond the 
present  discussion.124  For  reasons  I  have  given,  older  people,  as  such,  are  not  a  strong 
payment  for  cash  subsidies,  even  if  future  studies  find  that  their  WTP  is  sometimes 
relatively low under a VSLY approach. 
 
E. Uniformity and Disaggregation in Monetary Valuation  

 
Government agencies tend to use a uniform VSL. Proposals for the use of VSLY 
tend to use a uniform number or a number that makes only simple, crude distinctions—
between, say, people under and over 65.125 But we can make some conceptual progress 
here,  and  eventually  practical  progress  as  well,  if  we  recognize  that  if  government  had 
perfect information, and if it could individuate regulatory benefits, its valuations would 
be much more fine-grained. In fact the use of VSLY, as opposed to VSL, can be seen as 
an initial step toward more in the way of individuation. To put the point in the simplest 
terms: To the extent that the beneficiaries of regulation bear its full costs and have perfect 
information,  a  perfectly  informed  government  might  use  a  perfectly  individuated  WTP, 
giving people precisely the level of protection that they deem to be in their interests with 
respect to the risk in question.126 
 

It follows that a uniform VSL, or a uniform VSLY, is not easy to justify. It can be 
supported partly on the ground that government lacks the tools to bring about sufficient 
individuation across either people or risks. We have seen that government does not know 
how VSLY varies across the life cycle. With their various endowments and preferences, 
individuals show a great deal of heterogeneity with respect to statistical hazards. We have 
seen  that  wealthy  people  will  pay  more  than  poor  people;  risk-averse  people  will  of 
course pay  more than risk-inclined people In addition, social risks, even risks of death, 
are  hardly  all  the  same.  Many  people  are  risk-averse  with  respect  to  some  hazards  but 
risk-inclined  with  respect  to  others.  In  deciding  whether  to  be  risk-averse,  numerous 
distinctions might be deemed relevant. People might reasonably distinguish, for example, 
between  a  risk  of  death  from  cancer  and  a  risk  of  death  from  heart  disease,  and  they 
might also distinguish among workplace risks, risks of motor vehicle accidents, and risks 
associated  with  air  pollution.127  If  government  were  omniscient,  it  would  individuate 
regulatory  programs  along  all  these  dimensions.  And  if  regulatory  tools  could  be 
perfectly  individuated,  government  might  provide  every  individual  with  regulatory 
protection that perfectly matched his preferences and hence his situation-specific WTP—

                                                 
123 See Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason (2002). 
124 For some remarks, see Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 
125 See note supra. 
126 I am assuming that WTP is based on informed preferences and that there are no third party effects. 
127 See relevant discussion, see Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk (2001). 

 

29

assuming, again, that people are being forced to pay the cost of that protection.128 There 
would  be  no  single  VSL  or  VSLY;  the  relevant  values  would  be  highly  particular  to 
persons and situations. 

Why,  then,  does  government  rely  on  such  crude  population-wide,  largely  risk-
invariant129  measures?  One  reason  is  that  it  lacks  good  information  about  the  WTP  of 
subgroups; another reason is that for many regulatory programs, it must simultaneously 
protect  large  populations.  In  these  circumstances, a decision to  adopt subgroup-specific 
WTP would be hard to defend unless the program in question would benefit and burden 
mostly  or  entirely  classes  of  people  who  could  be  defined  in  terms  of  those  subgroup 
characteristics. As knowledge grows, it might be expected that less uniform numbers will 
be used in the future.130 I cannot discuss that issue in any detail here, but the shift from 
VSL to VSLY can be seen as a small but unmistakable movement in that direction. 

 

 

IV. Policy Implications 

 
 
I have suggested that on grounds of welfare and equity, it makes a great deal of 
sense  to  focus  on  statistical  life-years  rather  than  statistical  lives.  At  a  minimum, 
regulators  should  have,  and  give,  a  sense  of  the  life-years  expected  to  be  saved  by 
regulation.  The  hard  question  involves  the  translation  of  life-years  into  monetary 
equivalents. The basic claim of WTP is that it provides a (crude but administrable) proxy 
for the welfare effects of various courses of action. Other things being equal, more life-
years provide more welfare than fewer, whatever the results of WTP studies. But if young 
people show a low VSLY, and if old people show a high one, government does people no 
favors by using a uniform number if they are well-informed and if they bear the cost of 
the benefits that are being provided. Because VSLY might vary over the lifespan, there is 
a  risk  that  a  uniform  VSLY  will  produce  significant  errors—possibly,  in  fact,  more 
serious  errors  than  a  uniform  VSL.131  Ideally,  a  government  that  uses  WTP,  and  seeks 
accuracy,  would  inquire  into  WTP  over  lifespans  and  use  varying  VSLY  depending  on 
the ages of the beneficiaries of regulation. Lacking that information, government might 
do best to proceed more modestly and cautiously.  
 
 
We  could  imagine  a  range  of  possibilities.  At  a  minimum,  a  focus  on  life-years 
allows  alternatives  to  be  ranked  in  terms  of  cost-effectiveness:  A  program  that  saves 
10,000  life-years  is  better  than  one  that  saves  4000,  and  more  resources  should  be 
devoted to the former than to the latter. With respect to CBA, the most modest approach 
would  be  purely  informational:  to  calculate  both  VSL  and  VSLY  (using  the  most 

                                                 
128  As  noted,  subsidies  might  be  appropriate  in  cases  in  which  people’s  WTP  is  low  because  of  (say) 
poverty despite the possibility of large gains from regulation. 
129  But  see  the  sensitivity  analysis  in  the  context  of  arsenic,  giving  a  premium  because  of  the  dread  and 
involuntary nature of the cancer, discussed in Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note. 
130 Id. 
131 The reason is that if a uniform VSLY leads to far too low numbers for some people, and far too high 
numbers for others, the multiplication of life-years by the monetary value might produce less accuracy than 
would reliance on a simple, single VSL. Suppose, for example, that the government is choosing between a 
VSL of $6.1 million and a VSLY of $200,000. If young people show a VSLY of $60,000, and if old people 
show a VSLY of $350,000, it is possible that VSL will actually provide a better match to actual WTP.  

 

30

accurate  available  measure)  and  to  inform  the  public  of  the  calculations.  A  mildly  less 
modest approach would be to continue with VSL, but in close cases, to treat VSLY, or 
the  age  distribution  of  the  protected  population,  as  a  kind  of  tie-breaker.  When  CBA 
produces difficult calls, agencies might be told not to act if the benefited class is mostly 
elderly,  but  to  do  so  if  the  benefited  class  is  mostly  young.  On  this  view,  the  age 
distribution would be consulted only if the case were otherwise in equipoise.  
 

The  most  ambitious  approach  would  be  to  abandon  VSL  and  to  use  VSLY 
instead, at least if reasonably accurate numbers are available. On this view, VSL would 
be seen as a crude first step toward the more refined inquiry than VSLY makes possible. 
A  number  of  intermediate  approaches  are  possible.  Perhaps  VSL  would  be  the  basic 
foundation  for  analysis,  but  a  sensitivity  analysis  would  run  the  numbers  with  VSLY. 
Perhaps regulators would have the authority, subject to political constraints, to use one or 
another  number  when  the  circumstances  make  that  decision  seem  reasonable.132  Of 
course any effort to engage in analysis of costs and benefits would be constrained in the 
usual  fashion,  with,  for  example,  permission  to  consider  distributional  considerations, 
especially if poor people stand to lose or to gain a great deal from regulation.133 

 

V. Extensions 

 
 
The  discussion  thus  far  has  been  narrowly  focussed  on  the  choice  between 
statistical  lives  and  statistical  life-years.  But  an  exploration  of  the  relevant  issues  has 
some  broader  implications.  I  explore  three  questions  here:  the  possible  opposition 
between  the  use  of  surveys  to  resolve  hard  normative  questions;  the  choice  between 
QALYs and WTP in regulatory policy; and the possible opposition between welfare and 
WTP. 
 
A. A Tempting Wrong Question 
 

It might be tempting to argue that the choice between statistical lives and VSL or 
statistical  life-years  and  VSLY  should  be  made  not  by  asking  people  about  their  WTP, 
but  by  asking  them  their  preferences  as  between  programs  that  focus  on  VSL  or 
VSLY.134  People  might  be  asked  if  they  believe  that  government  should  treat  each 
averted fatality as no more and no less than one, or if government should instead consider 
the age of those whose lives are saved. If it turns out that people prefer life-years, then we 

                                                 
132 One implication of the present discussion involves the possibility of legal challenges to the decision to 
use either VSL or VSLY, and also to particular decisions about how to measure them. Under some statutes, 
cost-benefit  analysis  is  the  basis  for  decision,  and  in  such  cases,  the  agency’s  calculations  are  subject  to 
challenge. See, e.g., Corrosion Proof Fittings v. EPA, 947 F.2d 1201 (5th Cir. 1991). In light of the present 
state of uncertainty, it would not be arbitrary for an agency to choose either VSL or VSLY, though there 
are plausible challenges to both measures. See Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, supra note, for relevant 
discussion. 
133  See  Robert  Hahn  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Broader  and  Deeper  Cost-Benefit  Analysis?,  U  Pa  L  Rev 
(2002). Note that OMB suggests attention to distributional considerations in its draft guidelines. See Office 
of  Management  and  Budget,  Draft  2003  Report  to  Congress  on  the  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Federal 
Regulations, 68 Fed. Reg. 5521 (Feb. 3, 2003). 
134 For a related survey, see McKie et al., supra note, at 117-127. 

 

31

might  select  appropriate  numbers  by  asking  subjects  to  choose  between  programs  with 
different amounts for VSLY, or by seeing, through surveys, how people value life-years 
over  the  course  of  a  lifespan.  It  might  turn  out,  for  example,  that  people  consider  each 
life-year  as  equivalent  to  (say)  $200,000;  or  perhaps  people  will  value  life-years  at  a 
special  premium  when  the  beneficiaries  are  either  especially  old  or  especially  young. 
Perhaps people do not believe that every life-year counts as equivalent to every other, but 
would prefer to devote special attention to the life-years of those at identifiable points at 
the  age  distribution.  In  any  case,  the  suggestion  would  be  that  policy  should  be  set  by 
consulting not WTP, but instead the public’s judgments about the appropriate values. 

 
This  solution  has  some  intuitive  appeal;  it  seems  responsive,  as  a  democracy 
should be, to citizens’ judgments. Hence this solution has been used as a way of getting 
some  purchase  on  the  normative  issues.135  If  WTP  in  the  market  seems  to  have 
distortions, surveys might seem better, perhaps because they invite people to consult their 
conscience,  not  simply  their  self-interest.  But  this  approach  has  two  fundamental 
problems.  The  first  is  that  people’s  answers  are  highly  likely  to  depend  on  how  the 
questions  are  set  up.  The  second  is  that  even  if  people  do  have  stable  answers  to  such 
questions, it is unclear that those answers have any moral standing for purposes of policy 
and  law.  The  problems  with  surveys,  in  this  context,  suggest  that  surveys  are  not 
likelihood to be a helpful way to solve many normative issues of this kind. 

 
1.  An  analogy.  Consider  the  analogous  question  of  obligations  to  future 
generations,136 a much-disputed problem in regulatory policy.137 A regulatory system that 
attempts  to  track  people’s  preferences  would  try  to  measure  intergenerational  time 
preferences, that is, to elicit people’s judgments about how to trade off the protection of 
current lives and future lives. Hence an important question, asked in many debates about 
the  issue,  is  whether  people  actually  make  such  judgments  and  whether  they  can  be 
elicited. And indeed, an influential set of studies finds that people value the lives of those 
in the current generation far more than the lives of those in future generations.138 From a 
series of surveys, Maureen Cropper and her coauthors suggest that people are indifferent 
between  savings  one  life  today  and  saving  45  lives  in  100  years.139  They  make  this 
suggestion on the basis of questions asking people whether they would choose a program 
that  saves  “100  lives  now”  or  a  program  that  saves  a  substantially  larger  number  “100 
years from now.”140  

 

                                                 
135 See id. 
136 See Shane Frederick, Measuring Intergenerational Time Preference: Are Future Lives Valued Less?, 26 
J. Risk and Uncertainty 1 (2003). 
137  Richard  Revesz,  Environmental  Regulation,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis,  and  the  Discounting  of  Human 
Lives, 99 Col L Rev 941 (1999); Comment, Judicial Review of Discount Rates Used in Regulatory Cost-
Benefit Analysis, 65 U Chi L Rev 1333 (1998). 
138 See Maureen Cropper et al., Rates of Time Preference for Saving Lives, 82 Am. Econ. Rev. 469 (1992); 
Maureen Cropper et al., Preferences for Life Saving Programs: How the Public Discounts Time and Age, 8 
J. Risk and Uncertainty 243 (1994).  
139 Id. 
140 Id. 

 

32

But  it  turns  out  that  other  descriptions  of  the  same  problem  yield  significantly 
different results.141 Here, as in other contexts, it is unclear whether people actually have 
well-formed  preferences  with  which  the  legal  system  can  work.142  For  example,  most 
people consider “equally bad” a single death from pollution next year and a single death 
from  pollution  in  100  years143—implying  no  preference  for  members  of  the  current 
generation. In another finding of no strong preference for the current generation, people 
are equally divided between two programs: one that will save 55 lives now and 105 more 
lives  in  twenty  years;  and one that will save 100 lives  now and 50 lives 25 years from 
now.144 It is even possible to frame the question in such a way as to find that future lives 
are  valued  more,  not  less,  highly  than  current  lives.145  The  most  sensible  conclusion  is 
that people do not have robust, well-ordered intergenerational time preferences.146 If so, it 
is not possible for government to track those preferences, because they are an artifact of 
how the question is put. 

 
The issue of statistical lives or VSL vs. statistical life-years or VSLY is similar on 
this count. It should be easy to construct questions that would yield a preference for VSL: 

 
Government is considering a policy that would count the value of elderly people 
as  significantly  less  than  the  value  of  younger  people.  According  to  one  proposal,  for 
every  dollar  that  most  people  are  worth,  people  over  70  are  worth  53  cents.  Do  you 
approve of this proposal? 

 
We  can  safely  predict  that  most  respondents  would  answer  “No.”  But  it  should 
also  be  easy  to  construct  questions  that  would  suggest  public  disapproval  of  a  uniform 
VS:  

 
Would you favor (a) a program that would save one hundred children from dying 
of a fatal cancer at the age of ten or instead (b) a program that would save one hundred 
and one senior citizens from dying of a fatal cancer at the age of eighty? 

 
We can safely predict that most people would favor (a). In fact I have conducted a 
small  survey  myself,  asking  University  of  Chicago  law  students  whether  they  would 
favor a policy that saves twenty people with a median age of forty or one that saves thirty 
people with a median age of sixty-five. By a majority of about two-to-one (fifty-three to 
twenty-five),  the  former  policy  was  favored.  But  as  in  the  context  of  harms  to  future 
                                                 
141 Frederick, supra note. 
142  The  point  is  stressed  in  Cass  R.  Sunstein  and  Richard  H.  Thaler,  Is  Libertarian  Paternalism  An 
Oxymoron?, U Chi L Rev (forthcoming 2003). 
143 Frederick, supra note, at 43.  
144 Id. at 44. 
145  Id.  at  45.  Frederick  asked  subjects  to  choose  between  two  programs.  The  first  would  become  more 
effective over time, saving 100 lives this decade, 200 lives in the following decade, and 300 lives in the 
decade  after  that.  The  second  would  become  less  effective  over  time,  saving  300  lives  this  decade,  200 
lives  in  the  following  decade,  and  100  lives  in  the  decade  after  that.  Most  people  preferred  the  first 
program, apparently suggesting that future lives are valued more highly. Id. 
146 The absence of robust, well-ordered preferences is a pervasive theme in behavioral economics. See Cass 
R.  Sunstein  and  Richard  H.  Thaler,  Libertarian  Paternalism  Is  Not  An  Oxymoron,  U  Chi  L  Rev 
(forthcoming 2003). 

 

33

generations, highly variable responses should be expected in accordance with the nature 
of the question. It is doubtful that people have stable, well-considered judgments on the 
issue. 
 

2.  Why  the  question  is  wrong.  The  more  fundamental  problem  is  that  people’s 
judgments  on  survey  questions  of  this  sort  should  not  be  determinative  for  purposes  of 
policy or law. Suppose, for example, that a relevant population concluded that it would 
prefer to save one hundred white lives to one hundred African-American lives—or that it 
would  prefer  to  abandon  cost-benefit  analysis  altogether,  finding  both  VSL  and  VSLY 
morally unacceptable. What  kind of  standing would those judgments have? Or suppose 
that existing  generations concluded that  a current life is worth fifty lives in 2080. Why 
would that conclusion count for purposes of policy? What matters is not the fact of those 
judgments, but their legitimacy and their sense. If we care about WTP, it is only because 
WTP is a proxy for welfare, and because welfare deserves (some) moral standing as such. 
But  eliciting  people’s  judgments,  on  future  generations or VSL vs. VSLY, has  no such 
justification.  
 
To  be  sure,  those  judgments  deserve  consideration  and  respect  if  they  are 
reflective. And it is always possible to ask: Who will assess the legitimacy and sense of 
citizens’  judgments?  This  is  a  reasonable  question,  and  it  is  certainly  possible  to  doubt 
the legitimacy and sense of the assessor. But ours is a deliberative democracy, one that 
does not make policy on the basis of opinion polls or snapshots of people’s opinions.147 
Difficult normative questions of this kind might be informed by surveys, but they cannot 
be answered by them. 

 

B. A Brief Note on QALYs 

 
If focussing on life-years is appropriate, then it might be tempting to suggest that 
officials  should  be  concerned  with  quality-adjusted  life-years,  or  QALYs.  The  central 
idea  behind  QALYs  is  that  regulators  should  be  concerned  with  maximizing  the 
aggregate  health  of  the  community.148  To  calculate  QALYs,  regulators  come  up  with  a 
scale that ranges from zero, for death, to one, for perfect health. Adverse health effects 
are ranked in terms of severity, with serious harms (say, a devastating but nonfatal heart 
attack) ranked lower than less serious ones (say, low-level respiratory problems). Some 
government agencies have attempted to assess regulations by calculating the QALYs that 
they save.149 From the public health perspective, it is easy to see the appeal of QALYs. If 
a  choice  must  be  made,  a  doctor  might  reasonably  decide,  for  example,  that  she  will 
perform  a  difficult  operation  on  someone  who  is  thirty  rather  than  someone  who  is 
eighty.  And  if  the  public  health  community  has to allocate  scarce resources, an inquiry 
into QALYs seems like a sensible place to start. 

 
If  government  should  calculate  VSLY,  should  it  also  calculate  the  value  of 
QALYs,  and  then  VQALYs,  and  proceed  accordingly?  I  cannot  answer  that  complex 

                                                 
147 See William Bessette, The Mild Voice of Reason (1996). 
148 See Adam Wagstaff, QALYs and the Equity-Efficiency Trade-Off, 10 J Health Econ 21 (1991). 
149 See Appendix. 

 

34

question  here.  But  we  can  see  that  any  response  must  come  to  terms  with  questions  of 
both welfare and equity. At first glance, an effort to increase the number of QALYs has 
many advantages in terms of welfare; in fact it seems directly connected to the welfare 
goal.  But  in  some  contexts,  the  use  of  QALYs  would  raise  serious  questions  of  equity. 
Suppose,  for  example,  that  regulators  are  considering  two  kinds  of  interventions, 
Intervention A and Intervention B, designed to assist two different groups of people. The 
first  group  consists  of  people  with  extremely  serious  disabilities;  Intervention  A  would 
increase their QALYs. But it would do so only by creating a relatively small increase in 
their  well-being,  raising  them  from  extremely  serious  to  merely  serious  levels  of 
disability.  The  second  group  consists  of  people  with  moderate  levels  of  disability,  and 
Intervention B would raise them to slight levels of disability, in a way that would result in 
significantly more QALYs than Intervention A. If QALYs are our guide, Intervention B 
is clearly preferable, and indeed it is plausible to think that Intervention B would result in 
a larger welfare gain than Intervention A. 

 
Is  Intervention  B  to  be  preferred?  This  is  by  no  means  obvious,  and  for  two 
different reasons. First, QALYs might not be adequately measuring welfare gains in this 
context.  In  the  abstract,  it  is  possible  that  the  welfare  gains  from  Intervention  A  are 
actually higher even if it produces fewer increases in QALYs. Second, Intervention A is 
assisting those who are most severely disadvantaged, and people in that category have a 
claim  on  social  attention  even  if  helping them produces  fewer QALYs  than imaginable 
alternatives.150 Those with especially severe preexisting conditions might deserve higher 
priority  on  equitable  grounds,  whatever  the  QALY  calculus  might  show.  Here  as 
elsewhere, the pursuit of welfare, through regulation, should be undertaken in a way that 
gives  distributional  weights  to  those  who  are  least  well-off.  In  this  way,  the  larger 
philosophical  debates  about  utilitarianism  and  its  limits  find  analogies  in  current  and 
coming debates about regulatory policy. 

 
I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  these  are  fundamental  objections  to  the  use  of 
QALYs. The problem of severe preexisting conditions does not often arise in the context 
of  regulation;  it  is  more  likely  to  occur  in  the  context  of  medical  interventions,  where 
QALYs  have  raised  special  concerns.  There  are  also  hard  questions  about  how  to 
monetize QALYs, even if we decide that we should focus on them. Is the WTP approach 
appropriate  here?  Should  VQALYs  be  calculated  by  multiplying  each  QALY  by  the 
beneficiaries’  WTP  for  them?  We  could  easily  imagine  a  population  (one  of  wealthy 
senior citizens, for example) that would show a high WTP for a few QALYs. We could 
also  imagine  a  population  (one  of  poor  teenagers,  for  example)  that  would  show  a  low 
WTP for a large number of QALYs. At first glance, QALYs are a far better measure of 
welfare gains than WTP in such situations.  

 
But  recall  once  again  the  particular  problems  created  by  forced  exchanges:  If 
those who obtain a large number of QALYs are not willing to pay for them, government 
does them no favors by mandating the purchase. In a case in which people are not willing 
to pay much for a large number of QALYs, government should probably do a great deal 

                                                 
150 See Erik Nord et al., Incorporating Societal Concerns for Fairness in Numerical Valuations of Health 
Programmes, 8 Health Economics 25, 26-27 (1999). 

 

35

of  subsidizing.  My  (tentative)  analysis  of  the  uses  of  WTP  in  the  context  of  statistical 
lives  applies,  in  its  essential  form,  to  the  context  of  QALYs—suggesting  that  here  as 
elsewhere,  WTP  is  a  sensible  place  to  begin,  but  that  there  are  extremely  difficult  and 
unresolved normative and empirical questions here. 
 
C. Welfare vs. WTP 

 
I have suggested that WTP is a plausible starting-place for policy judgments about 
how  to  monetize  statistical  life-years.  But  I  have  also  indicated  that  in  the  face  of  a 
problem  of  information  or  cognition,  the  argument  for  relying  on  WTP  is  greatly 
weakened. It will be useful to explore that possibility. 

 
The most obvious cases are simple: People lack information about the risks that 
they face, and hence they show a small WTP to avoid a risk that is statistically large. Or 
people might have an inflated sense of the likely risk, and show a high WTP to avoid a 
risk that is miniscule.151 A growing body of literature shows a separate point: At the time 
of decision, people often mispredict the welfare effects of one or another option.152 For 
example,  assistant  professors  often  exaggerate  the  effects  of  a  denial  of  tenure  on  their 
well-being  a  year  after  the  decision.153  In  general,  people  overestimate  the  adverse 
consequences of setbacks, to which they are frequently able to adapt.154 In the context of 
environmental and social changes, an empirical study shows pervasive exaggerations of 
likely  consequences  for  quality  of  life.155  It  follows  that  in  some  contexts,  WTP  will 
mispredict  the  lived  consequences  of  choices.  “The  evidence  of  grave  deficiencies  in 
taste  predictions  appears  to  pose  a  significant  challenge  to  many  applications  of  the 
rational-agent model.”156 Some of these deficiencies stem from a failure to appreciate the 
possibility of adaptation to change; some of them are a product of an exaggerated sense 
of the effect any single factor on well-being.157 What I am adding here is that WTP will 
be  a  poor  proxy  for  welfare  in  cases  in  which  we  have  good  reason  to  suppose  that 
underestimation  or  overestimation  are  likely.  Of  course  government  officials  should  be 
reluctant  to  second-guess  citizens,  but  in  some  cases,  the  second-guessing  is  well-
justified. 
 

Consider an example: A reliable contingent valuation study shows that people are 
willing  to  pay  far  more  to  prevent  a  long  cancer  death  than  to  prevent  a  sudden 
unanticipated death, with death from heart disease falling somewhere in the middle.158 As 
it happens, the median WTP for a sudden unanticipated death is half the median WTP for 

                                                 
151 See Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect: Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law, 112 Yale L.J. 61 (2002) 
152 See Kahneman, supra note; Loewenstein and Schkade, supra note. 
153 See Daniel Gilbert et al., Immune Neglect: A Source of Durability Bias in Affective Forecasting, 75 J 
Personality and Social Psych 617 (1998). 
154 See Loewenstein and Schkade, supra note. 
155  See  George  Loewenstein  and  Shane  Frederick,  Predicting  Reactions  to  Environmental  Change,  in 
Environment, Ethics, and Behavior 52, 61-67 (Max Bazerman et al. eds. 1997). 
156 Kahneman, supra note, at 165. 
157 See Loewenstein and Frederick, supra note, at 66. 
158 See George Tolley et al., Valuing Health for Policy: An Economic Approach 342 (1994). 

 

36

a cancer death.159 Must these numbers be decisive for purposes of policy, assuming that 
the contingent valuation study is reliable160? I suggest that they should not be if we have 
reason  to  believe  that  the  WTP  figures  are  not  accurately  measuring  welfare.  And  is  it 
even plausible to think that the “cancer premium” is so high that it actually doubles the 
cost of death? Is it reasonable to think that a death from cancer is actually twice as bad as 
a  death  that  is  sudden  and  unanticipated?  To  be  sure,  a  degree  of  pain  and  suffering 
typically accompanies cancer, but it is not easy to defend the set of (exotic) values that 
would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  relevant  pain  and  suffering  is  as  bad  as  death 
itself.161 I believe that WTP is not measuring welfare here, and that the inflated numbers 
for cancer deaths is a product of an intuitive recoil at the idea of cancer, one that leads to 
unrealistically high monetary values.  

 
Perhaps  this  example  can  be  disputed.  If  so,  consider  the  fact  that  according  to 
some  studies  of  WTP,  a  curable  cancer  is valued at $2.3 million, more than  a third the 
value of a statistical life.162 Suppose that these studies are reliable and that $2.3 million 
really does capture people’s WTP for a curable cancer.163 Is it plausible to think that the 
welfare loss from a curable cancer is more than a third of the welfare loss from death? 
More likely, the frightening idea of “cancer” is driving people’s judgments, in a way that 
leads to a WTP that does not accurately measure the welfare loss from a curable cancer. 
This is an example of a situation in which “decision utility” (anticipated utility at the time 
of decision) does not match “experience utility” (the actual utility of lived experience).164 
There  are  many  other  illustrations,  as,  for  example,  when  people  show  a  high  WTP  to 
avoid an injury that is not so terrible in actual experience.165 In short, WTP is sometimes 
a poor proxy for welfare. Because that issue does not directly bear on the choice between 
VSL and VSLY, I will not discuss it in detail here. But I do suggest that the point holds 
out  a  warning  for  the  use  of  WTP  studies  to  assess  statistical  risks,  especially  in  the 
domain of morbidity. 
 
 
 
                                                 
159 Id. 
160 For an affirmative answer, see Revesz, supra note. 
161 If one believed that death itself is not terribly important, and that pain and suffering matter a great deal, 
then a huge cancer premium might well make sense. And undoubtedly some people have this exotic set of 
values. All I am suggesting is that the people who give the relevant answers in contingent valuation studies 
are most unlikely to endorse those particular values.  
162 See Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic, 90 Georgetown L J 2255 (2002). 
163 Note that WTP is often labile and ill-formed, very much dependent on the context of the question. See 
Cass  R.  Sunstein  and  Richard  H.  Thaler,  Libertarian  Paternalism  Is  Not  An  Oxymoron,  U  Chi  L  Rev 
(forthcoming 2003). I am putting that possibility to one side for now. The general claim here is that even 
when  WTP  is  stable  and  well-formed,  it  might  not  capture  the  welfare  that  comes  from  one  or  another 
option. For relevant discussion, see Kahneman et al., Back to Bentham, supra note. 
164 See Daniel Kahneman et al., Back to Bentham? Explorations of Experienced Utility, 112 Q. J Econ 375 
(1997). 
165 See the discussion in Edward J. McCaffery, Matthew Spitzer, and Daniel Kahneman, Framing the Jury: 
Cognitive Perspectives on Pain and Suffering Awards, 81 Va. L. Rev. 1341, 1354-73 (1995) (experimental 
finding that willingness to pay is systematically lower than willingness to accept for pain and suffering). 
The most important point here is that the experience of an injury is often less bad, because more adaptation 
is possible, than people anticipate in advance. See id. 

 

37

Conclusion 

In  this  essay,  I  have  suggested  that  government  should  focus  its  attention  on 
statistical life-years, not statistical lives. No regulatory program makes people immortal. 
The  only  issue  is  life  extension,  and  here  the length  of the extension surely matters.  In 
terms  of  welfare,  a  program  that  saves  10,000  life-years  is  better  than  one  that  saves 
1,000 life years, holding all else constant. Behind a veil of ignorance, reasonable people 
would undoubtedly prefer a program that eliminates a 1/500,000 risk faced at thirty to a 
program  that  eliminates  the  same  risk  faced  at  sixty.  In  welfare  terms,  a  program  that 
saves younger people is unquestionably better than one that saves older people, holding 
all else constant.  
 
To  be  sure,  there  are  ethical  constraints  on  the  promotion  of  welfare  through 
regulatory  policy.  But  as  a  general  rule,  there  is  no  injustice  in  taking  account  of  the 
difference between the anticipated welfare gain of a program that saves older people and 
the anticipated welfare gain of a program that saves younger people. Older people were 
once younger, and if all goes well younger people will become older. In any case a focus 
on statistical life-years has an important kind of neutrality: It treats everyone’s life-years 
the  same.  I  have  also  suggested  that  the  claims  that  underlie  the  prohibition  on  age 
discrimination do not raise serious moral questions about focussing on life-years. These 
points suggest that in terms of welfare and equity, it is better to attend to statistical life-
years than to statistical lives. If either approach discriminates, it is one that relies only on 
statistical lives, because that approach treats the life-years of older people as worth more 
than the life-years of younger people. 

 
But a choice in favor of life-years leaves open questions of monetary valuation. 
These  questions  are  both  normative  and  empirical  in  nature.  The  usual  debates  about 
WTP reappear in this context. In any case, we do not have good information about how 
WTP changes over the life cycle. Older people may or may not be willing to pay less to 
reduce risks  than  younger  people. Even if older people are willing to pay more to save 
each  remaining  statistical  life-year,  it  is  likely  that  older  people  are  willing  to  pay  less 
than  younger  people,  in  the  aggregate,  to  save  the  number  of  life-years  that  remain.166 
Without resolving the WTP debate, I have suggested several ways that regulators might 
incorporate  information  about  life-years  in  regulatory  decisions.  At  a  minimum,  I  have 
urged  that  information  on  life-years  should  be  compiled,  and  that  it  should  be  made 
relevant to judgments that are otherwise close or difficult. In this way, regulatory policy 
would  be  shifted  toward  somewhat  greater  concern  for  the  risks  faced  by  children,  and 
somewhat reduced concern for the risks faced by those who are elderly—thus making it 
more likely that more people would have a chance to become elderly. 
 
If  the  analysis  here  is  correct,  it  has  two  more  general  implications.  The  first  is 
 
that WTP is a pragmatic tool and no more. Some economists seem to identify WTP with 
welfare itself—an absurd claim that, if taken seriously, would produce both blunders and 
injustices. As we have seen, people’s WTP is sometimes poorly predictive of the welfare 

                                                 
166 See Viscusi and Aldy, supra note, at 50-53. 

 

 

38

effects of one or another option167—a point with general and underexplored implications 
for regulatory policy. The second involves constraints on the promotion of welfare. While 
welfare is indeed the basic goal of much regulation, there are constraints on the pursuit of 
that goal, and these constraints should be specified. Any attempt at specification will be 
controversial. I have suggested, for example, that when people have had bad luck in the 
natural 
to 
disadvantage them further. But however the hardest controversies are resolved, I suggest 
that the constraints do not apply to most regulatory decisions that focus on statistical life-
years.  Regulators  should  calculate  expected  savings  in  those  terms  and  give  the  result 
serious consideration at the point of decision. 

lottery,  government  cannot 

life-years  criterion 

legitimately  use 

the 

                                                 
167  For  a  great  deal  of  relevant  discussion,  see  Well-Being:  The  Foundations  of  Hedonic  Psychology 
(Daniel Kahneman et al. eds. 1999). 

 

39

 

 

Appendix 
 
Regulatory Impact Statements Using Life-Years or Quality-Adjusted Life Years 

 
FDA final seafood HACCP rule (1995). US Food and Drug Administration: Procedures 
for the Safe and Sanitary Processing and Importing of Fish and Fishery Products; Final 
Rule. 60 FR 65095, December 18, 1995. Used monetized QALYs in a primary benefit-
cost analysis; QALYs described accurately. 
 
FDA  final  anti-smoking  rule  (1996).  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  “Regulations 
Restricting  the  Sale  and  Distribution  of  Cigarettes  and  Smokeless  Tobacco  to  Protect 
Children and Adolescents; Final Rule,” 61 FR 44395, August 28, 1996. Used QALYs in 
a primary benefit-cost analysis. 
 
EPA final ozone and particulate standards for outdoor air quality (1997). ADD citation. 
Used life years but not QALYs in a sensitivity analysis of benefit-cost analysis. 
 
FDA  final  mammography  rule  (1997).  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration:  “Quality 
Mammography  Standards;  Final  Rule.”  62 FR 55851, October 28, 1997. Used a 5-year 
survival  rate  approach  when  measuring  benefits,  but  monetized  only  lives  saved,  using 
the value of a statistical life of $5 million. 
 
HRSA  organ  donor  final  rule  (1998).  Health  Resources  and  Services  Administration: 
“Procurement  and  Transplantation  Network;  Final  Rule.”  63  FR  16295,  April  2,  1998. 
Used statistical life years valued at $116,000 per year, but did not use QALYs. 
 
FDA  final  juice  labeling  rule  (1998).  Food  and  Drug  Administration:  “Food  Labeling: 
Warning  and  Notice  Statement:  Labeling  of  Juice  Products;  Final  Rule.”  63  FR  37029, 
July  8,  1998.  Used  monetized  QALYs  in  a  primary  benefit-cost  analysis;  QALYs 
described accurately.  
 
FDA  proposed  consumer 
labeling  rule  (1999).  US  Food  and  Drug 
Administration:  “Food  Labeling:  Trans  Fatty  Acids  in  Nutrition  Labeling,  Nutrient 
Content Claims, and Health Claims; Proposed Rule.” 64 FR 62746, November 17, 1999. 
Used monetized QALYs in a primary benefit-cost analysis; QALYs described accurately. 
 
FDA  final  shell  egg  safety  rule  (2000).  US  Food  and  Drug  Administration:  “Food 
Labeling, Safe Handling Statements, Labeling of Shell Eggs; Refrigeration of Shell Eggs 
Held  for  Retail  Distribution;  Final  Rule.”  65  FR  76091,  December  5,  2000.  Used 
monetized QALYs in a primary benefit-cost analysis; QALYs described accurately. 
 
EPA Tier 2 Rule (date?). 
 
FDA final juice HACCP rule (2001). Food and Drug Administration: “Hazard Analysis 
and  Critical  Control  Point  (HAACP);  Procedures  for  the  Safe  and  Sanitary  Processing 

trans-fat 

40

and  Importing  of  Juice;  Final  Rule.”  66  FR  6137,  January  19,  2001.  Used  monetized 
QALYs in a primary benefit-cost analysis; QALYs described accurately. 

CMS  immunization  standards  final  rule  with  comment  (2002).  Centers  for  Medicare  & 
Medicaid Services, “Conditions of Participation: Immunization Standards for Hospitals, 
Long-Term Care Facilities, and Home Health Agencies.” 67 FR 61808, October 2, 2002. 
Used  $50,000-$100,000  cost  per  year  of  healthy  life  saved  to  monetize  benefits, 
assuming lifespan of 84 years. 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 
 
 

csunstei@midway.uchicago.edu 

 

41

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other 
Unpublished Works:  An Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of 
Custom in the Law of Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 
1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 
1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A 
Quantitative Study (August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical 
Survey With An Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning 
Cartels in Imperial Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing 
Everyone Else Does) (April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial 
Entrenchment, and Firm-Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the 
Japanese Main Bank System (August 1993) 

18.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory 

Adjudication (September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23.  William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
24. 

J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan 
(August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property 
Protection of Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 

25. 
26. 

27. 

42

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 

6. 
7. 
8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

 

David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 
1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime 
Consumption (January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) 
Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations 
from the Fifty Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for 
Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business 
Enterprise (April 1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology 
(November 1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 
J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law 
Regimes: Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences 
Make Good Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost-Benefit State (May 1996) 

41. 

39. 
40.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes 
Over the Ownership of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry 
Concealed Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and 
Economics of Financially Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 

44. 
45.  William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay 

42. 
43. 

(March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: 
Evidence from California=s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to 
the Adoption of Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through 
the Lens of Laissez-Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive 
Damages (with Notes on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  

51.  William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: 
A Citation Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are 
Increasing: The Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  

52. 

28. 

29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 

36. 
37. 

38. 

46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

 

43

Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic 
Analysis of Law (March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are 
Homeowners Better Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to 
Law and Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, 
Police Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Second-Order Decisions (June 
1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, 
Effects on Firm Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional 
Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self-Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women=s Suffrage Change the Size and 
Scope of Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 
1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law 
(November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law 
(November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 
1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A 
AThird Way@ (January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 
1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods 
(February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with 
Particular Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental 
Violations, Legal Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 

72.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 

1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, 
Bombings, and Right-to-Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private 
and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  

53.  

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 

58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 

62. 

63. 

64. 

65. 

66. 

67. 

68. 

69. 

70. 
71. 

73. 

 

44

Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2=s Incorporation 
Strategy: A Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again 
(May 1999) 

76.  William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz 

Collection (May 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want 
Optimal Deterrence? (June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a 
Function of Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial 
Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic 
than Individuals? Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special 
Reference to Law and Economics (September 1999) 
Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost-Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal 
Decisionmaking: The Case of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 
1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal 
Characteristics (November 1999) 

Preferences Are Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and 
Satire (November 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on 
Derivative Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and 
Complexity in Contracts (January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd=s Legacy and Blackstone=s 
Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: 
The Severity Shift (February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with 
Special Reference to Sanctions (March 2000) 

88.  Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost-Benefit Analysis When 

74. 

75. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 

81. 

82. 
83. 

84. 
85. 
86. 

87. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 

95. 

96. 

 

45

97. 

98. 

99. 

Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 
2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann-Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 
2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti-Tax Avoidance Laws (May 
2000, revised May 2002)  

100.  Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
101.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
102.  Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Analysis and Relative 

Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
103. 
104.  Cass R. Sunstein, Cost-Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  
105. 

Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the 
Internet (November 2000) 

106.  Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
107.  Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent 

108. 

System (November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International 
Relations:  A Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 

109.  William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
110. 
111. 

Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 
2000) 

112.  Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious 
Liability, Class Actions and the Patient=s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
113.  William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An 

Economic Approach (December 2000) 

114.  Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
115.  George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital 

(January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 

116. 
117.  Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer 

Finance (February 2001) 

118.  Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) 

119. 

(March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost-Benefit Analysis:  A Positive 
Political Theory Perspective (April 2001) 

120.  Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital 

Age (April 2001) 

121.  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and 
the Conceptual Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 

122.  David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 

 

46

123.  William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? 

124.  Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 

125.  Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The 

Market for Federal Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)   

126.  Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 

(May 2001) 

2001) 

2001) 

127.  Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
128.    Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
129.  Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property 

Transfer (July 2001) 

130.  Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for 

Centralized Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 

131.  Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably 

132. 
133. 

Incoherent Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa  Bernstein,  Private  Commercial  Law  in  the  Cotton  Industry:    Creating 
Cooperation through Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 

134.  Richard A. Epstein, The Allocation of the Commons:Parking and Stopping on the 

Commons (August 2001) 

135.  Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
136. 

Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of 
Property Exemption Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an 
Incomplete Contracts Perspective (September 2001) 

137. 

138.  Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emptions, Worst Cases, and Law 

(November 2001) 

139.  Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? 
Board Connections and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
140.  Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha 

141. 

ASolution@ (February 2002) 
Edna Ullmann-Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation 
(February 2002) 

142.  Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in 

Compaq v. Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 
2002) 

143.  Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation 

and Dispute Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal 
Studies 2002) 

144.  Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended 

Consequences (March 2002, forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 

 

47

145.  David A. Weisbach, Thinking Ouside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law 

146. 

Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success 
or Failure (March 2002) 

147.  Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution 

148.  David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, 

(April 2002, The Antitrust Bulletin) 

Coase Lecture February 2002) 

149.  Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) 
150.  Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving 

Federal Regulation?  Deeper and Wider Cost-Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
151.  Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 

152.  Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 

153. 

2002) 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture:  
What a Difference Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 

154.  William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright 

2003) 

(July 2002) 

155.  Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the 

Government as Insurer? (July 2002) 

156.  Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
157.   Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
158.  Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with 

Notes on Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) 

159.  Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent 

162. 

160. 
161 

and Refusal and the Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for 
Tort and Contract Law (September 2002) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of 
Cooperation on the File-Swapping Networks (September 2002) 
163.  David A. Weisbach, Does the X-Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
164.  Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 
165.  Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
166.  Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 

167. 
168. 

2002) 
Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) 
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget 
(November 2002) 

169.  Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior, Sanctions, and Income Taxation: An 

Economic Analysis (November 2002) 

 

48

170.  Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for 

the Regulation of Public Health (December 2002) 

171.  Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) 
172.  David A. Weisbach, Taxation and Risk-Taking with Multiple Tax Rates 

173.  Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 

(December 2002) 

2002) 

174.  Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the 
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 

175.  Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 
176.  David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of 

Short-Term Assets (January 2003) 

177.  Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come 

with the 1996 Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 

178.  Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecom-

munications: Iowa Utilities and Verizon (January 2003) 

179.  William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright 

Infringement: An Economic Perspective (February 2003) 

180.  Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 
181.  Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 
182.  Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion 

(April 2003) 

183.  Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 

2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 

184. 
185.  Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an 

186.  Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing 

187.  Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 

Oxymoron (May 2003) 

Measures (May 2003) 

2003) 

188.  Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective 

189. 

(May 2003) 
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 
2003) 

190.  Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional 

Protection (June 2003) 

191.   Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life-Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
 
 

 

49

