University of Chicago

Supreme Court Economic Review, Vol. 11 (2004), pp. 171-188

 

On the Psychology of Punishment 
Author(s): Cass R. Sunstein 
Source: 
Published by: 
Stable URL: 
Accessed: 21-12-2015 12:28 UTC

 
University of Chicago Press
 

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3655329

 

 

REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article: 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3655329?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents

 

You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/
info/about/policies/terms.jsp

 

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content 
in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

University of Chicago Press and University of Chicago are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access 
 
 to Supreme Court Economic Review.

http://www.jstor.org

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

On the Psychology of Punishment 

Cass R. Sunstein * 

Are juries rational or irrational? In the context of punitive 
damage awards, jury decisions suffer from serious problems. 
Jurors are intuitive retributivists, in a way that produces de- 
partures from economic theories of punishment. Their deci- 
sions are rooted in outrage, which they cannot easily trans- 
late into dollar terms. The result is a degree of unpredictability 
and incoherence. An understanding of this point casts light 
on several problems with existing institutions and offers 
some clues about how those problems might be solved. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Judgments about punishment are typically a product of outrage about 
the underlying acts.' Inside as well as outside of law, punitive acts 
are undertaken when people have been wronged. When legislators 
penalize misconduct, they are typically responsive to the outrage 
of their constituents. And when juries punish unlawful acts, either 
through sentencing or through punitive damage awards, they are of- 
ten motivated by outrage.2 

In this essay I defend these points, and use them to make two ma- 
* Karl N. Llewellyn Distinguished Service Professor, University of Chicago, Law 
School and Department of Political Science. This essay is a revised version of a paper 
presented at a conference on The Law and Economics of Irrational Behavior at George 
Mason University Law School on Nov. 1, 2002. I am most grateful to participants in 
the conference for their helpful reactions, and to Daniel Kahneman and David 
Schkade, my coauthors on the work discussed here. 

1 Jonathan Baron and Ilana Ritov, Intuitions About Penalties and Compensation in 

the Context of Tort Law, 7 J Risk & Uncertainty 17 (1993). 

2 See Cass R. Sunstein et al, Assessing Punitive Damages, 107 Yale L J 2071 (1998). 

? 2004 by the University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0-226-64593-2/2004/0011-0005$10.00 

171 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

172  On the Psychology of Punishment 

jor claims about the relationship between outrage and legal punish- 
ments. The first is that it is extremely difficult to translate outrage 
into the terms that the legal system makes relevant. Because of the 
difficulty of this task, the legal system risks incoherence in the sense 
of erratic and unpredictable patterns. Precisely because of the unpre- 
dictability of particular awards, these patterns show a kind of irra- 
tionality. The second claim is that when people make one-shot judg- 
ments, as juries typically do, they are likely to produce patterns that 
they themselves would repudiate. The result is another kind of inco- 
herence-incoherence not in the sense of unpredictability, but in the 
sense of patterns that are extremely hard to justify. To that extent the 
patterns are irrational. 

Taken together, these points help to support the Supreme Court's 
extraordinary decision in State Farm Mutual Insurance Co. v. Camp- 
bell,3 in which the Court attempted to discipline punitive awards by 
juries, in part by suggesting that the punitive award should ordinarily 
not be more than nine times higher than the compensatory award.4 
The same concerns about unpredictability and incoherence clarify 
the argument for a number of legal institutions, including the United 
States Sentencing Commission and various institutions entrusted 
with producing workers' compensation awards.5 The same points also 
raise questions about existing practice in many domains, including 
the awarding of punitive damages by juries, the system of civil penal- 
ties by administrative agencies, and compensatory awards in several 
areas of law, involving, for example, libel, intentional infliction of 
emotional distress, pain and suffering, and sexual harassment. I will 
urge that an understanding of the dynamics of outrage casts light on 
problems and potential reforms in a variety of areas of law. 

In making these claims, I will draw on, and attempt to generalize, 
a series of experimental studies of punitive damage awards.6 The re- 
sulting work, much of it highly technical, seems to me to have 
broader implications for a range of issues in both law and politics. If 
punishment judgments are typically a function of outrage, the prob- 
lems found in jury behavior might well have analogies in criminal 
sentencing and administrative fines. If outrage is difficult to translate 

3 123 S Ct 1513 (2002). 
4 Id. 
5 A helpful overview is Price Fishback and Shawn Kantor, A Prelude to the Welfare 

State: The Origins of Workers Compensation (Chicago 1999). 

6 See Daniel Kahneman et al, Shared Outrage and Unpredictable Awards, 16 J Risk 
& Uncertainty 47 (1998); Sunstein, 107 Yale L J at 2071 (cited in note 2); David Schkade 
et al., Deliberating About Dollars: The Severity Shift, 100 Colum L Rev 1139 (2000); 
Cass R. Sunstein et al, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence, 29 J Legal Stud 237 
(2000); Cass R. Sunstein et al, Predictably Incoherent Judgments, 54 Stan L Rev 1153 
(2002). Many of these papers are collected, in revised and abbreviated versions, in Cass 
R. Sunstein et al, Punitive Damages: How Juries Decide (Chicago 2002). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass R. Sunstein  173 

into dollars or years, we might be able to understand seemingly un- 
justified disparities from both agencies and courts, and also to see 
what might be done about those disparities. If people's outrage, when 
faced with an individual case, produces patterns that people cannot 
accept, we might be able to identify serious problems with both civil 
and criminal punishment. In investigating some of these issues, I 
draw throughout on our empirical findings, but in a way that involves 
my own extrapolations, some of them admittedly speculative. One of 
my hopes is that the whole is larger than the sum of the parts. For 
purposes of the present discussion, I will speak broadly and in quali- 
tative terms. Readers interested in numbers and statistical analysis 
might consult the papers from which I draw. 

STARTS 

AND  OUTRAGE:  WHERE 

II.  RETRIBUTION 
PUNISHMENT 
Let us begin with the question of appropriate punishment. On the 
economic account, the state's goal, when imposing penalties, is to en- 
sure optimal deterrence.7 To increase deterrence, the law might in- 
crease the severity of punishment, or instead increase the likelihood 
of punishment. A government that lacks substantial enforcement re- 
sources might impose high penalties, thinking that it will produce 
the right deterrent signal in light of the fact that many people will es- 
cape punishment altogether. A government that has sufficient re- 
sources might impose a lower penalty, but enforce the law against all 
or almost all violators. 

A. Probability of Detection 
In the context of punitive damages, all this leads to a simple theory: 
the major purpose of such damages is to make up for the shortfall in 
enforcement.8 If injured people are 100% likely to receive compensa- 
tion, there is no need for punitive damages. If injured people are 50% 
likely to receive compensation, those who bring suit should receive a 
punitive award that is twice the amount of the compensatory award. 
The simple exercise in multiplication will ensure optimal deter- 
rence. But do people actually want optimal deterrence? Do they ac- 
cept or reject the economic theory of punishment? 

Three simple experiments cast light on these questions.9 In the 

7 See William Landes and Richard Posner, The Economic Structure of Tort Law 160- 

65, 184-85, 223-24 (Harvard 1993). 

8  See A. Mitchell Polinsky and Steven Shavell, Punitive Damages: An Economic 

Analysis, 111 Harv L Rev 869, 870-76 (1998). 

9 See Sunstein, 29 J Legal Stud 237 (cited in note 6); W. Kip Viscusi, The Challenge 

of Punitive Damages Mathematics, 30 J Legal Stud 313 (2001). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

174  On the Psychology of Punishment 

first, people were given cases of wrongdoing, arguably calling for puni- 
tive damages, and they were also provided with explicit information 
about the probability of detection. Different people saw the same 
case, with only one difference: varying probability of detection (by a 
factor of 20). People were asked about the amount of punitive dam- 
ages that they would choose to award. The goal was to see if people 
would impose higher punishments when the probability of detection 
was low. 

The basic finding was clear. o Varying the probability of detection 
had no effect on punitive awards. Even when people's attention was 
explicitly directed to the probability of detection, people were in- 
different to it. In fact, there was a modest increase in awards when 
the probability of detection was high, though the difference was not 
statistically significant. Hence people's decisions about appropriate 
punishment were largely unaffected by seeing a high or low probabil- 
ity of detection. The evident reason for this result is that people focus 
on the outrageousness of the defendant's actions, not on the likeli- 
hood that they will be detected." Now it is possible that altering the 
likelihood of detection could increase or decrease outrage. If a corpo- 
rate defendant was certain to be caught, but nonetheless dumped pol- 
lutants into drinking water, it might seem to be brazen, incorrigible, 
a kind of sadist, entirely deserving of serious punishment. And if a 
corporate defendant engaged in some act in an especially stealthy 
way, showing a real skill at evading the law, people might want to pun- 
ish it especially severely, on the ground that stealth and skill are 
grounds for heightened outrage. But in either case, a high or low like- 
lihood of detection is operating not in the economic fashion, as part 
of a deterrence calculus, but instead as a part of an inquiry into the 
egregiousness of the acts. 

There was something indirect about the first experiment: It showed 
people the probability of detection, but it did not ask them to evalu- 
ate judgments that took probability into account. The second exper- 
iment filled that gap.'2 It asked people to evaluate judicial and execu- 
tive decisions to reduce penalties when the probability of detection 
was high, and to increase penalties when the probability of detection 
was low. People were asked to say whether they approved or disap- 
proved of official decisions to vary the penalty with the probability of 
detection. Strikingly, strong majorities of respondents rejected judi- 
cial decisions to reduce penalties because of high probability of de- 
tection, and also rejected executive decisions to increase penalties be- 

0o See Sunstein, 29 J Legal Stud 237 (cited in note 6). 
11 We will see further evidence of this in Part Il below. 
12 See Sunstein, 29 J Legal Stud 237 (cited in note 6). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass R. Sunstein  175 

cause of low probability of detection. In other words, people did not 
approve of an approach to punishment that would make the level of 
punishment vary with the probability of detection. What apparently 
concerned them was the extent of the wrongdoing, and the right de- 
gree of moral outrage rather than optimal deterrence. 

A third study was the most direct of all.'13 This study asked people 
to undertake a deterrence calculus, based squarely on the compensa- 
tory award and the probability of detection. All the necessary infor- 
mation was placed before jurors. The result was that people did not 
successfully perform the elementary calculations. Errors were perva- 
sive. From this experiment, it is not entirely clear whether people 
erred because they were unable to do what they were asked, or be- 
cause they refused to do it, on the ground that it ran afoul of their 
moral convictions. But in either case, it is clear that people do not 
spontaneously think in terms of optimal deterrence, and indeed, they 
will fail to do so even if specifically requested to engage in that task. 

The most general conclusion is that people are intuitive retribu- 
tivists. Their moral intuitions are inconsistent with the economic 
theory of deterrence. Those intuitions are grounded in outrage. 

B. Pointless Punishment? 
Other studies support these findings. For example, Baron and Ritov 
studied people's judgments about penalties in tort cases involving 
harms resulting from the use of vaccines and birth control pills.'4 In 
one case, subjects were told that the result of a higher penalty would 
be to make companies try harder to make safer products. In an adja- 
cent case, subjects were told that the consequence of a higher penalty 
would be to make the company more likely to stop making the prod- 
uct, with the result that less safe products would be on the market. 
Most subjects, including a group of judges, gave the same penalties in 
both cases. 

A related study found no reduction in penalty even when subjects 
were told that the amount of the penalty would have no effect on fu- 
ture behavior-because the penalty was secret, the company had in- 
surance, and the company was about to go out of business.15 This 
in 
study strongly suggests that punishment judgments are retributive 
character, not tailored to consequentialist goals. 

Another test of punishment judgments asked subjects, including 
both judges and legislators, to choose penalties for dumping hazardous 

13 See Viscusi, 30 J Legal Stud 313 (cited in note 9). 
14 Baron, 7 J Risk & Uncertainty 17 (cited in note 1). 
1s See id. 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

176  On the Psychology of Punishment 

waste.16 In one case, the penalty would make companies try harder to 
avoid waste. In another, the penalty would lead companies to cease 
making a beneficial product. Most people did not penalize companies 
differently in the two cases. Perhaps most strikingly, people preferred 
to require companies to clean up their own waste, even if the waste 
did not threaten anyone, instead of spending the same amount to 
clean up far more dangerous waste produced by another, now-defunct 
company. These studies indicate that when assessing punishment, 
people's judgments are rooted in outrage; they do not focus solely on 
social consequences, at least not in any simple way. 

C.  Cost-Benefit Analysis 
A related test of punitive intuitions attempted to explore whether ju- 
rors would punish or reward companies that conducted a competent 
cost-benefit analysis before proceeding."7 The test asked people to as- 
sess different scenarios involving safety precautions. In some of them, 
the company did no explicit cost-benefit analysis, but simply con- 
cluded that the company "thought that there might be some risk 
from the current design, but did not believe it would be significant." 
In other scenarios, companies engaged in cost-benefit analysis, with 
varying amounts used to value life (from $800,000 to $4 million). The 
key question is this: Will people reward or punish companies that 
have explicitly weighed costs against benefits? 

The answer is that people do not react favorably to this kind of 
weighing.'" A company that engages in cost-benefit balancing is very 
likely to face a punitive award, and the award that it faces is likely to be 
high. In fact, companies that place a high monetary value on human 
life are likely to face especially high awards. By contrast, people do not 
much punish companies that are willing to impose a risk on people.'9 
There is a real oddity here: If the costs of precautions outweigh the 
benefits, then companies should not, under ordinary understandings, 
be deemed negligent at all. If jurors are punishing companies in such 
circumstances, it must be because of a kind of moral outrage that has 
little to do with either efficiency or law.20 And why are awards espe- 
16 Jonathan Baron, R. Gowda, and Howard Kunreuther, Attitudes toward Managing 
Hazardous Waste: What Should be Cleaned Up and Who Should Pay for It, 13 Risk 
Analysis 183 (1993); 

17 See W. Kip Viscusi, Corporate Risk Analysis: A Reckless Act?, 52 Stan L Rev 

547 (2000). 
18 See id. 
19 See id; see also Philip Tetlock, Coping With Tradeoffs, in Elements of Reason: 

Cognition, Choice, and the Bounds of Rationality 239 (Cambridge, 2000). 

20 What underlies these judgments? I cannot fully answer that question here. But a 
careful look raises the possibility that people are outraged by any explicit decision to 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass R. Sunstein  177 

cially high when companies place a high value on human life? The 
most likely answer is that jurors have a difficult time in coming up 
with dollar amounts to punish misconduct and that a high value op- 
erates as an anchor, leading to high punitive judgments.21 This point 
directly bears on the problem of translating moral judgments into 
monetary terms, to which I will shortly turn. 

Is it irrational to root punishment judgments in outrage? There is 
no simple answer. Many distinguished observers have argued in favor 
of retributive conceptions of punishment, and there is a clear con- 
nection between retribution and outrage.22 To the extent that people 
are using a kind of "outrage heuristic," they cannot be shown to be 
making the sorts of errors to which ordinary heuristics sometimes 
lead them.23 On the other hand, it is possible to worry about the po- 
tentially harmful social consequences of a system of punishment 
that is rooted in outrage. I share that worry; but to those who believe 
in the rationality of outrage, or in retribution generally, the issue can- 
not be resolved without a complex normative argument. If we have ir- 

trade money for risks. When they are generalizing from a set of moral principles that 
are generally sound, and even useful, but that work poorly in some cases. Consider the 
following moral principle: Do not knowingly cause a human death. People disapprove 
of companies that fail to improve safety when they are fully aware that deaths will re- 
sult-whereas people do not disapprove of those who fail to improve safety while ap- 
pearing not to know, for certain, that deaths will ensue. When people object to risky 
action taken after cost-benefit analysis, it seems to be partly because that very analysis 
puts the number of expected deaths squarely "on screen." Companies that fail to do 
such analysis, but that are aware that a risk exists, do not make clear, to themselves or 
to jurors, that they caused deaths with full knowledge that this was what they were go- 
ing to do. People disapprove, above all, of companies that cause death knowingly. I sug- 
gest, then, that a genuine heuristic is at work, one that imposes moral condemnation 
on those who knowingly engage in acts that will result in human deaths. The problem 
is that it is not always unacceptable to cause death knowingly, at least if the deaths are 
relatively few and an unintended byproduct of generally desirable activity. If govern- 
ment allows new highways to be built, it will know that people will die on those high- 
ways; if government allows new power plants to be built, it will know that some people 
will die from the resulting pollution; if companies produce tobacco products, and if 
government does not ban those products, hundreds of thousands of people will die; the 
same is true for alcohol. Much of what is done, by both industry and government, is 
likely to result in one or more deaths. Of course, it would make sense in most or all of 
these domains, to take extra steps to reduce risks. But that proposition does not sup- 
port the implausible claim that we should disapprove, from the moral point of view, of 
any action taken when deaths are foreseeable. 

21 See Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics, U Chi L Rev (forthcoming 2002). 
22 See David Owen, The Moral Foundations of Punitive Damages, 40 Ala L Rev 705 
(1989); Marc Galanter and David Luban, Poetic Justice, 42 Am U L Rev 1393 (1993); 
Jean Hampton, The Retributive Idea, in Jean Hampton and Jeffrie Murphy, Forgiveness 
and Mercy 111 (Cambridge 1988). 

3 The key papers can be found in Daniel Kahneman, Paul Slovic, and Amos Tver- 

sky, eds, Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases (Cambridge 1982). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

178  On the Psychology of Punishment 

rationality here, it is not irrationality in any simple sense. But for the 
legal system, the use of outrage does lead to serious problems, as we 
shall now see. 

PROBLEM 

III.  THE  TRANSLATION 
Punitive judgments are rooted in outrage; but do people agree about 
the appropriate level of outrage? Imagine that diverse Americans are 
confronted with a case of clear wrongdoing. Should we expect a sharp 
divergence if they are asked to answer, on a bounded numerical scale, 
"how bad was the underlying conduct?" I now offer evidence sug- 
gesting that people's outrage is widely shared, but that the consensus 
breaks down when people are asked to translate their outrage into 
dollars. The Supreme Court's evident concern about arbitrary puni- 
tive awards24 has a sound basis in the psychology of punishment, as 
we shall now see. 

A. Shared Outrage 
A series of studies of citizen judgments demonstrates that at least in 
some domains, people agree about the degree of outrage that appro- 
priately fits social misconduct.25 At least if people use a bounded 
scale (of, say, 0 to 6 or 0 to 8) with accompanying verbal descriptions 
("not at all outrageous" for 0 and "extremely outrageous" for 6 or 8), 
a high degree of social agreement is likely. In personal injury cases, 
the judgment of any particular group of six is likely to provide a good 
prediction of the judgment of any other group of six. In this sense, a 
"moral judgment" jury is indeed able to serve as the conscience of 
the community. 

In one study, people were asked to assess the outrageousness of the 
defendant's conduct on a bounded scale, and separately to say how 
much the defendant should be punished on that scale. Two striking 
facts emerged. The first was an extraordinary degree of correlation be- 
tween judgments of outrageousness and judgments about appropriate 
punishment-a finding that confirms the suggestion in Part I that 
punishment judgments are rooted in outrage.26 The second was a high 
degree of regularity in both sets of judgments, so that people tend to 
rank and to rate diverse cases in essentially the same way. At least in 
a set of highly varying personal injury cases, people's punishment 
judgments do not significantly diverge, and the assessment of one 
jury is a good predictor of the assessment of another. 

24 State Farm Mut Ins Co v. Campbell, 123 S. Ct. 1513 (2002). 
25 See Sunstein, 107 Yale L J at 2071 (cited in note 2); Schkade, 100 Colum L Rev at 

1139 (cited in note 6). 

26 See Sunstein, 107 Yale L J at 2071 (cited in note 2). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass R. Sunstein  179 

Indeed we can go further. Members of different demographic groups 
show considerable agreement about how to rank and rate personal in- 
juries cases.27 Thousands of people were asked to rank and rate cases. 
Information was elicited about the demographic characteristics of all 
of those people. As a result, it is possible, with the help of the com- 
puter, to put individuals together, so as to assemble all-male juries, all- 
female juries, all-white juries, all-African-American 
juries, all-poor 
juries, all-rich juries, all-educated juries, all less-educated juries, and 
so forth. Creating "statistical juries" in this way, there were no sub- 
stantial disagreements, in terms of rating or ranking, within any group. 
In personal injury cases, people largely agree with one another. 

Subsequent work has broadened this finding, showing that people 
agree on how to rank tax violations, environmental violations, and 
occupational safety and health violations.28 From this evidence, it 
seems reasonable to hypothesize that in a wide range of domains, 
people will agree how to rank and rate cases. The moral norms within 
a heterogeneous culture are, to that extent, widely shared, and strik- 
ingly so. Now this does not mean that people will agree on how to 
rank cases from different categories (a point to which I will return). 
Nor does it mean that small groups will always agree on how to do the 
ranking. Nor does it mean that demographically diverse groups will 
agree about how to rate cases in contentious areas of the law-con- 
sider sexual harassment or racial discrimination. But the findings do 
suggest that within category, disagreement about both outrage and 
punishment is the exception, not the rule. 

B. Erratic Dollar Awards 
There is a consensus about the appropriate level of outrage. But even 
when that consensus exists, there is no consensus about appropriate 
punishment in terms of dollars. As we shall see, the reason for the 
lack of consensus lays in particular properties of the dollar scale. The 
scale of years in jail, used for criminal punishment, suffers from sim- 
ilar problems. 

With respect to dollars, both individuals and jury-size groups are 
all over the map.9 Even when moral rankings are shared-as they 
generally are-dollar awards are extremely variable. A group that 
awards a "5," for defendant's misconduct, might give a dollar award of 
$500,000, or $2 million, or $10 million. A group that awards a "7" 
might award $1 million, or $10 million, or $100 million. In fact, there 

27 Id. 
28 See Cass R. Sunstein et al., Legal Coherence and Incoherence (unpublished man- 

29 See Sunstein, 107 Yale L J at 2071 (cited in note 2); Schkade, 100 Colum L Rev at 

uscript, 2001). 

1139 (cited in note 6). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

180  On the Psychology of Punishment 

is so much noise, in the dollar awards, that differences cannot be con- 
nected with demographic characteristics. It is not as if one group- 
whites for example-give predictably different awards from another- 
say African-Americans or Hispanics. We cannot show systematic dif- 
ferences between young and old, men and women, well-educated 
and less well-educated. The real problem is that dollar awards are 
quite unruly, from one individual to another and from one small group 
to another. 

C. Why Are Awards Erratic? 
These findings raise an obvious question: why are erratic dollar 
awards found amidst shared moral judgments? The best answer in- 
volves the problem of translating outrage into dollars. More particu- 
larly, the answer is that the effort to "map" moral judgments onto 
dollars is an exercise in "scaling without a modulus."30 In psychology, 
it is well known that serious problems will emerge when people are 
asked to engage in a rating exercise on a scale that is bounded at the 
bottom but not at the top, and when they are not given a "modulus" 
by which to make sense of various points along the scale. For ex- 
ample, when people are asked to rate the brightness of lights, or the 
loudness of noises, they will not be able to agree if no modulus is sup- 
plied and if the scale lacks an upper bound. But once a modulus is 
supplied, agreement is substantially improved. Or if the scale is given 
an upper bound, and if verbal descriptions accompany some of the 
relevant points, people will come into accord with one another. 

The upshot is that much of the observed variability with punitive 

damage awards-and in all likelihood with other damage awards too- 
does not come from differences in levels of outrage. It comes from 
variable, and inevitably somewhat arbitrary, "moduli" selected by in- 
dividual jurors and judges. If the legal system wants to reduce the 
problem of different treatment of the similarly situated, it would do 
well to begin by appreciating this aspect of the problem. The point ap- 
plies to many legal problems, including criminal sentences, pain and 
suffering awards, administrative penalties, and damages for libel, sex- 
ual harassment, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. In 
these areas as well, those entrusted with the task of "mapping" lack 
a modulus with which to discipline their decisions. An empirical 
study of pain and suffering awards finds that no less than forty per- 
cent of the variance cannot be explained by differences in case char- 
acteristics.31 A legal system that does not give guidance for "map- 

30 Schkade, 100 Colum L Rev at 1139 (cited in note 6). 
31 David Leebron, Final Moments: Damages for Pain and Suffering Prior to Death, 

64 NYU L Rev 256 (1989). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass R. Sunstein  181 

ping" is bound to create similar problems in other areas. Indeed, the 
rise of guidelines for criminal sentencing can be understood as re- 
sponsive, at least in part, to exactly this problem. 

D.  The Effects of Deliberation 

The study just described involved individual judgments, aggregated, 
with the aid of the computer, so as to produce statistical jurors. A sub- 
sequent study tested the effects of deliberation on both punitive in- 
tentions and dollar judgments.32 The study involved about 3000 jury- 
eligible citizens; its major purpose was to determine how individuals 
would be influenced by seeing and discussing the punitive intentions 
of others. To test the effects of deliberation on punitive intentions, 
people were asked to record their individual judgments privately, on a 
bounded scale, and then to join six-member groups to generate unan- 
imous "punishment verdicts." Hence, subjects were asked to record, 
in advance of deliberation, a "punishment judgment" on a scale of 0 
to 8, where 0 indicated that the defendant should not be punished at 
all, and 8 indicated that the defendant should be punished extremely 
severely. After the individual judgments were recorded, jurors were 
asked to deliberate to a unanimous "punishment verdict." 

Two findings are especially important. First, deliberation made the 
lower punishment ratings decrease, when compared to the median of 
pre-deliberation judgments of individuals-while deliberation made 
the higher punishments ratings increase, when compared to that same 
median. When the individual jurors favored little punishment, the 
group showed a "leniency shift," meaning a rating that was system- 
atically lower than the median predeliberation rating of individual 
members.33 But when individual jurors favored strong punishment, the 
group as a whole produced a "severity shift," meaning a rating that was 
systematically higher than the median predeliberation rating of indi- 
vidual members.34 When the median juror judgment was less than 
four, the jury's verdict was below the median judgment of individuals.35 
The second important finding is that dollar awards of groups were 
systematically higher than the median of individual group mem- 
bers-so much so that in 27% of the cases, the dollar verdict was as 
high as, or higher than, that of the highest individual judgment, pre- 
deliberation. The basic result is that deliberation causes awards to in- 
crease, and it causes high awards to increase a great deal. The effect of 
deliberation, in increasing dollar awards, was most pronounced in the 

32  Schkade, 100 Colum L Rev 1139 (cited in note 6). 
33 Id. at 1152, 1154-55. 
34 Id. 
35 Id. 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

182  On the Psychology of Punishment 

case of high awards. For example, the median individual judgment, in 
a case involving a defective yacht, was $450,000, whereas the median 
jury judgment, in that same case, was $1,000,000.36 But awards 
shifted upwards for low awards as well.37 

These findings create many puzzles. For present purposes, the key 
point is that the translation problem is not cured by deliberating bod- 
ies. On the contrary, the problem of unpredictability is increased, not 
decreased, by the existence of deliberation. If we are seeking an ex- 
planation for the movements that are observed, the best answer lies 
in the phenomenon of group polarization.38 This is the pervasive pro- 
cess by which group members end up in a more extreme position in 
line with the predeliberation tendencies of group members. It is pre- 
dicted, according to group polarization, that high levels of outrage 
will be increased by deliberation, and that low levels of outrage will 
be decreased by deliberation. Nor do such movements present any 
real puzzles for rationality. A central reason for group polarization in- 
volves the exchange of information within the group. In a group that 
favors a high punishment rating, group members will make many ar- 
guments in that direction, and relatively few the other way. Speaking 
purely descriptively, the group's "argument pool" will be skewed in 
the direction of severity. Group members, listening to the various ar- 
guments, will naturally move in that direction. 

In the context of actual dollar awards by juries, a particular finding 
deserves emphasis.39 As I have noted, the highest awards increased by 
the largest amount, but all awards increased. This might appear to be 
a surprise. An understanding of group polarization might suggest that 
low awards would drop and high awards would be raised, with the dif- 
ference pivoting around some neutral point, say, $60,000. But this 
is not what was observed. Why did dollar awards systematically in- 
crease? A possible explanation, consistent with group polarization, is 
that any positive median award suggests a predeliberation tendency 
to punish, and deliberation aggravates that tendency by increasing 
awards. But even if correct, this explanation seems insufficiently spe- 
cific. The striking fact is that those arguing for higher awards seem 
to have an automatic "rhetorical advantage" over those arguing for 
lower awards. A subsequent study of supported this finding, suggest- 
ing that given prevailing social norms, people find it much easier to 
defend higher awards against corporate defendants than the oppo- 
site.40 If this is so, then processes of deliberation will naturally lead 

36 Id. at 1152. 
37 Id. 
38 See Roger Brown, Social Psychology: The Second Edition (Simon & Schuster 1990). 
39 See Schkade, 100 Colum L Rev 1139 at 1149-1151 (cited in note 6). 
40 Id at 1161-62. 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass R. Sunstein  183 

to jury awards that are systematically higher than the award of the 
median individual member in advance of deliberation. 

My major goal here, however, is not to investigate the sources of 
movements in awards, but to suggest that group deliberation does not 
solve the translation problem. Deliberating juries, no less than sta- 
tistical juries, show a high degree of consensus about appropriate 
punishment (and hence outrage). Deliberating juries, even more than 
statistical juries, show a high degree of variability in terms of appro- 
priate dollar awards. 

PUNISHMENT, 

AND  CONTEXT 

IV.  OUTRAGE, 
I now turn to the largest puzzles of all. Thus far, it has seemed as if 
people's moral judgments are quite stable. But that proposition was 
established only by looking at a set of personal injury cases. Here the 
relevant level of outrage is both predictable and coherent, in the sense 
that people's judgments are not much affected by whether they are 
seeing cases in isolation or simultaneously and in the context of 
other cases from the same category. But is this coherence maintained 
when people look at cases from different categories? Suppose, for ex- 
ample, that people are evaluating personal injury cases and cases in- 
volving commercial fraud, and that similar people are evaluating per- 
sonal injury cases and cases involving rape and murder. Would the 
judgments about personal injury cases remain stable across these var- 
ious contexts? Are judgments about cases different, depending on 
whether those cases are seen in isolation or in the context of cases 
from other categories? 

We do not have full answers to these questions; but suggestive ev- 
idence has started to emerge.41 It appears that people agree on how to 
rank cases within categories and that their judgments about particu- 
lar cases are not affected by seeing them in isolation or alongside other 
cases within the same categories.42 It also appears that people have a 
kind of implicit ranking of categories themselves; they think that 
murder is worse than rape, that rape is worse than assault, and that 
assault is worse than libel. But when people are trying to rank cases 
from different categories, they have far more difficulty, in the sense 
that they are unsure exactly what to do. They are not certain, for ex- 
ample, whether a relatively bad income tax violation is worse than a 
relatively not-so-bad occupational safety and health violation.43 This 
lack of certainty translates into a lack of consensus. People agree 

41 See Sunstein, 54 Stan L Rev 1153 (cited in note 6). 
42 See Sunstein, 107 Yale L J at 2071 (cited in note 2). 
43 See Sunstein, Legal Coherence and Incoherence (cited in note 25). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

184  On the Psychology of Punishment 

much more on how to rank cases within a category than how to rank 
cases across categories. Note that I am putting aside the evident dif- 
ficulties in deciding what counts as a "category." It is easy to design 
experiments in which people will simply disagree about whether, 
for example, a comparatively serious tax violation is worse, or less 
bad, than a lawless act that harms the environment. Hence, the so- 
cial norms that govern cross-category comparisons are not as widely 
shared as the social norms that govern within-category comparisons. 
It follows that judgments about outrage, and about appropriate pun- 
ishment, are more variable across categories than within categories. 
Perhaps this is not big news. A more striking finding is that people's 
judgments about cases, taken one at a time, are very different from 
their judgments about the same cases, taken in the context of a prob- 
lem from another category.44 For example, people were asked to assess 
a case involving a personal injury, on a bounded punishment scale and 
also on a dollar scale. People were also asked to assess a case involv- 
ing financial injury, on a bounded punishment scale and also on a 
dollar scale. The financial injury involved relatively egregious mis- 
conduct, such as a violation of trust by a trustee, for the benefit of a 
favored client; the personal injuries were relatively less egregious, 
such as an injury caused to a driver when a steering system failed. The 
basic goal was to ask people to assess, in isolation but then in com- 
parison, a financial injury case that would seem outrageous for its 
type, and a personal injury case that would seem less outrageous for 
its type. 

Here is what emerged.45 When each of the two cases is judged in 
isolation, the financial injury case receives a more severe punishment 
rating and a higher dollar award. But when the two cases are seen to- 
gether, there is a significant judgment shift, in which people try to en- 
sure that the financial award is not much higher, and for many re- 
spondents is lower, than the personal injury award. The upshot is that 
people's decisions about the two cases are very different, depending 
on whether they see the case alone or in the context of a case from an- 
other category.46 

Exactly the same kind of shift was observed for judgments about 
two problems calling for government regulation and expenditures: re- 
search on bone marrow cancer among the elderly and protection of 
coral reefs by banning of cyanide fishing.47 Looking at the two cases 
in isolation, people are willing to pay about the same to protect coral 
reefs, and register more satisfaction, on a bounded scale, from doing 

"44 See Sunstein, 54 Stan L Rev at 1173-1178 (cited in note 6). 
4.  Id at 1176. 
46 Id. 
47 Id at 1176-1177. 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass R. Sunstein  185 

that. But looking at the two cases together, people will be quite dis- 
turbed at this pattern, and will want to pay significantly more to pro- 
tect elderly people from cancer and will also register more satisfac- 
tion from doing that. Here too there is a significant shift in judgment. 
In these findings, the translation problem is not the source of the 
difficulty. People's evaluations shift depending on whether they see 
cases in isolation or in the context of cases from other categories. 
What accounts for these shifts? Let me offer a preliminary account. 
When people see a case in isolation, they naturally normalize it by 
comparing it to a set of comparison cases that it readily calls up. If 
people are asked whether a German Shepherd is big or small, they are 
likely to respond that it is big; if they are asked whether a Volkswa- 
gen Bug is big or small, they are likely to respond that it is small. But 
people are well aware that a German Shepherd is smaller that a Volks- 
wagen bug. People answer as they do because a German Shepherd is 
compared with dogs, whereas a Volkswagen Bug is compared with 
cars. So far, so good; in these cases, everyone knows what everyone 
else means. We easily normalize judgments about size, and the nor- 
malization is mutually understood. Another example is John Stock- 
ton, who is about six feet tall, and hence a small basketball player. 
is innocuous. It does not 
What happens, in ordinary communication, 
breed error or confusion. 

In the context of legally relevant moral judgments, something sim- 
ilar happens, but it is far from innocuous. When evaluating a case in- 
volving financial injury, people apparently normalize the defendant's 
conduct by comparing it with conduct in other cases from the same 
category. They do not easily or naturally compare that defendant's 
conduct with conduct from other categories. Because of the natural 
comparison set, people are likely to be quite outraged by the miscon- 
duct, if it is far worse than what springs naturally to mind. The same 
kind of thing happens with the problem of bone marrow cancer among 
the elderly. People compare that problem with other similar prob- 
lems, and conclude that it is not so serious, within the category of 
health-related or cancer-related problems. The same is true with per- 
sonal injury cases (normalized against other personal injury cases) 
and problems involving damage to coral reefs (normalized against 
other cases of ecological harm). 

When a case from another category is introduced, this natural pro- 
cess of comparison is disrupted. Rather than comparing a cancer case 
involving the elderly with other cancers, or other human health risks, 
people see that it must be compared with ecological problems, which 
(in most people's view) have a lesser claim to public resources. Rather 
than comparing a financial injury case to other cases of business mis- 
conduct, people now compare it to a personal injury case, which (in 
most people's view) involves more serious wrongdoing. As a result of 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

186  On the Psychology of Punishment 

the wider viewscreen, judgments shift, often dramatically. It follows 
that if people's informed judgments are taken to be the criterion, 
punitive damage awards are likely to be too high in financial injury 
cases and too low in personal injury cases. Some data supports this 
suggestion.48 Similar shifts could be produced with many other pairs 
of categories. For example, punitive damages awards involving libel 
might well be higher, in isolation, than punitive damage awards in- 
volving racial discrimination; but there is likely to be a reversal if the 
two cases are put together. 

It is reasonable to hypothesize that the comparative situation may 
alter judgments in another way, by reducing the anchoring effects of 
compensatory damages on punitive awards. In the real world of puni- 
tive damages, unlike our experiment, compensatory awards are gen- 
erally much larger in financial cases than in cases of physical injury.49 
As a consequence, a case of financial damage with a large compensa- 
tory anchor (say $10,000,000) is expected to receive a higher punitive 
damage award than a case of physical injury with a smaller anchor 
(say $500,000), when the two are judged in isolation. When cases of 
the two kinds are directly compared, many people will be more 
strongly influenced by the relative prominence of the harms than by 
the relative size of the anchors. Preliminary evidences50 supports this 
hypothesis, which suggests that two distinct mechanisms may cause 
punitive awards for financial cases to be higher in the current system 
than they would be if jurors were given a richer context: anchoring on 
high dollar numbers, and masking of the low prominence of the cat- 
egory through the effect of normalization. 

I believe that this uncovers a serious problem with current practice 
in many domains of law. The problem is that when people assess 
cases in isolation, their viewscreen is usually narrow, indeed often 
limited to the category to which the case belongs, and that as a result, 
people produce a pattern of outcomes that makes no sense by their 
own lights. In other words, the overall set of outcomes is one that 
people would not endorse, if they were only to see it as a whole. Their 
considered judgments reject the very pattern that they have produced, 
because of a predictable feature of human cognition. The result is a 
form of incoherence. 

We can find that incoherence not only in jury verdicts, but also in 
administrative fines and in criminal sentencing, where no serious 

48  See Jonathan Karpoff and John Lott, On the Determinants and Importance of 

Punitive Damage Awards, 42 J L & Econ 527, 539 (1999). 

49 Id at 538-39, showing mean awards of $14.8 million in fraud cases, and $20.6 mil- 
lion in business negligence cases, but $6.2 million in product liability cases, $1.6 mil- 
lion in malpractice cases, and $991,000 in motor vehicle accident cases. 
so See Sunstein, Legal Coherence and Incoherence (cited in note 25). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

Cass R. Sunstein  187 

effort has been made to ensure that the overall pattern of outcomes 
makes the slightest sense.5' Indeed there is reason to believe that the 
pattern, in many domains, is quite senseless. And it may not be too 
much of a stretch to suggest that the same is true of reactions, some 
of the time, by both individuals and institutions-that people are 
quite outraged about behavior that, in a broader or different compar- 
ison set, would outrage them little or not at all. 

What should be done by way of legal reform? I cannot answer that 
question here. If outrage is the appropriate basis for punishment, 
then steps should be taken to ensure that outrage reflects a wide 
viewscreen rather than a narrow one, so as to reduce the risk that the 
legal system will produce punishment patterns that people reject. 
Perhaps the United States Sentencing Commission can be under- 
stood partly in this light; and perhaps an emphasis on incoherence 
suggests directions in which the Commission might go in the future. 
To date, the Commission has made little effort to ensure that penal- 
ties cohere across categories. 

In the context of punitive damages, the claims I have made suggest 

that judges might take a stronger role in overseeing jury awards, in 
part to ensure that those awards cohere with what has been done in 
other areas of the law. The natural implication is that judges should 
decrease unjustifiably high awards and increase unjustifiably low 
ones; and indeed the Supreme Court's unexpectedly ambitious ruling 
in the State Farm case is a clear step in the direction of imposing dis- 
cipline on jury awards.52 It might be tempting to reject this suggestion 
by emphasizing the populist credentials of the jury and by fearing ju- 
dicial usurpation of the jury's functions. But the translation problem, 
and the risk of incoherence from one-shot judgments, demonstrates 
that this concern is misplaced, because the decisions of any particu- 
lar jury do not produce community sentiment about what patterns of 
punishment make sense. 

Outside of the domain of punitive awards, it would make sense to 
try to systematize civil fines in general, so as to ensure that the penal- 
ties imposed by, for example, the Environmental Protection Agency 
fit well with the penalties imposed by say the Internal Revenue Ser- 
vice, the Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration. The discussion thus far suggests that any ef- 
fort at systematization would present a daunting task. But incoher- 
ent judgments are extremely likely in the administrative arena as 
well, and at least it would be worthwhile to attempt to correct the 
most egregious anomalies. 

51 See Sunstein, 54 Stan L Rev at 1189-1196 (cited in note 6). 
52 State Farm Mut Ins Co v. Campbell, 123 S. Ct. 1513 (2002). 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

188  On the Psychology of Punishment 

V.  CONCLUSION 
In this paper I have urged that punishment judgments are rooted in 
outrage and that people do not naturally think in terms of optimal de- 
terrence. With respect to punishment, people are intuitive retribu- 
tivists. I have also suggested that punishment judgments are rooted 
in outrage, which is, in an important respect, stable across individu- 
als or at least small groups. But for purposes of operating a legal sys- 
tem, punishments that are based on outrage present two key prob- 
lems. The first is that the legal system does not attempt to measure 
outrage directly, but instead requires people to translate their moral 
opprobrium into the unbounded scale of dollars. This act of transla- 
tion produces unpredictable and arbitrary awards. The second prob- 
lem is that outrage is category-specific. People's level of outrage is a 
function of comparison cases. When they confront a case in isolation, 
they evaluate it by comparing it not to the full universe of cases, but 
to a natural set of similar cases. When cases from other categories are 
introduced, their outrage is shifted. The result is that when making 
decisions in isolation, people produce patterns of outcomes that they 
themselves repudiate once those decisions are seen together. 

These findings raise a number of problems. Economically oriented 
observers reject the idea that punishment should be rooted in out- 
rage, which could easily result in too much and too little deterrence. 
For those who believe that punishments should not be an outgrowth 
of outrage, it is wrong to base civil and criminal punishments on or- 
dinary intuitions. In addition, the translation problem ensures a high 
degree of unexplained noise in punishments, resulting in unclear sig- 
nals to possible defendants and also ensuring that similarly situated 
plaintiffs and defendants will not be treated similarly. And for those 
who would like to take outrage seriously, and who believe in retribu- 
tive goals, the existence of incoherence raises serious problems of 
its own, above all because it suggests that one-shot judgments by ju- 
ries will not reflect the levels of outrage that would come from a 
wider viewscreen. 

For many purposes, outrage is highly desirable from the social point 
of view. But when operationalized into legal terms, it tends to pro- 
duce punishments that are both unpredictable and incoherent, and to 
result in systems that fall far short of rationality. I do not suggest that 
an understanding of the psychology of punishment clearly supports 
any particular set of legal reforms. But such an understanding helps 
to explain many problems with existing institutions, and offers a 
number of clues about how those problems might be solved. 

This content downloaded from 165.123.34.86 on Mon, 21 Dec 2015 12:28:41 UTC
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

