University of Chicago Law School
Chicago Unbound

Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and
Economics

2005

Irreversible and Catastrophic
Cass R. Sunstein

Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/law_and_economics

Part of the Law Commons

Recommended Citation
Cass R. Sunstein, "Irreversible and Catastrophic" ( John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working Paper No. 242, 2005).

This Working Paper is brought to you for free and open access by the Coase-Sandor Institute for Law and Economics at Chicago Unbound. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Coase-Sandor Working Paper Series in Law and Economics by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu.

 

C H I C A G O 

JOHN M. OLIN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO. 242 
(2D SERIES) 
 

 
Irreversible and Catastrophic 
 
Cass R. Sunstein 
 
 
 
THE LAW SCHOOL 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO 
 
 
 
April 2005 
 
This paper can be downloaded without charge at the John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics Working 
Paper Series: http://www.law.uchicago.edu/Lawecon/index.html  
and at the Social Science Research Network Electronic Paper Collection: 
 http://ssrn.com/abstract_id=705323  

 

 

Preliminary draft 3/24/05 
All rights reserved 

 
 

 
 

Irreversible and Catastrophic 

Cass R. Sunstein* 
 
 
Abstract 
 

As  many  treaties  and  statutes  emphasize,  some  risks  are  distinctive  in  the  sense 
that they are potentially irreversible or catastrophic; for such risks, it is sensible to take 
extra  precautions.  When  a  harm  is  irreversible,  and  when  regulators  lack  information 
about  its  magnitude  and  likelihood,  they  should  purchase  an  “option”  to  prevent  the 
harm  at  a  later  date—the  Irreversible  Harm  Precautionary  Principle.  This  principle 
brings  standard  option  theory  to  bear  on  environmental  law  and  risk  regulation.  And 
when  catastrophic  outcomes  are  possible,  it  makes  sense  to  take  special  precautions 
against the worst-case scenarios—the Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle. This 
principle  is  based  on  three  foundations:  an  emphasis  on  people’s  occasional  failure  to 
appreciate  the  expected  value  of  truly  catastrophic  losses;  a  recognition  that  political 
actors may engage in unjustifiable delay when the costs of precautions would be incurred 
immediately and when the benefits would not be enjoyed until the distant future; and an 
understanding of the distinction between risk and uncertainty. The normative arguments 
are  illustrated  throughout  with  reference  to  the  problem  of  global  warming;  other 
applications  include  injunctions  in  environmental  cases,  genetic  modification  of  food, 
protection of endangered species, and terrorism. 

 
 
Many  losses  are  irreversible.  Once  a  species  is  gone,  it  is  gone  forever. 
Transgenic crops can impose irreversible costs as a result of increasing pest resistance.1 

Because  some  greenhouse  gases  stay  in  the  atmosphere  for  centuries,  the  problem  of 

global  warming  may  be  irreversible,  at  least  for  all  practical  purposes.  Global  warming 
could  be  catastrophic  as  well,  potentially  endangering  many  millions  of  people.2 

                                                 

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of  Jurisprudence,  University  of  Chicago,  Law 
School and Department of Political Science. I am extremely grateful to Robert Goodin, Robert Hahn, Eric 
Posner,  Richard  Posner,  Adrian  Vermeule,  and  David  Weisbach,  and  participants  in  a  workshop  at 
Columbia Law School for valuable comments; special thanks to Vermeule and Weisbach for many helpful 
discussions.  

1  See  Justus  Wesseler,  Resistance  Economics  of  Transgenic  Crops  under  Uncertainty:  A  Real  Options 
Approach,  in Battling  Resistance  to Antibiotics  and  Pesticides  214  (Rmanan Lazminarayan  ed.  2003);  to 
the same general effect, see Benoit Morel et al., Pesticide Resistance to Bt Corn: Real Option and Rational 
Option Approaches to Decisionmaking, in id. at 184.  

2 See Richard Posner, Catastrophe: Risk and Response 43-58 (2004). 

Irreversible  or  catastrophic  risks  pose  distinctive  problems  for  regulators;  they  require 
significant  adjustments  in  the  standard  forms  of  cost-benefit  analysis.3  In  any  case 

specialists  in  risk  perception  have  long  emphasized  the  fact  that  under  some 

circumstances,  people  are  especially  averse  to  risks  that  are  irreversible,  potentially 
catastrophic, or both.4  

The Precautionary Principle, used in many international documents,5 is often said 

to have a special place in the context of irreversibility and catastrophe.6 Consider a few 

examples: 

(cid:131)  The  closing  Ministerial  Declaration  from  the  United  Nations  Economic  Conference 

for  Europe  in  1990  asserts,  “In  order  to  achieve  sustainable  development,  policies 

must be based on the Precautionary Principle. . . . Where there are threats of serious 

or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason 
for postponing measures to prevent environmental degradation.”7  

(cid:131)  The  1992  Rio  Declaration  states,  “Where  there  are  threats  of  serious  or  irreversible 

damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing 
cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation.”8  

(cid:131)  The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change states: “Where there 

are  threats  of  serious  or  irreversible  damage,  lack  of  full  scientific  certainty  should 

not be used as a reason for postponing [regulatory] measures, taking into account that 

policies  and  measures  to  deal  with  climate  change  should  be  cost-effective  so  as  to 
ensure global benefits at the lowest possible cost.”9  

                                                 

3  See  Kenneth  J.  Arrow  and  Anthony  C.  Fisher,  Environmental  Preservation,  Uncertainty,  and 
Irreversibility,  88  Q  J  Econ  312  (1974);  W.  David  Montgomery  and  Anne  E.  Smith,  Global  Climate 
Change and the Precautionary Principle, 6 Human and Ecological Risk Assessment 399 (2000). 

4 See Paul Slovic, The Perception of Risk 117-20 (2000). 
5 Arie Trouwborst, Evolution and Status of the Precautionary Principle in International Law (2002) 
6 For a valuable and somewhat technical discussion, see Christian Gollier and Nicolas Treich, Decision-
Making  under  Scientific  Uncertainty:  The  Economics  of  the  Precautionary  Principle,  27  J  Risk  and 
Uncertainty 77 (2003). 

7 Indur Goklany, The Precautionary Principle: A Critical Appraisal of Environmental Risk Assessment 5 

8  Quoted  in  Bjorn  Lomborg,  The  Skeptical  Environmentalist  347  (New  York:  Cambridge  University 

(2003). 

Press, 2001). 

9 See Goklany, supra note, at 16. 

2 

(cid:131)  The  Final  Declaration  of  the  First  European  “Seas  At  Risk”  conference  says  that  if 

“the ‘worst case scenario’ for a certain activity is serious enough then even a small 
amount of doubt as to the safety of that activity is sufficient to stop it taking place.”10  

In  American  law,  similar  ideas  are  at  work.  A  special  precautionary  principle 

underlies the analysis of preliminary injunctions in cases involving a risk of irreparable 
environmental  harm.11  San  Francisco  has  adopted  its  own  precautionary  principle,  with 

an emphasis on seriousness and irreversibility: “Where threats of serious or irreversible 

damage to people or nature exist, lack of full scientific certainty about cause and effect 

shall not be viewed as sufficient reason for the City to postpone cost effective measures 
to prevent the degradation of the environment or protect the health of its citizens.”12 At 

the  national  level,  the  National  Environmental  Policy  Act  requires  agencies  to  discuss 

“any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which would be involved in 
the proposed action should it be implemented.”13 Courts have been careful to insist that 

environmental impact statements should be prepared at a time that permits consideration 
of environmental effects before irretrievable commitments have been made.14 A number 

of  federal  statutes,  especially  in  the  environmental  context,  specifically  refer  to 
irreversible losses and make their prevention a high priority.15 

For a long period, both courts and the executive branch also required agencies to 
engage  in  “worst-case  analysis,”  focusing  on  potential  catastrophes.16  That  requirement 
has been eliminated by the Council on Environmental Quality,17 but agencies continue to 

be  directed  to  explore  “impacts  which  have  catastrophic  consequences,  even  if  their 
probability  of  occurrence  is  low.”18  Under  the  Clean  Air  Act,  the  Environmental 

                                                 

10 Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” Conference, Annex 1, Copenhagen, 1994. 
11 See Sierra Club v. Marsh, 872 F2 497 (1st Cir. 1989); on the complexities here, see below. 
12 See San Francisco Precautionary Principle Ordinance, available at  

http://temp.sfgov.org/sfenvironment/aboutus/innovative/pp/sfpp.htm 

13 42 USC 102 (c)(5). 
14 See Metcalf v. Daley, 214 F3d 1135 (9th Cir 2000); Scientists Inst. For Public Info v. AEC, 481 F2d 

1079 (DC Cir 1973); Sierra Club v. Marsh, 976 F2d 763 (1st Cir 1985). 

15  See,  eg,  33  USC  2712(j)  (making  special  exception  to  planning  requirement  for  use  of  federal 
resources in a situation requiring action to avoid irreversible loss of natural resources”); 42 USC 9611 (i) 
(same  exception  for  Superfund  cleanups);  22  USC  2151p-1  (c)(2)(A)  (requiring  President  to  assist 
developing countries in a way that responds to “the irreversible losses associated with forest destruction”). 

16 See Sierra Club v. Sigler, 695 F2d 957 (5th Cir 1983); Save Our Ecosystems v. Clark, 747 F2d 1240 

(9th Cir 1984). 

17 See Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council, 490 US 332 (1989). 
18 40 CFR 1502.22. 

3 

Protection  Agency  is  asked  to  build  an  “adequate  margin  of  safety”  into  health-based 
national ambient air quality standards.19 This explicitly precautionary requirement is not 

limited to irreversible or catastrophic harms, but it might well be understood as an effort 

to ensure against them.  

The  central  notions  here—irreversibility  and  catastrophe—play  a  critical  role  in 

many domains, and they lie at the heart of countless discussions of how to deal with risks 

to safety, health, and the environment. The problem is that both notions are exceedingly 

ambiguous,  and  it  is  by  no  means  clear  how  regulators  should  understand  them.  The 

central purpose of this Article is unpack the ambiguities and to identify the proper role of 

both  concepts  in  law  and  policy.  I  shall  show  that  standard  option  theory,  emphasizing 
the importance of irreversibility, 20 has important implications for environmental law, and 

indeed that some statutes and doctrines show an implicit appreciation of this point. I shall 

also  show  that  regulators  should  sometimes  attempt  to  eliminate  worst-case  scenarios, 

even or perhaps especially if they cannot assign a probability to its occurrence. When no 

such probability can be assigned, the best approach is to assess what is gained, and what 

is lost, by eliminating the most catastrophic outcomes—a point that helps discipline the 

inquiry  into  many  risk-related  problems,  including  global  warming,  terrorism,  and 

injunctions in environmental cases.  

These general points lead to two refined versions of the Precautionary Principle. 

The first involves irreversibility: When regulators lack information about the likelihood 

and magnitude of a risk, it makes sense to spend extra resources to buy an “option” to 

protect against irreversible harm until future knowledge emerges. The value of the option 

is  that  of  delaying  the  decision  until  better  information  is  available.  An  emphasis  on 

options  and  irreversibility  leads  to  a  distinctive  principle,  which  I  shall  call  the 

Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle. 

The second principle involves catastrophe: When risks have extremely bad worst-

case  scenarios,  it  makes  sense  to  pay  special  attention  to  those  risks,  even  if  they  are 

unlikely to come to fruition and even if existing information does not enable regulators to 

make a reliable judgment about the probability that they will occur. An emphasis on the 

                                                 

19  42  USC  7409  (b)(1).  An  “ample  margin  of  safety”  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  hazardous  air 

pollutants lacking a safe thresholds, see 42 USC 7412 (d)(4). 
20 See Arrow and Fisher, supra note, for an early treatment. 

4 

need to attend to potentially catastrophic risks also yields a distinctive principle, which I 

shall call the Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle. 

At  first  glance,  these  two  principles  seem  to  justify  aggressive  action  to  combat 

many  environmental  risks,  including  those  posed  by  global  warming,  threats  to 

endangered  species,  and  genetic  modification  of  food.  Perhaps  societies  should  invest 

substantial  resources  in  the  reduction  of  greenhouse  gases,  first  to  prevent  what  might 
turn out to be an irreversible loss, and second to stop the worst-case scenarios.21 Outside 

of  the  environmental  domain,  the  two  principles  bear  on  appropriate  steps  to  prevent 

terrorist  attacks,  epidemics,  asteroid  collisions,  earthquakes,  and  more.  An  emphasis  on 

the two principles also has the advantage of suggesting the possibility of a rapprochement 
between  the  risk  judgments  of  experts  and  the  risk  judgments  of  ordinary  people.22  As 

risk  analysts  have  long  emphasized,  ordinary  people  sometimes  pay  a  great  deal  of 
attention  to  whether  risks  are  irreversible  or  potentially  catastrophic.23  If  the  refined 

precautionary  principles  can  be  defended,  then  ordinary  intuitions  turn  out  to  be 

plausible, and experts should accept them. Indeed the two principles might be combined, 
in  certain  cases,  into  an  Irreversible  and  Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary  Principle,24 

which provides the strongest basis for aggressive regulation of greenhouse gases. 

At  the  same  time,  I  shall  show  that  both  principles  are  subject  to  important 

qualifications. The unifying claim is  that the refined precautionary principles should be 

implemented with wide rather than narrow viewscreens. They must be attentive to the full 

range  of  consequences,  not  simply  to  a  subset.  A  focus  on  irreversibility,  and  on 

catastrophic  harm,  threatens  to  violate  this  principle  through  a  kind  of  selective 

perception.  More  particularly,  the  idea  of  irreversibility  is  exceedingly  ambiguous; 

because  time  is  linear,  every  step  is  in  a  literal  sense  irreversible.    In  the  technical 

                                                 

21  See  R.  Posner,  supra  note,  at  162,  184-86,  197,  and  in  particular  emphasizing  “the  practically 
irreversible  effect  of  greenhouse-gas  emissions  on  the  atmospheric  concentration  of  those  gases.  .  .  . 
Making  shallower  cuts  now  can  be  thought  of  as  purchasing  an  option  to  enable  global  warming  to  be 
stopped or slowed at some future at a lower cost.” Id. at 162. 
22 See Paul Slovic, Perception of Risk 117, 148-51 (2000). 
23  See  id.  These  psychometric  studies  coexist,  however,  with  evidence  that  people  dismiss  many  low-
probability  risks  of  catastrophe,  as  discussed  below.  A  simple  example  is  that  people  do  not  pay  much 
attention to the risk of asteroid collisions, even though there is a good argument that they should do so. See 
Posner, supra note, at 24-29. 

24 An early treatment of relevant points is Talbot Page, A Generic View of Toxic Chemicals and Similar 

Risks, 7 Ecology L.Q. 207 (1978). 

5 

literature,  the  problem  of  ambiguity  is  solved  through  a  particular  definition  of 
irreversibility.25  But  under  that  definition,  irreversibilities  are  usually  on  all  sides  of 

environmental problems. If significant steps are taken to reduce greenhouse gases, those 

very  steps  will  inflict  irreversible  losses,  environmental  or  economic—making  it 

necessary  to  explore  their  likelihood  and  magnitude  in  order  to  decide  what  to  do.  An 

Irreversible  Harm  Precautionary  Principle  is  both  coherent  and  sensible,  but  it  calls  for 

precautions  against  the  irreversible  harms  associated  with  environmental  protection,  as 

well as against the irreversible harms associated with environmental neglect. 

In  addition,  it  can  be  costly,  and  even  environmentally  harmful,  to  avoid  worst-

case scenarios. If those scenarios are exceedingly unlikely, then there are clear limits on 

how much regulators should do to eliminate them. If it would cost a great deal to avoid 

those scenarios, or if doing so would subject people to high probabilities of very bad-case 

scenarios,  then  avoiding  the  worst-case  may  not  be  sensible.  It  is  both  necessary  and 

possible,  in  short,  to  explore  what  is  gained  and  what  is  lost  by  eliminating  worst-case 

scenarios. As we shall see, an understanding of the uses and limits of the refined versions 

of the Precautionary Principle, focusing on irreversibility and catastrophe, casts new light 

on the foundations of environmental law, and indeed on all aspects of law that deal with 
the reduction of serious risks to safety and health.26 

This  Article  comes  in  four  parts.  Part  I  briefly  explores  the  conventional 

Precautionary  Principle,  with  an  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  precautionary  steps  often 

produce risks of their own. Part II discusses the question of irreversibility. The key point 

here is that because environmental harms are often irreversible, it is appropriate to spend 

resources  to  maintain  flexibility  for  the  future;  the  theory  of  real  options  has  important 

implications for the theory and practice of environmental law, and indeed for regulation 

in  general.  An  understanding  of  the  problem  of  irreversibility  also  helps  to  explain 

continuing debates over the issuance of preliminary injunctions in environmental cases. 

Armed  with  that  understanding,  we  can  discipline  the  analysis  of  injunctions  in  such 

cases. 

                                                 

25 See, e.g., Tom Copeland and Vladimir Antikarocov, Real Options 8-13 (2001). 
26 On related issues in tort law, see Ariel Porat and Alex Stein, Tort Liability under Uncertainty (2001). 

6 

Part III turns to the risk of catastrophic harm. A particular focus is the difference 

between risk, where probabilities can be assigned to various outcomes, and uncertainty, 

where no such probabilities can be assigned. With respect to catastrophe, risk aversion is 

perfectly sensible, but it is hard to defend the idea that regulators should generally seek to 

eliminate  the  worst-case  scenario,  whatever  the  environmental  and  other  costs  of  doing 

so. Part III also offers some experimental evidence that people do not focus on the worst-

case scenario under circumstances of either risk or uncertainty. The most important point 

here  is  that  a  form  of  cost-benefit  balancing,  perhaps  with  distributional  weights,  can 

inform the decision whether to eliminate the most catastrophic outcomes. Part IV offers 

some  brief  remarks  on  the  question  whether  experts  and  ordinary  people  display  “rival 

rationalities,” and on the relationship of irreversibility and catastrophe to that question. 

 
I.  The Precautionary Principle 
 

In the face of risks of environmental harm, it has become common to invoke the 
Precautionary  Principle,  an  increasingly  influential  idea  for  environmental  protection.27 

My principal concerns here are irreversibility and catastrophe, but in order to understand 

those problems, it is necessary to explore the Precautionary Principle more generally.  

Unfortunately, there are twenty or more definitions of that principle, and they are 
not compatible  with one another.28 The most cautious and weak versions suggest, quite 

sensibly, that a lack of decisive evidence of harm should not be a ground for refusing to 

regulate.  Controls  might  be  justified  even  if  it  is  impossible  to  establish  a  definite 

connection between, for example, low-level exposures to certain carcinogens and adverse 

effects  on  human  health.  Thus  the  Ministerial  Declaration  of  the  Second  International 

Conference  on  the  Protection  of  the  North  Sea,  held  in  London  in  1987,  sensibly 

suggests:  “Accepting  that  in  order  to  protect  the  North  Sea  from  possibly  damaging 

effects  of  the  most  dangerous  substances,  a  Precautionary  Principle  is  necessary  which 

                                                 

27  See,  e.g.,  Precaution,  Environmental  Science,  and  Preventive  Public  Policy  (Joel  Tckner  ed.  2003). 
This section draws extensively from Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle, 151 U. Pa. L. 
Rev. 1003 (2003). 

28  See  Julian  Morris,  Defining  the  Precautionary  Principle,  in  Rethinking  Risk  and  the  Precautionary 

Principle 1-19 (Julian Morris, ed. 2000). 

7 

may require action to control inputs of such substances even before a causal link has been 
established by absolutely clear scientific evidence.”29  

The  widely  publicized  Wingspread  Declaration, 

from  a  meeting  of 

environmentalists in 1998, goes much further: “When an activity raises threats of harm to 

human health or the environment, precautionary measures should be taken even if some 

cause  and  effect  relationships  are  not  established  scientifically.  In  this  context  the 
proponent of the activity, rather than the public, should bear the burden of proof.”30  

In  Europe,  the  Precautionary  Principle  is  sometimes  understood  in  a  still  stronger  way, 
suggesting  that  it  is  important  to  build  “a  margin  of  safety  into  all  decision  making.”31 

According  to  one  definition,  the  Precautionary  Principle  means  “that  action  should  be 

taken to correct a problem as soon as there is evidence that harm may occur, not after the 
harm has already occurred.”32 The word “may” is the crucial one here, because it signals 

the need for corrective action even in the face of merely speculative evidence that the risk 
is serious.33  

In  a  comparably  strong  version,  it  is  said  that  “the  Precautionary  Principle 

mandates that when there is a risk of significant health or environmental damage to others 

or to future generations, and when there is scientific uncertainty as to the nature of that 

damage or the likelihood of the risk, then decisions should be made so as to prevent such 

activities  from  being  conducted  unless  and  until  scientific  evidence  shows  that  the 
damage  will  not  occur.”34  What  is  striking  about  this  passage  is  its  requirement  that 

potentially hazardous activities be prevented until they are shown to be safe. I have noted 

that the Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” conference goes so far as 

to say that if “the ‘worst case scenario’ for a certain activity is serious enough then even a 

small  amount  of  doubt  as  to  the  safety  of  that  activity  is  sufficient  to  stop  it  taking 
place.”35  

                                                 

29 Quoted in id. at 3. 
30  Id.  A  strong  version  is  defended  in  Carolyn  Raffensperger  &  Peter  L.  deFur,  Implementing  the 
Precautionary Principle: Rigorous Science and Solid Ethics, 5 Hum. & Ecol. Risk Assess. 933, 934 (1999). 
31  See  Bjorn  Lomborg,  The  Skeptical  Environmentalist  348  (New  York:  Cambridge  University  Press, 

2001). 

32 http://www.logophilia.com/WordSpy/precautionaryprinciple.asp 
33 See The Precautionary Principle for the Twenty-First Century, supra note, for support of this approach. 
34 Testimony of Dr. Brent Blackwelder, President, Friends of the Earth, before the Senate Appropriations 

Committee, Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, (Jan. 24, 2002). 

35 Final Declaration of the First European “Seas At Risk” Conference, Annex 1, Copenhagen, 1994. 

8 

 

A.  Hazardous Precautions 

 
The  weak  versions  of  the  Precautionary  Principle  are  unobjectionable  and 
important. Every day, individuals and nations take steps to avoid hazards that are far from 
certain.  We  do  not  walk  in  moderately  dangerous  areas  at  night;  we  exercise;  we  buy 
smoke  detectors;  we  buckle  our  seatbelts;  we  might  even  avoid  fatty  foods  (or 
carbohydrates).  Sensible  governments  regulate  risks  that,  in  individual  cases  or  even  in 
the  aggregate,  have  a  well  under  100%  chance  of  coming  to  fruition.36  An  individual 
might  ignore  a  mortality  risk  of  1/500,000,  because  that  risk  is  quite  small,  but  if  100 
million citizens face that risk, the expected number of deaths is 200, and the nation had 
better take the problem seriously.  

For the moment let us understand the Precautionary Principle in a strong way, to 
suggest that regulation is required whenever there is a possible risk to health, safety, or 
the  environment,  even  if  the  supporting  evidence  remains  speculative  and  even  if  the 
economic costs of regulation are high. Recall that under the Final Declaration of the First 
European  “Seas  At  Risk”  conference,  a  serious  worst-case  scenario  is  said  to  justify 
abandonment of activity even if there is only “a small amount of doubt as to the safety of 
that activity”; recall too that under the National Environmental Policy Act, agencies must 
pay close attention to risks that have only a small probability of occurrence.37 To avoid 
absurdity,  any  emphasis  on  the  idea  of  “possible  risk”  must  be  understood  to  require  a 
certain threshold of scientific plausibility. To support regulation, no one thinks that it is 
enough if someone, somewhere, urges that a risk is worth taking seriously. But under the 
Precautionary Principle in its stronger forms, the threshold burden is minimal, and once it 
is  met,  there  is  a  presumption  in  favor  of  regulatory  controls.  This  version,  as  we  shall 
see, helps to clarify a significant problem with the idea of precaution, in a way that bears 
on the more refined versions as well. 

The  real  problem  with  the  Precautionary  Principle,  thus  understood,  is  that  it 

offers no guidance—not that it is wrong, but that it forbids all courses of action, including 

regulation. Taken seriously, it is paralyzing, banning the very steps that it simultaneously 

requires. In some cases, it should be easy to see that in its own way, stringent regulation 

would  actually  run  afoul  of  the  Precautionary  Principle.  Consider  the  “drug  lag,” 

produced  whenever  the  government  takes  a  highly  precautionary  approach  to  the 
introduction  of  new  medicines  and  drugs  onto  the  market.38  If  a  government  insists  on 

such an approach, it will protect people against harms from inadequately tested drugs, in 

a  way  that  fits  well  with  the  goal  of  precaution;  but  it  will  also  prevent  people  from 

receiving potential benefits from those very drugs, and hence subjects people to serious 

                                                 

risk of 1/1,000,000 or below). 

36 See 42 USC 7412(b)(9)(B) (allowing deletion from list of hazardous air pollutants in case of lifetime 

3740 CFR 1502.22. 
38 Henry Grabowski and John Vernon, The Regulation of Pharmaceuticals: Balancing the Benefits and 
Risks (1983); K.I. Kaitin and Jeffrey Brown, A Drug Lag Update, 29 Drug Information Journal 361 (1995). 

9 

risks  that  they  would  not  otherwise  face.  Is  it  “precautionary”  to  require  extensive 

premarketing testing, or to do the opposite? Or consider the case of DDT, often banned or 
regulated in the interest of reducing risks to birds and human beings.39 The problem with 

such  bans  is  that  in  poor  nations,  they  eliminate  what  appears  to  be  the  most  effective 
thus  significantly  undermine  public  health.40 

way  of  combating  malaria—and 

Precautionary  steps  seem  both  mandated  and  forbidden  by  the  idea  of  precaution  in  its 

strong forms. 

Similar  issues  are  raised  by  the  continuing  debate  over  whether  certain 
antidepressants impose a (small) risk of breast cancer.41 A precautionary approach might 

seem  to  caution  against  use  of  such  antidepressants  because  of  their  carcinogenic 

potential.  But  the  failure  to  use  those  depressants  might  well  impose  risks  of  its  own, 

certainly  psychological  and  possibly  even  physical  (because  psychological  ailments  are 

sometimes associated with physical ones as well). Or consider the decision, by the Soviet 

Union,  to  evacuate  and  relocate  more  than  270,000  people  in  response  to  the  risk  of 

adverse  effects  from  the  Chernobyl  fallout.  It  is  not  clear  that  on  balance,  this  massive 

relocation  project  was  justified  on  health  grounds:  “A  comparison  ought  to  have  been 

made  between  the  psychological  and  medical  burdens  of  this  measure  (anxiety, 

psychosomatic  diseases,  depression  and  suicides)  and  the  harm  that  may  have  been 
prevented.”42 More generally, a sensible government might want to ignore the small risks 

associated  with  low  levels  of  radiation,  on  the  ground  that  precautionary  responses  are 
likely to cause fear that outweighs any health benefits from those responses.43 

The  Precautionary  Principle  is  often  invoked  in  connection  with  genetic 
modification  of  food44—a  plausible  invocation  in  light  of  the  multiple  risks  created  by 

                                                 

39 See Robert Percival et al., Environmental Regulation 1122-23 (2003). 
40 See id; Goklany, supra note, at 13-27. 
41 See Judith P. Kelly et al., Risk of Breast Cancer According to Use of Antidepressants, Phenothiazines, 
and  Antihistamines,  150  Am.  J.  Epidemiology  861  (1999);  C.R.  Sharpe  et  al.,  The  Effects  of  Tricyclic 
Antidepressants on Breast Cancer Risk, 86 Brit. J. of Cancer 92 (2002). 

42  Maurice  Tubiana,  Radiation  Risks  in  Perpective:  Radiation-Induced  Cancer  Among  Cancer  Risks, 

39(1) Radiat. Environ. Biophy. 3, 8-10 (2000). 

43 Id. For some counterevidence in an important context, see Lennart Hardell et al., Further Aspects on 
Cellular  and  Cordless  Telephones  and  Brain  Tumours,  22  Intl.  J.  Oncology  399  (2003)  (discussing 
evidence of an association between cellular telephones and cancer). 

44 See the discussion in Goklany, supra note, at 29-56. 

10 

that practice.45 But many people believe that a failure to allow genetic modification might 
well  result  in  numerous  deaths,  and  a  small  probability  of  many  more.46  The  reason  is 

that  genetic  modification  holds  out  the  promise  of  producing  food  that  is  both  cheaper 

and healthier—resulting, for example, in “golden rice,” which might have large benefits 
in developing countries.47 The point is not that genetic modification will likely have those 

benefits, or that the benefits of genetic modification outweigh the risks. The claim is only 

that if the Precautionary Principle is taken literally, it is offended by regulation as well as 

by nonregulation.  

The  example  suggests  that  regulation  sometimes  violates  the  Precautionary 

Principle because it gives rise to substitute risks, in the form of hazards that materialize, 
or are increased, as a result of regulation.48 It is possible to go much further. A great deal 

of evidence suggests the possibility that an expensive regulation can have adverse effects 
on  life  and  health.49  An  early  study  found  that  a  statistical  life  can  be  lost  for  every 
expenditure  of  $7  million50;  one  study  suggests  that  an  expenditure  of  $15  million 
produces a loss of life.51 Another suggests that poor people are especially vulnerable to 

this effect—that  a  regulation that reduces wealth for the poorest 20% of  the population 

will  have  twice  as  large  a  mortality  effect  as  a  regulation  that  reduces  wealth  for  the 
wealthiest 20%.52 To be sure, both the phenomenon and the underlying mechanisms are 
disputed.53 It is unnecessary to accept any particular amount here, or even to suggest that 

there  has  been  an  unambiguous  demonstration  of  an  association  between  mortality  and 

regulatory  expenditures.  The  only  point  is  that  reasonable  people  believe  in  that 

                                                 

45 See Morel et al., supra note, at 184-86. 
46 See Kym Anderson and Chantal Nielsen, Golden Rice and the Looming GMO Debate: Implications 

for the Poor, available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=508463 

47 Id.; see also Goklany, supra nte, at 30-41 (discussing environmental and health benefits of engineered 

crops). 

48 See the discussion of risk-related tradeoffs in John Graham & Jonathan Wiener, Risk vs. Risk (1995); 

Cass R. Sunstein, Health-Health Tradeoffs, in Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason, 133-52 (2002). 

49Ralph Keeney, Mortality Risks Induced by Economic Expenditures, 10 Risk Anal. 147 (1990); Randall 
Lutter  &  John  F.  Morrall,  III,  Health-Health  Analysis:  A  New  Way  to  Evaluate  Health  and  Safety 
Regulation, 8(1) J. Risk & Uncertainty 43, 49 table 1 (1994).  

50 See Keeney, supra note. 
51 See Robert W. Hahn et al., Do Federal Regulations Reduce Mortality? (2000). 
52 See Kenneth S. Chapman & Govind Hariharan, Do Poor People Have a Stronger Relationship Between 
Income and Mortality Than the Rich? Implications of Panel Data for Health-Health Analysis, 12 J. Risk & 
Uncertainty 51, 58-63 (1996). 

53See Randall Lutter & John F. Morrall, III, Health-Health Analysis: A New Way to Evaluate Health and 

Safety Regulation, 8 J. Risk & Uncertainty 43, 49 table 1 (1994). 

11 

association.  It  follow  that  a  multimillion  dollar  expenditure  for  “precaution”  has—as  a 

worst  case  scenario—significant  adverse  health  effects,  with  an  expenditure  of  $600 

million as leading to perhaps as many as sixty lives lost.  

This point makes the Precautionary Principle hard to implement not merely where 

regulation removes “opportunity benefits,” or introduces or increases substitute risks, but 

in  any  case  in  which  the  regulation  costs  a  significant  amount.  If  this  is  so,  the 

Precautionary Principle, for that very reason, raises doubts about many regulations. If the 

principle argues against any action that carries a small risk of imposing significant harm, 

then regulators should be reluctant to require large expenditures to reduce risks, simply 

because  those  expenditures  themselves  carry  risks.  Here  is  the  sense  in  which,  the 

Precautionary  Principle  is  paralyzing:  It  stands  as  an  obstacle  to  regulation  and 

nonregulation, and to everything in between. 

 A  nation-by-nation  study  commissioned  by  the  German  Federal  Environmental 

Agency goes so far as to conclude that there are two separate camps in the industrialized 

world:  “precaution  countries”  (Germany,  Sweden,  the  Netherlands,  and  the  United 
States)  and  “protection  countries”  (Japan,  France,  and  the  United  Kingdom).54  If  the 

argument  thus  far  is  correct,  this  conclusion  is  implausible—not  empirically  but 

conceptually. The universe of risks is far too large to permit categorizations of this kind. 

The most general point is that no nation is precautionary in general and costly precautions 
are inevitably taken against only those hazards that seem especially salient or insistent.55 

Taken  in  its  strongest  and  crudest  forms,  the  Precautionary  Principle  wrongly  suggests 

that nations can and should adopt a general form of risk aversion. It is possible to take 

precautions against particular risks, but it is not possible to take precautions against all of 

them.  It  is  possible  to  display  aversion  to  particular  hazards,  but  it  is  not  possible  to 
display aversion to all of them.56  

                                                 
54 See Sand, supra note, at 448. 
55  See  David  Vogel,  The  Hare  and  the  Tortoise  Revisited:  The  New  Politics  of  Consumer  and 
Environmental regulation in Europe, 33 B. J. Pol. S. 557, 570-71 (2003). for a demonstration of this point 
for Europe. 

56 It might be tempting to defend the Precautionary Principle—certainly in the context of health, safety, 
and  the  environment—on  the  ground  that  early  warnings,  in  the  form  of  merely  suggestive  evidence  of 
harm, often turn out to be correct. See The Precautionary Principle in the Twenty-First Century, supra note. 
And it is right to insist that indisputable proof of harm should not be required to justify regulation; this is 
the sense in which the weak version of the principle is both unobjectionable and important. But the fact that 
suggestive evidence must be taken seriously does not render the strong version coherent, simply because 

12 

 

B.  A Note on Distributional Issues 
 

Those  who  endorse  the  Precautionary  Principle  often  do  so  on  grounds  of 
fairness, believing that the principle will assist the most vulnerable members of society.57 

Does the principle actually have that effect? In the United States, the Clean Air Act takes 

a  highly  precautionary  approach,  requiring  an  “adequate  margin  of  safety”  and  hence 
regulation  in  the  face  of  scientific  uncertainty.58  At  the  same  time,  the  Clean  Air  Act 

delivers especially large benefits to poor people and members of minority groups—larger 
benefits,  on  balance,  than  it  gives  to  wealthy  people.59  In  the  international  domain, 

aggressive action to combat climate change would be more beneficial to poor countries 
than  to  wealthy  ones.60  In  the  context  of  global  warming,  at  least,  the  Precautionary 

Principle  might  be  invoked  to  prevent  especially  severe  burdens  on  those  in  the  worst 

position to bear them. 

It  makes  a  great  deal  of  sense  to  emphasize  the  distribution  of  domestic  or 

international  risks,  and  the  distributional  effects  of  global  warming  are  among  the 
strongest  points  in  favor  of  aggressive  regulation  of  greenhouse  gases.61  But  in  many 

cases,  the  Precautionary  Principle,  as  applied,  would  have  unfortunate  distributional 

effects. Consider the case of DDT. A ban on DDT, often supported by reference to the 

                                                                                                                                                 
suggestive evidence of harm is often on all sides. In any case, suggestive evidence of harm has often been 
found not to be an early warning worth heeding, but instead a false alarm, producing unjustified fear and 
significant  social  losses  of  many  kinds.  See  Aaron  Wildavsky,  But  Is  It  True?  (1996).  Consider,  for 
example, fears of contaminated cranberries in 1959, of MSG in Chinese restaurants in 1968, of cyclamates 
in  1968,  of  flouordated  water  in  1950,  and  of  mercury  in  tuna  in  1970.  All  of  these  widely  publicized 
“hazards” turned out to pose no serious risk. See Allan Mazur, True Warnings and False Alarms 110-141 
(2004). For a valuable effort to distinguish between prescient warnings and false ones, see id. at 97-109, 
and in particular the suggestion tat the “clearest hallmark of a true public warning during the period 1948-
1971  was  a  reputable  scientific  news  source.  Warnings  reaching  the  press  from  scientists  operating  in  a 
conventional way at an orthodox scientific institution were true more than twice as often as those reaching 
the news from government officials or citizen advocates.” Id. at 87. 

57 See, e.g., Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless (2004). 
58 42 USC 7409 (b)(1). 
59 See Matthew E. Kahn, The Beneficiaries of Clean Air Act Regulation, 24(1) Regulation 34 (2001). 
60  See,  e.g.,  Joseph  Aldy,  Peter  Orszag,  &  Joseph  Stiglitz,  Climate  Change:  An  Agenda  for  Gloval 
Collective  Action  (unpublished  manuscript  2001);  Bjorn  Lomborg,  The  Skeptical  Environmentalist  291-
302 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001).  

61  Note,  however,  that  if  the  concern  involves  poor  countries,  it  is  not  clear  that  global  warming  is  an 
especially  high  priority,  in  light  of  the  many  needs  of  those  countries,  needs  that  might  be  addressed  by 
wealthier  nations.  For  controversial  but  illuminating  treatments,  see  Bjorn  Lomborg,  The  Skeptical 
Environmentalist  322-23  (2001);  Indur  Goklany,  The  Precautionary  Principle:  A  Critical  Appraisal  of 
Environmental Risk Assessment 71-88 ( 2001).  

13 

Precautionary Principle, is eminently justified in wealthy nations. But such a ban is likely 

to  have—and  is  actually  having—unfortunate  effects  in  at  least  some  poor  countries, 

where DDT is the cheapest and most effective way of combating serious diseases, most 
notably  malaria.62  The  case  of  genetic  modification  of  food  might  well  be  a  similar 

example;  according  to  some  projections,  the  benefits  are  likely  to  be  enjoyed  by  poor 
people, not the wealthy.63 And recall that expensive regulations have a disproportionately 

serious effect on poor people, simply because any price increases are hardest for them to 

handle, and because the costs of regulation may well manifest themselves in fewer and 
less remunerative jobs.64  

Distributional  issues  should  indeed  be  a  central  concern  of  a  system  of  risk 
regulation,65 but the Precautionary Principle is a crude, indirect, and sometimes perverse 

way  of  incorporating  distributional  concerns.  As  a  result,  an  emphasis  on  distribution 

does  not  rescue  the  Precautionary  Principle  from  the  charge  of  incoherence.  The  real 

question is whether more refined understandings of the principle can be developed. 

 
II.  Uncertainty, Options, and Irreversibility 
 

It is possible to identify an Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle, applicable 
to  a  subset  of  environmental  risks.66  On  plausible  assumptions,  the  problem  of 

irreversibility  does  justify  aggressive  measures  to  combat  environmental  risks,  under  a 

general attitude of “act, then learn,” as opposed to the tempting alternative of “wait and 

learn.” With respect to global warming, for example, some people believe that it is most 

sensible  to  use  research  as  the  first  line  of  defense,  refusing  to  commit  substantial 
resources  until  evidence  of  harm  is  clear.67  But  if  research  alone  allows  continued 

                                                 

It True? 61 (1995). 

62 Goklany, supra note, at 13-28; Cass R. Sunstein, Risk and Reason 14 (2002); Aaron Wildavsky, But Is 

63 See Goklany, supra note, at 55. 
64 See Keeney, supra note. 
65 On some of the complexities here, see Sunstein, Risk and Reason, supra note, at 124-26. 
66  See  Scott  Farrow,  Using  Risk-Assessment,  Benefit-Cost  Analysis,  and Real  Options  to  Implement  a 

Precautionary Principle, 24 Risk Analysis 727 (2004).  

67 See, eg, Robert Mendelsohn, Perspective Paper 1.1., in Global Crises, Global Solutions 44, 47 (Bjorn 
Lomborg  ed.  2004);  Wilfred  Beckerman,  Small  is  Stupid  (1995).  The  cautious  approach  of  the  Bush 
Administration can be understood in this light, see,  
www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2002/02/climatechange.html;  Senators  Hagel  and  Murkowski,  High 
Costs of Kyoto, Wash. Post, Jan. 29, 2000, at A17. Nordhaus and Boyer find that extremely little is lost by 
a ten-year delay in emissions reductions. See William D. Nordhaus & Joseph Boyer, Warming the World: 

14 

emissions to produce irreversible risks, it might be best to take precautions now as a way 
of  preserving  future  flexibility.68  In  the  environmental  context  in  general,  this  point 

suggest  that  regulators  should  proceed  with  far  more  aggressive  measures  than  would 
otherwise seem justified.69 

 

A.  Option Value vs. Use Value 

 
Begin  with  the  monetary  valuation  of  an  environmental  amenity,  such  as  a 

pristine area. Some people will be willing to pay to use the area; others will be willing to 

pay  to  preserve  it,  even  if  they  will  not  use  it.  Hence  “existence  value”  is  sometimes 
included  in  the  valuation  of  environmental  amenities,70  and  indeed  federal  courts  have 

insisted  that  agencies  pay  attention  to  that  value  in  assessing  damages  to  natural 
resources.71  But  people  are  also  willing  to  pay  for  the  option  to  use  an  environmental 
amenity  in  the  future,  even  if  they  are  unsure  whether  they  will  exercise  that  option.72 

Suppose that a pristine area might be developed in a way that ensures irreversible change. 

Many people would be willing to pay a significant amount to preserve their option. Under 

federal law, option value must also be considered in  the assessment of  natural  resource 
damages.73  Many  regulations  explore  the  role  of  option  value  in  the  environmental 
context.74 

Here,  then,  is  a  simple  sense  in  which  irreversible  environmental  harm  causes  a 

loss  that  is  not  adequately  captured  in  the  standard  economic  measure  of  value.  Some 

                                                                                                                                                 
Economic  Models  of  Global  Warming  127  (2000)  (describing  the  net  loss  as  “trivially  small”).  For  a 
technical discussion, see Alistair Ulph and David Ulph, Global Warming, Irreversibility and Learning, 107 
Ec J 636 (1997). 

68 See Posner, supra note, at 161. 
69 See G. Chichilnisky and G. Heal, Global Environmental Risks, 7 J Econ Persp. 65 (1993). 
70  See  David  Dana,  Existence  Value  and  Federal  Preservation  Regulation,  28  Harv  Env  L  Rev  343 
(2004);  Charles  J.  Cicchetti  and  Louis  J.  Wilde,  Uniquness,  Irreversibility,  and  the  Theory  of  Nonuse 
Values, Amer J. Agri Econ 1111 (1992).  

71 See Ohio v. Department of Interior, 880 F2d 432 (DC Cir 1989). 
72  Cicchetti  and  Wilde,  supra  note.  The  independent  use  of  option  value  is,  however,  challenged  in 
various  places,  see,  e.g.,  A.  Myrick  Freeman,  The  Measurement  of  Environmental  and  Natural  Resource 
Values 249-51 (2003). 

73 See Ohio v. Department of Interior, supra. 
74 See, e.g., 60 Fed Reg 29914 (1995); 60 Fed.Reg. 28210 (1995); 59 Fed. Reg. 1062 (1994). But see 69 
Fed  Reg.  68444  (2004)  (doubting  whether  option  value  should  be  recognized  as  separate  form  others 
values). 

15 

skeptics contend that it “is hard to imagine a price for an irreversible loss,”75 but people 
do identify prices for such losses.76 

 

B.  The Basic Argument 

 
The  idea  of  option  value,  as  used  in  the  monetary  valuation  literature  just 

discussed, is closely related to the use of the notion of “options” in the domain that I shall 

be  emphasizing  here.  The  simple  claim  is  that  when  regulators  are  dealing  with  an 

irreversible loss, and when they are uncertain about the timing and likelihood of that loss, 

they should be willing to pay a sum—the option value—in order to maintain flexibility 
for  the  future.77  The  option  might  not  be  exercised  if  it  turns  out  that  the  loss  is  not  a 

serious one. But if the option is purchased, regulators will be in a position to forestall the 

loss if it turns out to be large. 

 In  the  domain  of  finance,  options  take  multiple  forms.78  An  investor  might  be 

willing  to  purchase  land  that  is  known  to  have  deposits  of  gold;  even  if  the  cost  of 

extraction is too high to justify mining, ownership of the land creates an option to mine if 
the cost falls.79 A standard “call option” is a right to purchase an asset prior to a specific 
date at a specified price.80 In another variation, people might seek the right to abandon a 

project  at  a  fixed  price,  perhaps  on  the  occurrence  of  a  specified  set  of  events. 

Alternatively,  they  might  obtain  the  right  to  scale  back  a  project,  to  expand  it,  or  to 

extend its life. Options that recognize multiple sources of uncertainty, of the sort that can 
be found for many environmental problems, are termed “rainbow options.”81  

Option  theory  has  countless  applications  outside  of  the  domain  of  investments. 

Suppose,  for  example,  that  because  of  law  or  social  norms,  it  is  difficult  to  divorce,  so 

                                                 

75 See Frank Ackerman and Lisa Heinzerling, Priceless 185 (2004).  
76  A  helpful  overview  is  Richard  C.  Bishop,  Option  Value:  An  Exposition  and  Extension,  58  Land 
Economics 1 (1982). In recognizing the existence of option value, I do not mean to make any controversial 
suggestions about the role of “willingness to pay” in environmental policy. The only point is that people do 
place a value on preserving environmental options, and that it would be foolish for regulators to refuse to 
do so. 

77 See Claude Henry, Investment Decisions under Uncertainty: The “Irreversibility Effect,” 64 Am Econ 
Rev  1006,  1006  (1974),  and  in  particular  this  suggestion:  “A  decision  is  considered  irreversible  if  it 
significantly  reduces  for  a  long  time  the  variety  of  choices  that  would  be  possible  in  the  future.”  On 
precommitment value, see below. 

78 See Tom Copeland and Vladimir Antikarocov, supra note, at 12-13. 
79 See Richard Brealey and Stewart Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance565 (2002) 
80 Id. at 582. 
81 Copeland and Antikarocov, supra, at 13. 

16 

that a decision to marry cannot readily be reversed.82 If so, prospective spouses might be 

willing to incur costs to maintain their flexibility before marrying—higher costs than they 

would  be  willing  to  incur  if  divorce  were  easier.  Narrow  judicial  rulings,  of  the  sort 
celebrated by judicial minimalists,83 can be understood as a way of “buying” an option, or 

at  least  of  “paying”  a  certain  amount  in  return  for  flexibility.  Judges  who  leave  things 

undecided,  and  who  focus  their  rulings  on  the  facts  of  particular  cases,  are  in  a  sense 

forcing themselves, and society as a whole, to purchase an option to pay for flexibility in 

the resolution of subsequent problems. Whether that option is worthwhile depends on its 

price and the benefits that it provides. 

It should be readily apparent how an emphasis on option value might explain the 

emphasis, in NEPA and other environmental statutes, on irreversible losses. The central 
point  of  NEPA  is  to  ensure  that  environmental  factors  receive  serious  consideration,84 

and  if  irreversible  losses  are  involved,  the  delay  produced  by  the  duty  to  generate  an 

environmental impact statement can be seen as payment for an option. It should also be 

clear that the idea of option value might help give content to the Precautionary Principle, 

which would, on this view, be understood as requiring societies to pay a kind of premium 
in the face of potentially irreversible losses.85 An important implication involves global 

warming;  the  argument  for  a  global  carbon  tax  is  significantly  strengthened  by  an 
appreciation  of  the  option  value  of  conserving  the  atmospheric  environment.86  Let  us 

elaborate the argument for the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle. 

In a classic essay, Arrow and Fisher demonstrate that the ideas of uncertainty and 
irreversibility have considerable importance to the theory of environmental protection.87 

They imagine a situation in which the question is whether to preserve a virgin redwood 

forest for wilderness recreation or instead to open it to clear-cut logging. Assume that if 

the  development  option  is  chosen,  the  destruction  of  the  forest  is  effectively 

                                                 

82 See Dixit and Pindyck, supra, at 24. 
83 See Cass R. Sunstein, One Case At A Time (1999). 
84 See Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens’ Council, 490 US 332 (1989). 
85  See  Benoit  Morel  et  al.,  Pesticide  Resistance,  the  Precautionary  Principle,  and  the  Regulation  of  Bt 
Corn:  Real  Option  and  Rational  Option  Approaches  to  Decisionmaking,  in  Battling  Resistance  to 
Antibiotics and Pesticides, supra note.  

86 See Graciela Chichilnisky and Geoffey Heal, Global Environmental Risks, 7 J Econ Perspectives 65, 

80 (1993). 

Irreversibility, 88 Q J Econ 312 (1974).  

87  See  Kenneth  J.  Arrow  and  Anthony  C.  Fisher,  Environmental  Preservation,  Uncertainty,  and 

17 

irreversible.88 Arrow and  Fisher  argue that it matters whether the authorities cannot yet 

assess the costs or benefits of a proposed development. If development produces “some 

irreversible transformation of the environment, hence a loss in perpetuity of the benefits 

from  preservation,”  then  it  is  worth  paying  something  to  wait  to  acquire  the  missing 

information.  Their  suggestion  is  that  “the  expected  benefits  of  an  irreversible  decision 
should be adjusted to reflect the loss of options it entails.”89 

Much  more  recently,  Fisher  has  generalized  this  argument  to  suggest  that 

“[w]here  a  decision  problem  is  characterized  by  (1)  uncertainty  about  future  costs  and 

benefits  of  the  alternatives,  (2)  prospects  for  resolving  or  reducing  the uncertainty  with 

the  passage  of  time,  and  (3)  irreversibility  of  one  or  more  of  the  alternatives,  an  extra 
value, an option value, properly attaches to the reversible alternative(s).”90 To pass a cost-

benefit  test,  it  follows  that  an  irreversible  decision  must  clear  a  higher  hurdle.  The 

intuition  here  is  both  straightforward  and  appealing:  More  steps  should  be  taken  to 

prevent harms that are effectively final than to prevent those that can be reversed at some 

cost.  If  an  irreversible  harm  is  on  side,  and  a  reversible  one  on  the  other,  an 

understanding of option value suggests that it is worthwhile to spend a certain amount to 

preserve future flexibility, by paying a premium to avoid the irreversible harm. 

Judge  Richard  Posner  has  invoked  a  point  of  this  sort  as  a  justification  for 
aggressive steps to combat global warming.91 Posner acknowledges that the nature of the 

threat of global warming is disputed, and hence it is tempting to wait to regulate until we 

have  more  information.  But  there  is  a  serious  problem  with  waiting,  which  is  “the 

irreversible  effect  of  greenhouse-gas  emissions  on 

practically 
the  atmospheric 
concentration of those gases.”92 Thus Posner concludes that making “shallower cuts now 

can  be  thought  of  as  purchasing  an  option  to  enable  global  warming  to  be  stopped  or 

                                                 

88 The assumption may be unrealistic, under ordinary understandings of what counts as irreversibility. If 
seeds are retained, the forest can be recreated, though perhaps with a significant interim loss. I deal below 
with some of the complexities in the notion of irreversibility. 

89 Id. at 319.  
90 See Anthony Fisher, Uncertainty, Irreversibility, and the Timing of Climate Policy 9 (2001). 
91 See Richard A. Posner, Catastrophe 161-62 (2004). A more technical discussion to the same effect is 
Graciela  Chichilnisky  and  Geoffey  Heal,  Global  Environmental  Risks,  7  J  Econ  Perspectives  65  (1993), 
emphasizing  the  need  for  a  distinctive  approach  to  “risks  that  are  poorly  understood,  endogenous, 
collective,  and  irreversible.”  Id.  at  67;  see  especially  pp.  76-84  for  a  treatment  of  option  value  and 
irreversibility. 

92 Posner, supra note, at 161. 

18 

slowed at some future time at a lower cost.”93 The reduction in cost, as a result of current 

steps, could result from lowering current emissions or simply from increasing the rate of 

technological innovations that make pollution reduction less costly in the future. Posner 

concludes that the “option approach is applicable to other catastrophic risks as well, such 
as the risks associated with genetically modified crops.”94  

The  general  point  here  is  that  as  in  the  stock  market,  those  involved  in 

environmental  protection  are  trying  to  project  a  stream  of  costs  and  benefits  over  time; 

the ability to project the revenue stream will improve and hence much can be gained from 
being  able  to  make  the  decision  later  in  time  rather  than  earlier.95  If  more  accurate 

decisions  can  be  made  in  the  future,  then  there  is  a  (bounded)  value  to  putting  the 
decision off to a later date.96 The key point is that uncertainty and irreversibility should 
lead  to  a  sequential  decision-making  process.  97  If  better  information  will  emerge, 
regulators might seek an approach that preserves greater flexibility.98  

 

C.  Irreversibilities 

 
Unfortunately,  the  idea  of  irreversibility  is  highly  ambiguous.  On  one  view,  an 

effect is irreversible when restoration to the status quo is impossible or at best extremely 

difficult, at least on a relevant timescale. For example, the “decision not to preserve a rich 

reservoir  of  biodiversity  such  as  the  60  million-year-old  Korup  forest  in  Nigeria  is 

irreversible. The alteration or destruction of a unique asset of this type has an awesome 
finality.”99 If this is the appropriate interpretation of irreversibility, then it is an aspect of 

seriousness. An alternative interpretation, familiar in the economic literature on options, 

                                                 

93 Id. at 162. 
94 Id. at 163, 
95  See  Christian  Gollier  &  Nicolas  Treich,  Decision-Making  Under  Scientific  Uncertainty:  The 
Economics  of  the  Precautionary  Principle,  27  J.  Risk  &  Uncertainty  77,  84  (2003),  for  the  definition  of 
irreversibility  used  in  the  real  options  approach.  See  also  id.  at  87-91  for  distinctions  among  stock 
externalities, environmental irreversibility, and captial irreversibility. 

96 Gollier & Treich, supra note, at 88.  
97  Chan  S.  Park  &  Hemantha  S.B.  Herath,  Exploiting  Uncertainty—Investment  Opportunities  as  Real 

Options: A New Way of Thinking in Engineering Economics, 45 Engineering Economist 1, 3-4 (2000).  

98 See Kenneth Arrow and Anthony Fischer, Environmental Preservation, Uncertainty and Irreversibility, 

88 Q. J. Economics 312, 313-14 (1974). 

99  See  Graciela  Chichilnisky  and  Geoffrey  Heal,  Global  Environmental  Risks,  7  J  Econ  Persp  65,  76 

(1993). 

19 

sees  irreversibility  in  terms  of  sunk  costs.  The  two  interpretations  lead  to  different 

understandings of the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle. 

1. Irreversibility and seriousness. From one point of view, no clear line separates 

the  reversible  from  the  irreversible.  The  question  is  not  whether  some  effect  can  be 

reversed, but instead at what cost; areas that have been developed, or otherwise harmed, 

can often be returned to their original state, even if at considerable expense. Lost forests 

can themselves be restored. But for the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle, there 

is  a  more  serious  conceptual  difficulty,  which  is  that  whether  a  particular  act  is 

“irreversible” depends on how it is characterized. Any death, of any living creature, is 

irreversible, and those who invoke irreversibility do not intend the notion of irreversible 

harm to apply to each and every mortality risk. What is true for living creatures is true for 

rocks  and  refrigerators  too;  if  these  are  destroyed,  they  are  destroyed  forever.  And 

because  time  is  linear,  every  decision  is,  in  an  intelligible  sense,  irreversible.  If  I  play 

tennis at 11 am today, that decision cannot be reversed, and what might have been done 

at  that  time  will  have  been  permanently  lost.  If  government  builds  a  new  highway  in 

upstate New York in May, that particular decision will be irreversible, even though the 

highway can be replaced or eliminated. This is the sense in that “irreversibility” depends 

on how the underlying act is characterized; if we characterize it narrowly, to be and to do 

precisely what it is and does, any act is literally irreversible by definition. 

Environmentalists  who  are  concerned  about  irreversibility  must  have  something 

far  more  particular  in  mind.  They  must  mean  something  like  a  large-scale  alteration  in 

environmental conditions, one that imposes permanent, or nearly permanent, changes on 

those  subject  to  them.  But  irreversibility  in  this  sense  is  not  a  sufficient  reason  for  a 

highly precautionary approach. At a minimum, the irreversible change has to be for the 

worse, and it must also rise to a certain level of magnitude. A truly miniscule change in 

the global temperature, even if permanent, would not justify expensive precautions if it is 
benign  or  if  it  imposes  little  in  the  way  of  harm.100  For  this  reason,  it  is  tempting  to 

understand  the  idea  of  irreversibility,  for  environmental  purposes,  as  inseparable  from 

that of seriousness. A loss of a wisdom tooth is irreversible, but not a reason for particular 

                                                 

Lomborg ed. 2004). 

100 See, eg, Robert Mendelsohn, Perspective Paper 1.1., in Global Crises, Global Solutions 44, 47 (Bjorn 

20 

precautions;  a  loss  of  an  extremely  small  forest,  with  little  wildlife,  hardly  justifies  a 

special principle, even if that loss cannot be reversed.  

At first glance, then, irreversibility matters only because of its connection with the 

magnitude  of  the  harm—an  issue  explored  below  in  connection  with  potentially 

catastrophic  risks.  Compare  in  this  regard  the  standard  of  “irreparable  harm”  as  a 
precondition to the grant of a preliminary injunction.101 If a harm is irreparable, it can be 

avoided only by grant of the injunction, but irreparability is not a sufficient condition for 
granting  the  injunction;  the  harm  must  be  serious  as  well  as  irreparable.102  And  if 

irreversibility  in  environmental  protection  is  to  be  analyzed  in  the  same  way,  then  an 

Irreversible  Harm  Precautionary  Principle  is part  of  a  Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary 

Principle,  or  at  least  a  Significant  Harm  Precautionary  Principle.  If  so,  the  Irreversible 

Harm Precautionary Principle is not distinctive. The principle is also vulnerable, some of 

the time, to the same objections that apply to the Precautionary Principle as a whole. As 

we have seen, significant harms may well be on all sides of risk-related problems, and a 

focus on one set of risks will give rise to others, perhaps environmental risks as well.  

2. Irreversibility  and sunk  costs. Analysts of real options understand  the idea of 
irreversibility  in  a  technical  way.103  Irreversible  investments  are  sunk  costs—those  that 

cannot  be  recovered.  Examples  include  expenditures  on  advertising  and  marketing,  or 
even capital investments designed to improve the performance of a factory.104 In fact the 

purchase  of  motor  vehicles,  computers,  and  office  equipment  is  not  fully  reversible, 
because purchase cost substantially exceeds resale cost.105 Reversible investments include 

the  purchase  of  ordinary  stocks  and  bonds.  The  problem  with  an  investment  that  is 

irreversible  is  that  those  who  make  it  relinquish  “the  possibility  of  waiting  for  new 

information  that  might  affect  the  desirability  or  timing  of  the  expenditure,  and  this  lost 
option value is an opportunity cost that must be included as part of the investment.”106 

                                                 

101 In the environmental context, see Sierra Club v. Marsh, 872 F2d 497 (1st Cir 1989) (Breyer, J.). 
102 Id.  
103 See Avinash Dixit and Robert Pinsyck, Investment Under Uncertainty 6-9 (1994) 
104 Id. at 8. 
105 Id. 
106 Id. at 412. 

21 

Everyone agrees that we should characterize, as irreversible harms, environmental 
effects that are both serious and extremely expensive and time-consuming to reverse.107 

This is the factor that leads Posner and others to argue for the purchase of an “option” to 

slow down global warming at a lower rate in the future. Immediate adoption of a policy 
produces  a  “sunk  benefit.”108  But 
important  point: 
Irreversibility,  in  this  sense,  lies  on  all  sides.109  Regulation  that  reduces  one 

this  argument 

ignores  an 

environmental risk might well increase another environmental risk; efforts to reduce the 

dangers associated with fossil fuels, for example, may lead to increased dependence on 
nuclear energy, as in fact has happened in China.110 As with the Precautionary Principle 

in general, so with the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle in particular: Measures 

that the principle requires, on grounds on safety and health, might well be prohibited on 

exactly  those  grounds.  And  there  is  a  more  general  point.  If  steps  are  taken  to  reduce 

greenhouse  gas  emissions,  capital  costs  will  be  incurred,  and  they  cannot  be  recouped. 

Sunk  costs  are  a  familiar  feature  of  environmental  regulation,  in  the  form  of  mandates 
that  require  technological  change.111  We  are  dealing,  then,  with  irreversibilities,  not 

irreversibility.  

This  point  much  complicates  the  case  for  an  Irreversible  Harm  Precautionary 

Principle. As Fisher writes for global warming, “it is not clear whether the conditions of 

the  problem  imply  that  investment  in  control  ought  to  be  slowed  or  reduced,  while 

waiting for information needed to make a better decision, or that investment should come 

sooner to preserve the option to protect ourselves from impacts that may be revealed in 
the future as serious or even catastrophic.”112 It is for this reason that many economists 

have concluded, unlike Judge Posner, that the existence of uncertainty and irreversibility 

                                                 

107 See Fisher, supra note. 
108 Id. at 413.  
109 See Fisher, supra note, and sources cited. 
110 See Ling Zhong, Note: Nuclear Energy: China's Approach Towards Addressing Global Warming, 12 
Geo. Int'l Envtl. L. Rev. 493 (2000). Of course it is possible to urge that nations should reduce reliance on 
either  coal-fired  power  plants  or  nuclear  power,  and  move  instead  toward  alternatives  that  might  be 
preferable  in  risk-related  grounds,  such  as  solar  power.  For  general  discussion,  see  Renewable  Energy: 
Power  for  a  Sustainable  Future,  Godfrey  Boyle,  ed.  (1996);  Allan  Collinson,  Renewable  Energy  (1991); 
Dan E. Arvizu, Advanced Energy Technology and Climate Change Policy Implications, 2 Fl. Coastal L.J. 
435  (2001).  But  these  alternatives  pose  problems  of  their  own,  involving  feasibility  and  expense.  See 
Lomborg, supra note 56, at 118-48. 

111 See Bruce Ackerman and William Hassler, Clean Coal/Dirty Air (1983). 
112 Fisher, supra note, at 11. 

22 

argue  for  less,  not  more,  in  a  way  of  investments  in  reducing  greenhouse  gas 
emissions.113  Everything  depends  on  the  likelihood  and  magnitude  of  the  losses  on  all 

sides. 

Judge Posner’s analysis does not use the idea of options in the technical sense. He 

emphasizes,  correctly,  that  because  of  the  cumulative  effect  of  emissions  on  the 

atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide, a steady or even declining rate of emissions 
will cause that concentration to increase.114 He emphasizes that it may be more costly to 

reduce global warming in the future than in the present—a point that comes close to the 

technical  understanding  of  irreversibility  in  the  economic  literature.  But  it  is  a  gap  in 

Judge  Posner’s  analysis  that  he  neglects  to  attend  to  the  irreversible  losses  associated 

with  greenhouse  gas  reductions.  On  the  other  hand,  any  advice  to  “wait  and  learn” 

depends  on  a  contentious  empirical  assumption,  which  is  that  we  lose  very  little  if  we 
defer  investments  while  waiting  to  obtain  more  information  about  the  benefits.115  If  a 

great  deal  is  lost  by  deferring  such  investments,  then  the  judgment  should  be  reversed; 

and there is reason to believe that for global warming, the irreversible losses associated 

with  climate  change  do  indeed  justify  the  irreversible  losses  associated  with  greater 
investments in emissions reductions, world-wide.116 

 

D.  Qualifications and Conclusions 

 
The  arguments  for  an  Irreversible  Harm  Precautionary  Principle,  along  with  an 

understanding  of  its  central  limitations,  are  now  in  place.  But  there  are  three  important 

qualifications, involving optimal delay, distributional considerations, and precommitment 

value. Let us briefly explore each of these. 

1.  Irreversibilities  and  optimal  delay.  The  general  notion  of  optimal  delay 

provides  important  countervailing  considerations.  Future  generations  will  almost 

                                                 

113 Id. at 19. 
114Posner, supra note. 
115  William  Cline,  Rejoinder  to  Perspective  Papers,  in  Global  Crises,  Global  Solutions  56,  57  (Bjorn 

Lomborg ed. 2004). 

116  See  William  D.  Nordhaus  &  Joseph  Boyer,  Warming  the  World:  Economic  Models  of  Global 
Warming (2000). This point is not meant to endorse any particular set of responses to climate change; it is 
simply  meant  to  suggest  that  some  such  response  is  justified,  in  part  because  of  the  risk  of  irreversible 
harm. A good discussion can be found in id. and in Richard Stewart and Jonathan Wiener, Reconstructing 
Climate Policy: Beyond Kyoto (2003). 

23 

certainly be both wealthier and more knowledgeable than the present generation; for this 

reason, they will be in a far better position, and possibly an unimaginably better position, 
to  handle  environmental  problems  that  materialize  in  their  time.117  In  the  view  of  one 

commentator, the nearly inevitable increase in wealth over time means that it “makes no 
sense  to  make  current  generations  ‘pay’  for  the  problems  of  future  generations.”118  In 

addition, expensive investments in greenhouse gas reduction may well diminish available 

resources for future generations, leaving them with less “to devote to subsequent damage 
control.”119  There  is  a  final  point.  For  many  environmental  problems,  the  irreversible 

costs of emissions reductions are incurred immediately, whereas the irreversible costs of 

emissions will be incurred in the future. This difference strengthens public resistance to 

emissions reductions, in a way that fits with standard claims about the need to discount 
future effects.120 

The argument for “wait and learn” is strengthened by these points. But any such 

argument must also take account of the incontrovertible fact that waiting simultaneously 
threatened to diminish the flexibility of future decisionmakers, and perhaps severely.121 

2.  Irreversibilities  and  distribution.  At  first  glance,  an  Irreversible  Harm 

Precautionary  Principle  might  seem  to  be  especially  beneficial  to  disadvantaged 
people.122 In the context of global warming, aggressive precautions are projected to give 

far more to poor countries than to rich ones, partly because rich nations are so much less 
dependent  on  agriculture  .123  Nonetheless,  there  is  no  simple  connection  between 

distributional goals and an emphasis on irreversible harms. Some of the risks associated 
with genetic engineering are irreversible,124 but as we have seen, the benefits of genetic 

                                                 

2004). 

117  See  Remarks  of  Vernon  Smith,  in  Global  Crises,  Global  Solutions  630,  635  (Bjorn  Lomborg  ed. 

118 Remarks of Thomas Schelling, in id. at 627. 
119 Remarks of Vernon Smith, supra, at 635, 
120 For a statement and criticism of the standard claims, see Richard Revesz, Environmental Regulation, 

Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the Discounting of Human Lives, 99 Colum L Rev 941 (1999). 
121 As emphasized by William Cline, Rejoinder to Perspective Papers, in id. at 56, 57. 
122  See  Juan  Almendares,  Science,  Human  Rights,  and  the  Precautionary  Principle  in  Honduras,  in 

Precaution, Environmental Science, and Preventive Public Policy 55 (Joel A. Tickner ed. 2003). 

123 William D. Nordhaus & Joseph Boyer, Warming the World: Economic Models of Global Warming 

161-168 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000). 

124  Justus  Wesseler,  Resistance  Economics  of  Transgenic  Crops  under  Uncertainty:  A  Real  Options 

Approach, in Battling Resistance to Antibiotics and Pesticides 214 (Rmanan Lazminarayan ed. 2003). 

24 

engineering are likely to be felt above all in poor nations.125 The analysis of distributional 

goals must be undertaken separately from the analysis of irreversibility.  

3.  Precommitment  value.  In  some  domains,  future  flexibility  is  undesirable,  and 

people are willing to pay a great deal to eliminate it. The tale of Ulysses and the Sirens is 
perhaps  the  most  familiar  example,126  and  the  idea  of  precommitment  has  many  legal 
applications.127  In  the  environmental  context,  regulators  might  be  willing  to  pay  for 

precommitment  strategies  that  will  operate  as  a  constraint  on  interest-group  power, 

myopia,  weakness  of  will,  excessively  high  discount  rate,  cognitive  biases,  or  other 

problems.  Indeed,  the  conventional  Precautionary  Principle,  understood  to  impose  a 

thumb  on  the  scales  in  favor  of  environmental  protection,  might  be  explained  in  these 
terms.128  

The  difficulty,  for  any  such  explanation,  should  now  be  familiar:  Any 

precommitment  strategy  may  give  rise  to  problems,  including  environmental  problems, 

for which a precommitment strategy might also be justified. It is nonetheless important to 

see  that  option  value  is  sometimes  paralleled  by  “precommitment  value,”  for  which 

regulators might also be willing to spend a great deal. The literature on options, and on 

the  need  to  maintain  flexibility,  has  not  yet  come  to  terms  with  situations  in  which 

flexibility is a problem rather than a solution. 

4.  Conclusions.  There 

is  a  coherent  and  distinctive  Irreversible  Harm 

Precautionary Principle, taking the form of willingness to pay a certain price to preserve 

environmental  flexibility  for  the  future.  In  many  settings,  it  makes  sense  to  pay  for  an 

option to avoid a risk of irreversible losses. The amount of the payment depends on the 

magnitude of the loss if it is irreversible. If irreversible losses are on both sides, then it is 

necessary  to  assess  their  likelihood  and  their  magnitude.  We  can  find  an  implicit 

understanding  of  option  value  in  the  emphasis  on  irreversibility  in  NEPA  and  other 

federal  statutes,  along  with  many  international  agreements.  But  because  environmental 

expenditures are typically sunk costs, an emphasis on irreversibility will sometimes argue 

                                                 

125 See note supra; Thomas DeGregori, Bountiful Harvest 100-109 (2002). 
126 See Jon Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens (1982). 
127 See Stephen Holmes, Passions and Constraint (1995) (emphasizing precommitment strategies in the 

128 See David Dana, A Behavioral Economic Defense of the Precautionary Principle, 97 NW L Rev 1315 

constitutional domain) 

(2003). 

25 

in favor of delaying, rather than accelerating, environmental protection. Whether it does 

so depends on the magnitude and likelihood of the relevant effects. 

 

E.  Environmental Injunctions 
 

An understanding of these points helps to explain some longstanding disputes the 

issuance of preliminary injunctions in environmental cases. For many years, some courts 

of  appeals  had  held  that  when  environmental  harm  was  alleged,  district  courts  should 

adopt  a  presumption  of  irreparable  damage  and  indeed  a  presumption  in  favor  of 
injunctive relief.129  In  NEPA  cases,  the  result  was  a  likely  injunction  if  the  agency  had 

failed  to  prepare  an  adequate  environmental  impact  statement:  “Irreparable  damage  is 

presumed  when  an  agency  fails  to  evaluate  thoroughly  the  environmental  impact  of  a 
proposed action.”130 But what is the basis for this presumption? And what follows from 

it?  Does  it  follow,  for  example,  that  the  United  States  Navy  must  be  enjoined  from 

conducting  weapons-training  operations  before  it  has  obtained  a  permit  to  discharge 

ordnance into the sea?  

In response to the last question, the Supreme Court offered a negative answer.131 

Rejecting the idea that environmental violations should give rise to automatic injunctions, 

the Court said that an injunction is an equitable remedy, subject to traditional balancing, 

and  that  it  would  “not  lightly  assume  that  Congress  has  intended  to  depart  from 
established  principles”  permitting  district  courts  to  exercise  their  discretion.132  In  a 

subsequent  case,  involving  the  Alaska  Native  Claims  Settlement  Act,  the  Court 

underlined  the  point  and  expressly  rejected  the  presumption  of  irreparable  harm  in 
environmental  cases.133  “This  presumption 
traditional  equitable 
principles.”134  Nonetheless,  the  Court  stressed  environmental  problems  raise  distinct 

is  contrary 

to 

issues,  because  “[e]nvironmental  injury,  by  its  nature,  can  seldom  be  adequately 

remedied  by  money  damages  and  is  often  permanent  or  at  least  of  long  duration,  i.e., 

                                                 

129 See Thomas v. Peterson, 753 F2d 754, 764 (9th Cir 1985).  
130  Save  Our  Ecosystems  v.  Clark,  747  F2d  1240,  1250  (9th  Cir  1984).  For  general  discussion,  see 

Zigmund Plater, Statutory Violations and Equitable Discretion, 70 Cal L Rev 524 (1982). 

131 See Weinberger v. Romero-Barcelo, 456 US 305 (1982). 
132 Id. at 313. 
133 Amoco Production Co. v. Village of Gambell, 480 US 531 (1987). 
134 Id. at 544. 

26 

irreparable.”135 It follows that if an environmental injury is likely, “the balance of harms 
will usually favor the issuance of an injunction to protect the environment.”136 

When  courts  of  appeals  spoke  in  terms  of  a  presumption  in  favor  of  injunctive 

relief,  they  might  be  understood  as  adopting  a  version  of  the  Irreversible  Harm 

Precautionary Principle—assuming that environmental harm is irreversible in the relevant 

sense, and requiring a strong showing by those who seek to proceed in the face of that 

harm.  This  interpretation  helps  to  explain  the  simplest  exception  to  the  lower  courts’ 

presumption:  cases  in  which  “irreparable  harm  to  the  environment  would  result  if  such 
relief  were  granted.”137  If,  for  example,  an  injunction  against  the  use  of  a  logging  road 

would  prevent  the  removal  of  diseased  trees  and  hence  allow  the  spread  of  infect 
infection through national forests, no injunction would issue.138  

Here,  then,  is  a  clear  recognition  of  the  existence  of  environment-environment 

tradeoffs,  in  a  way  that  requires  a  qualification  of  any  Irreversible  Harm  Precautionary 

Principle.  And  when  the  Supreme  Court  rejected  the  presumption,  it  did  so  in  favor  of 

traditional equitable balancing, in a way that recognized that serious harms, and perhaps 

irreversible  harms,  are  on  all  sides.  But  even  in  doing  so,  the  Court  endorsed  a  kin  of 

Irreversible  Harm  Precautionary  Principle 

through 

its  explicit  recognition 

that 

environmental injury “is often permanent or at least of long duration.” 

What  still  remains  undecided,  after  the  Court’s  decisions  in  the  1980s,  is  the 
appropriate judicial posture in the face of violations of NEPA.139 The Court’s rejection of 

a  presumption  in  favor  of  preliminary  injunctions  might  well  be  taken  to  suggest  that 
such injunctions ought rarely to issue in NEPA cases140—especially, perhaps, in light of 

the fact that NEPA is a purely procedural statute, one that imposes information-gathering 

                                                 

135 Id. 
136 Id. 
137 People of Village of Gambell v. Hodel, 774 F2d 1414, 1424 (9th Cir 1985) (emphasis in original). 
138 Alpine Lakes Protection Society v. Schlapfer, 518 F.2d 1089 (9th Cir 1975); Thomas v. Peterson, 753 

F.2d at 764 n. 8. 

Chi L Rev. 1263 (1992). 

139 For general discussion, see Comment, Injunctions for NEPA Violations: Balancing the Equities, 59 U 

140  See  New  York  v.  NRC,  550  F2d  745  (2d  Cir  1977);  Conservation  Society  v.  Secretary  of 
Transportation, 508 F.2d 927, 933-3 (2d Cir. 1974); United States v. 27.09 Acres of Land, 737 F Supp 277, 
283-84  (SDNY  1990);  Stand  Together  Against  Neighborhood  Decay  v.  Board  of  Estimate,  690  F  Supp 
1191 (EDNY 1988). 

27 

duties  on  agencies  without  requiring  them  to  take  that  information  into  account.141  If 

courts  cannot  forbid  agencies  to  act  as  they  choose  after  producing  an  adequate 

environmental  impact  statement,  injunctions  might  seem  an  odd  remedy  in  the  NEPA 

setting.  But  in  the  most  elaborate  discussion  of  the  question,  then-Circuit  Judge  Breyer 
suggested  that  injunctions  are  often  appropriate  in  NEPA  cases.142  The  discussion 

endorses an appropriately constrained Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle, adapted 
to the NEPA setting.143 

Judge  Breyer  did  not  contend  that  a  presumption  in  favor  of  injunctive  relief 

would be appropriate for environmental cases in general. Instead he argued that NEPA is 

meant  to  prrvent  a  particular  kind  of  injury,  one  that  should  play  a  central  role  in  the 

decision whether to grant an injunction. The purpose of NEPA is to ensure that officials 

take environmental considerations into account before they embark on a course of action. 

“Thus, when a decision to which NEPA obligations attach is made without the informed 

environmental consideration that NEPA requires, the harm that NEPA intends to prevent 
has  been  suffered.”144  That  harm  is  the  increased  risk  to  the  environment  that  arises 

“when governmental decisionmakers make up their minds without having before them an 

analysis  (with  prior  public  comment)  of  the  likely  effects  of  their  decision  upon  the 
environment.”145  

Irreversibility is central here, for it is simply the case that administrators are less 

likely to destroy a nearly completed project than one that has only started. The relevant 

harm “may well have to do with the psychology of decisionmakers, and perhaps a more 
deeply  rooted  psychological  instinct  not  to  tear  down  projects  once  they  are  built.”146 

Judge Breyer’s point, then, is that “the district court should take account of the potentially 

irreparable  nature  of  this  decisionmaking  risk  to  the  environment  when  considering  a 
request for preliminary injunction.”147 

                                                 

141 See Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council, 490 US 332 (1989). 
142 Sierra Club v Marsh, 872 F2d 497 (1st Cir 1989). 
143 See, in this vein, Washington County, North Carolina v. US Department of the Navy, 317 F Supp 2d 

626 (EDNC 2004); Crutchfield v. US Army Corp of Engineers, 192 F.Supp. 2d 444 (ED Va 2001). 

144 Sierra Club v. Marsh, 872 F2d at 500. 
145 Id. 
146 Id. at 504. 
147 Id. at 501. 

28 

None of this means that in NEPA cases, preliminary injunctions should issue as a 

matter of course; that view would endorse the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle 

in  its  crudest  form.  Sometimes  injunctions  will  themselves  impose  serious  harm,  and 
sometimes the risk to the environment is trivial.148 But in NEPA cases, it makes sense to 

consider, as a relevant factor, the risk that an inadequately informed decision to proceed 

will  alter  the  status  quo,  ensuring  that  once  an  environmental  impact  statement  is 

produced, it will be too late to have a meaningful effect on the outcome. If delay is not 

exceedingly costly, and if the risk of environmental harm is  serious, injunctive relief is 

appropriate for NEPA violations. An understanding of the risk of irreversibility helps to 

explain why. 

  
III. On Catastrophes and Worst Case Scenarios 
 

On one understanding of irreversibility, the real problem is seriousness: A loss of 

a species, or of a pristine area, is far worse if the loss is permanent. Many international 
treaties  focus  on  serious  and  in  particular  on  catastrophic  harm.149  The  line  between  a 

noncatastrophic  and  a  catastrophic  harm  rests  on  the  magnitude  of  the  adverse  effects. 

For  present  purposes,  let  us  simply  understand  a  catastrophic  harm  to  involve  a  large 

number  of  human  deaths—not  thousands,  and  not  even  hundreds  of  thousands,  but 
millions.150 

 

A.  Against Catastrophic Risk, 1: A Modest Principle 
 

Environmental  regulation  is  often  concerned  with  low  probability  events  having 

especially  bad  worst-case  scenarios.  The  standard  approach  to  risk  regulation  fully 

supports  that  concern.  To  see  why,  consider  three  stylized  environmental  problems, 

creating three quite different sorts of risks. (a) The first problem creates a 999,999 in a 

million chance that no one will die, and a 1 in a million chance that 200 million people 

will die. (b) The second problem creates a 50% chance that no one will die and a 50% 

chance  that  400  people  will  die.  (c)  The  third  problem  creates  a  100%  chance  that  200 

                                                 

148 See Village of Gambell, supra note. 
149 See supra. 
150 A narrower definition, involving threats to the survival of the human race, is adopted in Posner, supra 

note, at 6. 

29 

people will die. Suppose that government can eliminate all three problems at a specified 

cost. 

Each  of  these  risks  presents  an  expected  loss  of  200  lives.  If  outcomes  and 

probabilities  are  simply  multiplied,  the  three  problems  will  be  seen  as  equivalent.  In 

problem  (a),  my  special  concern,  it  would  be  difficult  to  defend  that  view  that  no 

resources should be devoted to eliminating the underlying risk. Suppose that a human life 

is valued at $6 million. If so, then $1.2 billion should be expended for eliminating the risk 

involved in problem (a). And in fact, this is the approach counseled by the government’s 
current approach to risk reduction.  151 Let us begin, then, with the most modest kind of 

Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle—one that favors precautionary steps based on 

expected  value  calculations  of  this  sort. Note  that  under  this  approach,  catastrophes  are 

not receiving any particular attention. The central point  is  that they do not deserve less 

attention than higher probability harms with equivalent expected outcomes.  

Despite its modesty, this form of the Precautionary Principle has important uses. 

In  many  contexts,  human  beings  treat  low-probability  risks  as  if  they  were  zero, 
especially if those risks are unlikely to come to fruition in the near future.152 And because 
judgments about probability are often driven by the availability heuristic,153 people may 

well treat low-probability risks as if they were zero probability risks. By their very nature, 

low-probability  risks  are  unlikely  to  be  accompanied  by  “available”  instances  of  real-

world  harm.  The  importance  of  the  Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary  Principle  is 

concerned  by  the  fact  that  when  a  risk  probability  is  below  a  certain  threshold,  people 

treat the risk as essentially zero, and are willing to pay little or nothing for insurance in 

the event of loss.154 Such responses provide support for the intuitive suggestion that some 

risks  are  simply  “off-screen”—whereas  others,  statistically  not  much  larger,  can  come 

                                                 

151 Agencies use a value of a statistical life of about $6 million, independent of the probability that the 
relevant  risk  will  come  to  fruition.  For  an  overview,  see  Eric  Posner  and  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Dollars  and 
Death, U Chi L Rev (forthcoming 2005); see, e.g., 66 Fed. Reg. at 7012 (2001). In its July 2003 regulation 
governing food labeling of trans fatty acids, the Food and Drug Administration used a VSL of $6.5 million, 
see 68 Fed. Reg. 41434, 41488 (July 11, 2003); in its March 13, 2003 proposed rule on dietary ingredients 
and dietary supplements, the same agency suggested a VSL of $5 million, see 68 Fed. Reg. 12158, 12229 
(using this value to calculate the “value of a statistical life day”). 

152 See Max Bazerman, Predictable Surprises (2004). 
153  See  Amos  Tversky  &  Daniel  Kahneman,  Judgment  Under  Uncertainty:  Heuristics  and  Biases,  in 

JUDGMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES 3, 11-14 (Daniel Kahneman et al. eds 1982). 

154. See  Gary  H.  McClelland  et  al.,  Insurance  for  Low-Probability  Hazards:  A  Bimodal  Response  to 

Unlikely Events, 7 J. RISK & UNCERTAINTY 95 (1993). 

30 

“on screen” and produce behavioral changes.155 The central idea behind the most modest 

form of the Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle is that low probability, high harm 

risks should be treated in accordance with their expected value.  

This principle, based on expected value, might well provide more protection than 

accords with ordinary intuitions. In order to obtain a preliminary understanding of those 
intuitions,  I  conducted  an  experiment  with  176  law  students,156  who  were  asked  the 

following question:  

The  government  is  considering  two  environmental  problems.  The  first  creates  a 
one in one million risk of killing 200 million people, and a 999,999 in one million risk of 
killing  zero  people.  The  second  creates  a  one  in  ten  risk  of  killing  2000  people,  and  a 
nine in ten risk of killing zero people. Do you think: 

the first problem has higher priority? 
the second problem has higher priority? 
the two problems have equal priority? 

 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
 
A  strong  plurality  –-  41%—chose  (b),  whereas  36%  chose  (c)  and  only  22% 

chose (a). In short, far more respondents were risk-seeking than risk-averse in the domain 

of low-probability catastrophes; for low-probability risks of disaster, they were willing to 

take  their  chances,  at  least  when  the  comparison  risk  involves  a  higher  probability  risk 

with an equivalent expected value. Of course law students at particular institutions may 

not be representative of the population as a whole, but it is reasonable to expect that the 

relatively  lower  concern  for  a  low-probability,  high-harm  risk  would  be  even  more 

pronounced within the general population. If so, attending to expected value would have 
significant effects in the case of potentially catastrophic harm.157 To the extent that many 

people show little concern about global warming, part of the explanation may well lie in 

the fact that human beings often neglect low probability, high harm risks, especially if the 

                                                 

155 Id. 
156 One hundred and four were at the University of Alabama Law School and seventy-two were at the 

University of Chicago Law School; the numbers were substantially the same across the two schools. 

157  Notably,  over  one-third  of  respondents  in  this  experiment  were  risk-neutral,  perhaps  because  law 
students are taught to attend to expected value—a tendency that would be expected to be less pronounced 
in the general population. It might have been anticipated that University of Chicago law students would be 
more  incline  to  risk-neutrality  than  University  of  Alabama  law  students,  because  of  the  prevalence  of 
economic  analysis  at  the  former  institution,  but  the  figures  were  essentially  the  same:  37.5%  of  Chicago 
students were risk neutral, compared to 35.5% of Alabama students. 

31 

costs would be incurred immediately and if the benefits would not be realized until the 
distant future.158 

 
B.  Against Catastrophic Risk, 2: Expected Value, Prospect Theory, and (Bounded) 

Risk Aversion 

 

A Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle, emphasizing expected value, raises 

several  questions.  The  first  is  whether  a  low  probability  risk  of  catastrophe  might  not 

deserve more attention than higher probability risks with apparently equivalent expected 

value. Perhaps people should be especially attentive to low-probability, high consequence 

hazards. The reason is that it is plausible to think that the loss of 200 million people is 

more than 1000 times worse than the loss of 2000 people. Indeed, the former loss might 

be dramatically worse than a mere exercise in multiplication might suggest. Consider the 

real-world meaning of a loss of 200 million people in the United States. In that event, the 

nation would find it extremely hard to recover. Its private and public institutions would 

be damaged for a long time, perhaps forever. What kind of governance structure would it 

have?  What  would  its  economy  look  like?  Future  generations  would  inevitably  suffer. 

The effect of a catastrophe greatly outruns a simple multiplication of a certain number of 

lives lost. 

It follows  that  the overall costs  of losing two-thirds  of the American population 

are far more than 100,000 times the loss if 2000 people are killed. Consider in this regard 

the  "Buffalo  Creek  Syndrome,"  documented  several  times  in  the  aftermath  of  major 

disasters.  Nearly  two  years  after  the  collapse  of  a  dam  that  left  120  dead  and  4,000 

homeless,  psychiatric  researchers  continued  to  find  significant  psychological  and 

sociological  changes;  survivors  were  characterized  by  a  loss  of  direction  and  energy, 
other disabling character changes, and a loss of communality.159 One evaluator attributed 

this  loss  of  direction  specifically  to  "the  loss  of  traditional  bonds  of  kinship  and 
neighborliness."160 Genuine catastrophes, involving the loss of millions of people, would 

magnify that loss to an unimaginable degree. There is a detailed literature on the “social 

amplification of risk,” exploring secondary social losses, from one or another event, that 
                                                 

158 See Max Bazerman et al., Predictable Surprises (2004). 
159 Daniel J. Fiorino, Technical and Democratic Values in Risk Analysis, 9 Risk Analysis 293 (1989). 
160  Id.  at  295.  See  also  J.  D.  Robinson,  M.  D.  Higgins,  &  P.  K.  Bolyard,  Assessing  Environmental 

Impacts on Health: A Role for Behavioral Science, 4 Envtl. Impact Assessment Rev. 41 (1983). 

32 

can greatly outrun the initial effect of that event.161 A Catastrophic Harm Precautionary 

Principle,  devoting  special  attention  to  risks  with  large  secondary  losses,  is  well 

supported by an understanding of social amplification. 

In  any  case  (and  this  is  an  independent  point),  a  well-known  alternative  to 

expected  utility  theory,  prospect  theory,  predicts  risk  aversion  in  circumstances  of  just 
this sort.  162 It follows that if the question is properly framed, people may be willing to 

devote special priority to a low probability risk of catastrophe, with the degree of priority 
depending on the degree of risk aversion.163 Especially in light of the secondary costs of 

catastrophe,  it  might  be  concluded  that  whatever  the  right  figure  is,  the  simple 

aggregation ($6 million multiplied by the number of lives lost) produces implausibly low 

figures  when  the  question  is  the  death  of  millions.  Perhaps  it  makes  sense  to  build  a 

distinctive premium, called “catastrophe aversion,” into case (a). This idea might be used 

as the basis for a second and more aggressive kind of Catastrophic Harm Precautionary 

Principle, embodying that premium. 

This claim might be supported by questioning the use of the $6 million figure for 

the value of a human life. That figure is a product of studies of actual workplace risks, 
attempting to determine how much workers are paid to assume mortality hazards.164 The 
relevant risks usually are in the general range of 1/10,000 to 1/100,000.165 The calculation 

of  VSL  is  a  product  of  simple  arithmetic.  Suppose  that  workers  must  be  paid  $600,  on 

average, to assume a risk of 1/10,000. If so, the value of a statistical life would be said to 

be $6 million. But if someone is willing to pay $60 to avoid a risk of 100,000, it does not 

follow that they would be willing to pay (only) $60 to avoid a risk of 100,000 when that 

risk  might  come  to  fruition  for  millions  of  people  at  the  same  time.  People  might  be 

willing  to  show  a  kind  of  catastrophe  premium,  stemming  not  from  risk  aversion,  but 

from a special distaste for risks of true disaster.  

                                                 

161 See The Social Amplification of Risk (Nick Pidgeon et al. eds 2003). 
162  Daniel  Kahneman  &  Amos  Tversky,  Prospect  Theory:  An  Analysis  of  Decision  Under  Risk,  in 
CHOICES, VALUES, AND FRAMES 17, 28-38 (Daniel Kahneman & Amos Tversky eds., 2001); Amos Tversky 
& Daniel Kahneman, Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representations of Uncertainty, in id. at 
44, 64-65. 

163 See id. 
164 See W. Kip Viscusi, Fatal Tradeoffs (1982), for discussion. 
165 See, e.g., W. Kip Viscusi, The Value of Life: Estimates With Risks by Occupation and Industry, 42 

Ec. Inquiry 29, 33 (2004) (showing fatality risks ranging from about 1/100,000 to 45/100,000). 

33 

I do not mean to settle the question of monetization here. My only suggestion is 

that for a number of reasons, it makes sense to show special concern for low probability 

risks of catastrophe. If so, a Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle is justified. There 

is a clear implication for such problems as global warming, genetic modification of food, 

nuclear power, and terrorism: In all of these contexts, attention to the expected value of 

the harm is warranted, together with a premium that recognizes the secondary effects that 

results from the magnitude of the danger. But from the analysis thus far, what is true in 

the  context  of  irreversible  harms  is  true  for  the  Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary 

Principle as well. The amount of the premium is bounded, and everything depends on the 

probability  of  the  risk,  its  size,  and  the  various  costs  associated  with  reducing  or 

eliminating it.  

Thus far, then, the territory is conventional. Attention to expected value justifies a 

concern  with  low  probability  risks  of  real  disaster;  and  the  degree  of  attention  must  be 

attuned  to  the  distinctive  problems  and  costs  associated  with  catastrophe.  Even  if 

regulators are risk-neutral, they will devote substantial resources to the reduction of such 

risks. In view of the high stakes, a degree of risk-aversion may well make sense in this 

context, complementing a focus on the problem of irreversibility to suggest, for example, 

that  significant  resources  should  be  devoted  to  the  problems  of  global  warming  and 
depletion  of  the  ozone  layer.166  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  important  to  attend  to  the 
environmental and other risks associated with reducing those problems.167 An analysis of 
this kind might be used to specify appropriate responses.168 What I am adding here is that 

this analysis might be undertaken under the general framework of a Catastrophic Harm 

Precautionary Principle. 

 

C.  Catastrophic Harm, Timing, and Politics 
 
 

The risk of catastrophe can be immediate, as in the case  of terrorist attacks; but 

sometimes it is clear that if a catastrophe will occur, it will not be until the distant future, 

                                                 

166 On the latter problem, see generally Richard Benedict, Ozone Diplomacy (1991); Robert Percival et 

al., Environmental Regulation: Law, Science, and Policy 1046-1055 (2003) 

167  See,  e.g.,  Goklany,  supra  note,  at  57-88,  emphasizing  that  “an  insurance  policy  might  itself  raise 
new—or  aggravate  existing—threats  to  human  health  or  the  environment,”  id.  at  57;  William  Cline, 
Climate Change, in Global Crises, Global Solutions, supra note, at 13, 15-21. 

168 See Cline, supra note: Nordhaus and Boyer, supra note. 

34 

as  in  the  case  of  global  warming.  When  the  costs  of  precautions  are  incurred 

immediately,  and  when  the  benefits  will  not  be  enjoyed  until  decades  later,  people  are 

likely to be extremely averse to precautionary steps, even if they are justified. Of course 

the  aversion  might  make  sense  if  it  is  based  on  a  decision  to  apply  the  appropriate 
discount  rate  to  future  benefits  (a  highly  controversial  question169).  But  it  is  easy  to 

imagine  situations  in  which  future  harms  are  being  treated  as  irrelevant,  or  nearly  so, 
because  of  social  myopia,  wishful  thinking,170  or  a  simple  failure  of  imagination  or 

empathy with those who will be at risk. For these reasons, there is a particular need for a 

Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary  Principle  when  the  risk  will  not  materialize  until  the 

distant future. 

 

The point can be fortified with a reference to likely political dynamics. If the costs 

of precautions  will  be incurred immediately, and if the benefits will not be enjoyed for 

many decades, elected officials will have a strong incentive to delay. The reason is that 

they will face political retribution for imposing immediate costs and might well receive 

little or no political gain for delivering long-term benefits. In the case of global warming, 

the temporal disparity between costs and benefits creates a strong incentive to delay even 

if  immediate  precautions  are  justified,  simply  because  those  who  are  most  likely  to 
benefit do not vote.171 This point provides an additional reason to endorse a Catastrophic 

Harm Precautionary Principle, one that attempts to overcome the danger that future risks 

will receive less attention than they deserve. 

 
D.  Against Catastrophic Risk, 3: Uncertainty 

 

 Is  it  possible  to  support  a  still  more  aggressive  kind  of  Catastrophic  Harm 

Precautionary Principle? To approach this question, it is necessary to venture into some 

technical waters. 

In some contexts, environmental and other risk-related problems involve hazards 

of ascertainable probability; and ascertainable probability has been the assumption of the 

discussion thus far. It may well be possible to say that the risk of death, from a certain 

                                                 

Lives, 99 Colum L Rev 941 (1999). 

169  Richard  Revesz,  Environmental  Regulation,  Cost-Benefit  Analysis,  and  the  Discounting  of  Human 

170 See George Akerlof, The Economic Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance, in George Akerlof, An 

Economic Theorist’s Book of Tales (1988). 

171 See Bazerman et al., Predictable Surprises, supra note. 

35 

activity, is 1/100,000, or at least that it ranges from (say) 1/20,000 to 1/500,000, with an 

exposed  population  of  (say)  10  million.  Or  it  may  be  possible  to  say  that  the  risk  of 
catastrophic  harm  from  global  warming  is  under  10%  but  above  1%.172  But  as  the 

economist  Frank  Knight  has  maintained,  it  is  possible  to  imagine  instances  in  which 
analysts  cannot  specify  even  a  range  of  probability.173  Hence  regulators,  and  ordinary 

people,  are  often  acting  in  a  situation  of  uncertainty  (where  outcomes  can  be  identified 

but no probabilities can be assigned) rather than risk (where outcomes can be identified 
and probabilities assigned to various outcomes).174 And they are sometimes acting under 

conditions of ignorance, in which they are unable to specify either the probability of bad 

outcomes  or  their  nature—where  regulators  do  not  even  know  the  magnitude  of  the 
harms that they are facing.175  

When  existing  knowledge  allows  regulators  to  identify  outcomes,  but  does  not 

permit them to assign probabilities to each, it is sometimes said to be rational to follow 
the  maximin  principle:  Choose  the  policy  with  the  best  worst-case  outcome.176  In  the 

environmental context, perhaps elaborate precautions can be justified by reference to the 

maximin principle, asking officials to identify the worst case among the various options, 

and  to  select  that  option  whose  worst-case  is  least  bad.  Perhaps  the  maximin  principle 

would lead to an exceptionally aggressive form of the Catastrophic Harm Precautionary 

Principle,  by,  for  example,  urging  elaborate  steps  to  combat  global  warming.  Suppose 

that such steps would impose various hardships, but that even in the worst case, these are 

not  nearly  so  bad  as  the  worst  cases  associated  with  global  warming.  It  follows  that  if 

aggressive measures are justified to reduce the risks associated with global warming, one 
                                                 

172 Nordhaus and Boyer, supra note, at 88 (suggesting a 1.2% probability of a catastrophic impact with 

2.5 C warming and of 6.8% with 6 C warming). 

173  Frank  H.  Knight,  Risk,  Uncertainty,  and  Profit  (1933).  This  is  Posner’s  view  of  the  abript  global 

warming. See Posner, supra note, at 57. 

174  See  Knight,  supra  note;  Paul  Davidson,  Is  Probability  Theory  Relevant  for  Uncertainty?  A  Post-
Keynesian Perspective, 5(1) J. of Econ. Perspectives 129 (1991). Some people object that uncertainty does 
not exist, because it is always possible for decisionmakers to produce probability assignments by proposing 
a  series  of  lotteries  over  possible  outcomes;  but  such  assignments  have  no  epistemic  credentials  if  not 
rooted  in  either  theory  or  repeated  experiences,  and  many  risk-related problems,  such  as  those  involving 
global warming, are that sort of case. I take up this point in detail below. 

175  On  ignorance  and  precaution,  see Poul  Harremoes,  Ethical  Aspects of Scientific  Incertitude [sic]  in 

Environmental Analysis and Decision Making, 11 Journal of Cleaner Production 705 (2003).  

176For  a  technical  treatment,  suggesting  the  possibility  rationality  of  maximin,  see  Kenneth  Arrow  and 
Leonid  Hurwicz,  An  Optimality  Criterion  for  Decision-Making  under  Ignorance,  in  Uncertainty  and 
Expectations  in  Economics:  Essays  in Honor of G.L.S. Shackle (1972);  for  a nontechnical  overview,  see 
Jon Elster, Explaining Technical Change 185-207 (1983). 

36 

reason is that those risks are potentially catastrophic and existing science does not enable 
us  to  assign  probabilities  to  the  worst-case  scenarios.177  The  same  analysis  might  be 
applied  to  many  problems,  including  the  risks  associated  with  nuclear  energy178  and 

terrorism. 

 

E.  Against Worst-Case Analysis 
 

To understand these claims, we need to back up a bit and to investigate maximin 

in more detail. Does it generally make sense to eliminate the worst-case scenario? Put the 

question of uncertainty to one side and begin with a numerical example that involves risk 

instead: Which would you prefer?  

 
(a) A 99.9% chance of gaining $2000, and a 0.1% chance of losing $6, or 
(b) A 50% chance of gaining $5, and a 50% chance of losing $5.  
 
Under maximin, (b) is preferable—but under standard accounts of rationality, it 

would be much more sensible to select (a), which has a far higher expected value. To 
choose (b), one would have to show an extraordinary degree of risk aversion. 

Now  turn  to  a  mundane  illustration  of  the  kinds  of  decisions  in  which  maximin 

might seem attractive: A reporter, living in Los Angeles, has been told that he can take 

one  of  two  assignments.  First,  he  can  go  to  a  nation,  say  Iraq,  that  is  facing  a  large 

amount  of  terrorism.  Second,  he  can  go  to  Paris  to  cover  anti-American  sentiment  in 

France. The Iraq assignment has, in his view, two polar outcomes: a) he might have the 

most  interesting  and  rewarding  experience  of  his  professional  life  or  b)  he  might  be 

killed.  The  Paris  assignment  has  two  polar  outcomes  of  its  own:  a)  he  might  have  an 

interesting experience, one that is also a great deal of fun and b) he might be lonely and 

homesick. It might seem tempting for the reporter to choose Paris, on the ground that the 

worst-case  scenario  for  that  choice  is  so  much  better  than  the  worst-case  scenario  for 

Iraq. And if this is correct, the conclusion might bear on regulatory policy, where one or 
another approach has an identifiably worst worst-case scenario.179 

                                                 

177 See Richard Posner, Catastrophe: Risk and Response 49 (2004). 
178 See Elster, supra note, at 188-205. 
179  See  id;  Richard  T.  Woodward  and  Richard  C.  Bishop,  How  to  Decide  When  Expert  Disagree: 
Uncertainty-Based  Choice  Rules  in  Environmental  Policy,  73  Land  Economics  492  (1997);  cf.  Posner, 
supra note, at 45-51, emphasizing the possibility of catastrophe from abrupt global warming. 

37 

 

But maximin is not always a sensible decision rule. Suppose that the reporter now 

has the choice of staying in Los Angeles or going to Paris; suppose too that on personal 

and professional grounds, Paris is far better. It would make little sense for him to invoke 

maximin  in  order  to  stay  in  Los  Angeles  on  the  ground  that  the  plane  to  Paris  might 

crash. A plane crash is of course extremely unlikely, but it cannot be ruled out. Using an 

example  of  this  kind,  John  Harsanyi  contends  that  maximin  should  be  rejected  on  the 

ground that it produces irrationality, even madness: “If you  took the maximin principle 

seriously  you  could  not  ever  cross  the  street  (after  all,  you  might  be  hit  by  a  car);  you 

could never drive over a bridge (after all, it might collapse); you could never get married 

(after  all,  it  might  end  in  a  disaster),  etc.  If  anybody  really  acted  in  this  way  he  would 
soon end up in a mental institution.”180  

Harsanyi’s argument might also be invoked to contest the use of maximin in the 

choice  between  Iraq  and  Paris.  Perhaps  the  reporter  should  attempt  to  specify  the 

likelihood of being killed in Iraq, rather than simply identifying the worst-case scenario. 

Perhaps maximin is a way of neglecting probability, and hence a form of irrationality. In 

some circumstances, people do display probability neglect, in a way that ensures attention 
to  the  worst-case  scenario.181  But  if  probabilities  can  actually  be  assessed,  and  if  that 

scenario is extremely unlikely to come to fruition, probability neglect is hard to defend 

even for people who are exceptionally risk-averse. Suppose that the risk of death, in Iraq, 

turns out to be 1/1,000,000, and that the choice of Iraq would be much better, personally 

and professionally, than the choice of Paris. It is necessary to know something about the 

reporter’s values and tastes to understand how to resolve this problem, but it is certainly 

plausible to think that the reporter should choose Iraq rather than make the decision by 

obsessively  fixating  on  the  worst  that  might  happen.  Recall  that  the  Council  of 

Environmental Quality no longer requires worst-case analysis; it refuses to do so on the 
ground that extremely speculative and improbable outcomes do not deserve attention.182 

So far, then, Harsanyi’s criticism of maximin seems on firm ground.  

                                                 

180 See John C. Harsanyi, Morality and the Theory of Rational Behavior, in Utilitarianism and Beyond 40 

(Amartya Sen and Bernard Williams eds. 1982).  

181  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Probability  Neglect:  Emotions,  Worst  Cases,  and  the  Law,  112  Yale  LJ  61 

(2002). 

182 See Robert Percival et al., Environmental Law and Policy 848-49 (2003). 

38 

But something important is missing from Harsanyi’s argument and even from the 

reporter’s analysis of the choice between Los Angeles and Paris: Risks, and equally bad 

worst-case scenarios, are on all sides of the hypothesized situations. If the reporter stayed 

in Los Angeles, he might be killed in one way or another, and hence the use of maximin 

does  not  by  itself  justify  the  decision  to  stay  in  the  United  States.  And  contrary  to 

Harsanyi’s argument, maximin does not really mean that people should not cross streets, 

drive over bridges, and refuse to marry. The reason is that failing to do those three things 

has  worst-case  scenarios  of  its  own  (including  death  and  disaster).  To  implement 

maximin, or an injunction to take precautions, it is necessary to identify all relevant risks, 

not a subset. Harsanyi errs in the same way as do those who embrace the strong version 

of the Precautionary Principle, by neglecting the possibility that precautions against one 

set  of  risks  will  create  risks  of  its  own.  Alternative  decisions  may  lead  to  worst-case 

scenarios  that  are  very  bad  and  even  equally  bad.  A  Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary 

Principle, attempting  to eliminate the  worst  cases,  might  produce  nightmarish  scenarios 

too.  

Nonetheless, the more general objection to maximin holds under circumstances of 

risk. If probabilities can be assigned to the various outcomes, it does not make sense to 

follow  maximin  when  the  worst  case  is  highly  improbable  and  when  the  alternative 

option is both much better and much more likely. Of course many people are risk-averse, 

or averse to particular risks. But when probabilities can be assigned, maximin seems to 
require  infinite  risk  aversion.183  It  follows  that  the  reporter  would  do  well  to  reject 

maximin, and to go to Paris, even if the worst-case scenario for Paris is worse than that 

for  Los  Angeles  if  the  realistically  likely  outcomes  are  so  much  better  in  Paris.  These 

points  are  not  meant  to  suggest  that  in  order  to  be  rational,  the  reporter  must  calculate 

expected  values,  multiplying  imaginable  outcomes  by  probability  and  deciding 

accordingly. Life is short; people are busy and occasionally risk-averse; and it is far from 

irrational to create a margin of safety to protect against disaster. But if the likelihood of a 

bad outcome is extremely small, and if much is to be gained by deciding in accordance 

with expected values, maximin is foolish.  

                                                 

(1974). 

183  See  R.A.  Murgrave,  Maximin,  Uncertainty,  and  the  Leisure  Trade-Off,  88  Q  J  Econ  625,  626-28 

39 

For  environmental  policy,  the  implication  is  clear.  A  Catastrophic  Harm 

Precautionary Principle makes sense if it emphasizes expected value; it may even make 

sense if it embodies a form of risk aversion. But it does not make sense, as a general rule, 

to  identify  the  worst-case  scenario  and  to  attempt  to  eliminate  it.  But  the  problem  of 

uncertainty raises distinctive questions. 

 

F.  Maximin and Uncertainty 

 
1.  Precautions,  uncertainty,  and  worst  case  scenarios.  I  have  suggested  that 

maximin  has  sometimes  been  recommended  under  circumstances  of  uncertainty  rather 
than  risk.184  In  an  illuminating  effort  to  recast  the  Precautionary  Principle,185  Stephen 

Gardiner  invokes  John  Rawls’s  argument  for  maximin  in  the  context  of  distributive 
justice.  186  Rawls  argues  that  when  “grave  risks”  are  involved,  and  when  probabilities 

cannot be assigned to the occurrence of those risks, maximin is the appropriate decision 

rule, at least if the chooser “cares very little, if anything, for what he might gain among 
the minimum stipend that he can, in fact, be sure of by following the maximin rule.”187 

Rawls contends, then, that maximin is justified (1) in the face of potentially catastrophic 

outcomes,  (2)  where  probabilities  cannot  be  assigned  ,and  (3)  where  the  loss,  from 
following  maximin,  is  a  matter  of  relative  indifference.188  Gardiner  argues  that  this 

argument  forms  the  basis  for  a  “core”  Precautionary  Principle  in  the  environmental 

setting. When the three conditions are met, precautions, in the form of efforts to avoid the 

worst-case scenario, should be adopted. 

Gardiner  adds,  sensibly,  that  to  justify  maximin,  the  threats  that  are  potentially 

catastrophic must satisfy some minimal threshold of plausibility. If they can be dismissed 

as unrealistic, then maximin should not be followed. Gardiner believes that the problem 

of global warming can be usefully analyzed in these terms and that it presents a good case 

for the application of maximin. In a similar vein, Jon Elster, speaking of nuclear power, 

contends that maximin is the appropriate choice when it is possible to identify the worst-
                                                 

184 See, e.g., Elster, supra note, at 188-205. 
185 See Stephen Gardiner, The Core Precautionary Principle (unpublished manuscript 2004). 
186 See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice 132-39 (revised ed. 1999). 
187 See id. at 134. 
188  Rawls  draws  in  turn  on  William  Fellner,  Probability  and  Profit  140-42  (1965).  Rawls  offers  a 
somewhat  revised  defense  of  maximin  in  John  Rawls,  Some  Reasons  for  the  Maximin  Criterion,  64  Am 
Econ Rev 141 (1974). 

40 

case scenario and when the alternatives have the same best consequences.189 Here, then, 

is  the  basic  argument  in  favor  of  the  most  aggressive  form  of  the  Catastrophic  Harm 

Precautionary  Principle—a  principle  that  calls  on  regulators,  under  circumstances  of 

uncertainty,  to  identify  and  eliminate  the  worst-case  scenario.  Taken  seriously,  this 

principle  would  have  large  consequences  for  regulatory  policy,  at  least  if  conditions  of 

uncertainty are common. 

2. Objection 1: The argument is trivial. An initial problem with this argument is 
that  it  risks  triviality,  above  all  because  of  condition  (3).190  If  individuals  and  societies 

can  eliminate  an  uncertain  danger  of  catastrophe  for  essentially  no  cost,  then  of  course 

they  should  eliminate  that  risk.  If  people  are  asked  to  pay  $1  to  avoid  a  potentially 

catastrophic  risk  to  which  probabilities  cannot  be  assigned,  they  might  as  well  pay  $1. 

And  if  two  options  have  the  same  best-case  scenario,  and  if  the  first  has  a  far  better 

worst-case scenario, people should of course choose the first option. 

There  is  nothing  wrong  with  this  argument,  but  the  real  world  rarely  presents 

problems  of  this  form.  Where  policy  and  law are disputed, the  elimination of uncertain 

dangers of catastrophe imposes both costs and risks. In the context of global warming, for 

example, it is implausible to say that regulatory choosers can or should care “very little, if 

anything,” for what might be lost by following maximin. If nations followed maximin for 
global  warming,  they  would  spend  a  great  deal  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions.191 

The  result  would  almost  certainly  be  higher  prices  for  gasoline  and  energy,  probably 

producing increases in unemployment and poverty. A study done at the Wharton School, 

for  example,  projected  extremely  high  costs  for  the  United  States  from  the  Kyoto 
Protocol192—including  a  loss  of  2.4  million  jobs  and  $300  billion  in  the  nation’s  GDP, 

with an average annual cost of $2700 per household, a 65 cent per gallon increase in the 

                                                 

189 See Jon Elster, Explaining Technical Change 200 (1983). 
190  Cf.  David  Kelsey,  Choice  under  Partial  Uncertainty,  34  International  Economic  Review  297,  305 
(1993):  “It  is  often  argued  that  lexicographic  decision  rules  such  as  maximin  are  irrational,  since  in 
economics we would not expect an individual to be prepared to make a small improvement in one of his 
objectives at the expense of large sacrifices in all of his other objectives. This criticism is less powerful in 
the current context since we have assumed that the decision maker has a weak order rather than a cardinal 
utility function on the space of outcomes. Given this assumption the terms ‘large and ‘small’ used in the 
above argument are not meaningful.” In many environmental choices, however, decision makers do have a 
cardinal utility function, not merely a weak order. 

191  See  William  D.  Nordhaus  &  Joseph  Boyer,  Warming  the  World:  Economic  Models  of  Global 

Warming 168 (2000). 

192 http://www.api.org/globalclimate/wefastateimpacts.htm 

41 

price  of  gasoline,  and  a  near-doubling  of  the  price  of  energy  and  electricity.193  Even  if 

these figures  are  wildly  inflated, as seems likely, any significant effort to curtail  global 

warming  would  impose  significant  hardships,  especially  on  poor  people,  who  are  least 

able  to  bear  the  relevant  cost  increases.  Something  similar  can  be  said  about  genetic 

modification of food, because elimination of the worst-case scenario, through aggressive 

regulation,  might  well  eliminate  an  inexpensive  source  of  nutrition  that  would  have 

exceptionally  valuable  effects  on  countless  people  who  lives  under  circumstances  of 
extreme deprivation.194 

The  real  question,  then,  is  whether  regulators  should  embrace  maximin  in  real-

world cases in which doing so is extremely costly. If they should, it is because condition 

(3) is too stringent and should be abandoned. Even if the costs of following maximin are 

significant,  and  even  if  regulators  care  a  great  deal  about  incurring  those  costs,  the 

question is whether it makes sense to follow maximin when they face uncertain dangers 
of catastrophe. In the environmental context, some people have so claimed.195 This claim 

takes us directly to the next objection to maximin. 

3.  Objection  2:  Maximin  assumes  infinite  risk  aversion.  Rawls’  arguments  in 

favor of adopting maximin, for purposes of distributive justice, were subject to withering 
critiques from economists.196 The central challenge was that the maximin principle would 

be chosen by those maximizing expected utility only if they showed infinite risk aversion. 

In the words of one of Rawls’ most influential critics, infinite risk aversion “is unlikely. 

Even though the stakes are great, people may well wish to trade a reduction in the assured 

floor  against  the  provision  of  larger  gains.  But  if  risk  aversion  is  less  than  infinite,  the 
outcome will not be maximin.”197  To adapt this objection to the environmental context: 

It is plausible to assume a bounded  degree  of risk  aversion with respect to  catastrophic 

harms, to support some modest forms of the Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle. 

                                                 

193 Id. 
194 See Kym Anderson and Chantal Nielsen, Golden Rice and the Looming GMO Debate: Implications 

for the Poor, available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=508463 

195  See  Richard  T.  Woodward  and  Richard  C.  Bishop,  How  to  Decide  When  Expert  Disagree: 

Uncertainty-Based Choice Rules in Environmental Policy, 73 Land Economics 492 (1997). 

196 See, e.g., Musgrave, supra note; Kenneth Arrow, Some Ordinalist-Utilitarian Notes on Rawls’ Theory 
of Jusice, 70 J Phil 245 (1973); J.C. Harsanyi, Can the Maximin Principe Serve As a Basis for Morality? A 
Critique of John Rawls’ Theory, 69 Am Plit Sci Rev 594 (1975). 

197 Musgrave, supra note, at 627. 

42 

But even under circumstances of uncertainty—the argument goes—maximin is senseless 

unless societies are to show infinite risk aversion.  

This is a  standard challenge,  but it  is  wrong, because maximin does not assume 
infinite risk aversion.198 Suppose that people are in circumstances of genuine uncertainty, 

that  is  Knightian  uncertainty,  in  which  probabilities  cannot  plausibly  be  assigned  to 
various outcomes.199 The objection that maximin assumes infinite risk aversion depends 

on  a  denial  that  uncertainty  exists;  it  assumes  that  subjective  choices  will  be  made  and 

that  they  will  reveal  subjective  probabilities.  It  is  true  that  subjective  choices  will  be 

made. But such choices do not establish that objective uncertainty does not exist. To see 

why, it is necessary to engage that question directly. 

3.  Objection  3:  Uncertainty  does  not  exist.  Many  economists  have  denied  the 

existence  of  uncertainty.  Milton  Friedman,  for  example,  writes  of  the  risk-uncertainty 

distinction that “I have not referred to this distinction because I do not believe it is valid. I 

follow L.J. Savage in his view of personal probability, which denies any valid distinction 

along  these  lines.  We  may  treat  people  as  if  they  assigned  numerical  probabilities  to 
every  conceivable  event.”200  Friedman  and  other  skeptics  are  correct  to  insist  that 
people’s  choices  suggest  that  they  assign  probabilities  to  events.201  On  a  widespread 

view,  an  understanding  of  people’s  choices  can  be  taken  as  evidence  of  subjective 

probabilities. People’s decisions about whether to fly or instead to drive, whether to walk 

in certain neighborhoods at life, and whether to take risky jobs can be understood as an 

implicit  assignment  of  probabilities  to  events.  Indeed,  regulators  themselves  make 

decisions, including decisions about global warming, from which subjective probabilities 
                                                 

198 See C.Y. Cyrus Chu and Wen-FengLiu, A Dynamic Characterization of Rawls’s Maximin Principle: 

Theory and Implications, 12 Const Polit Econ 255 (2001). 

199 See id. 
200  See  Milton  Friedman,  Price  Theory:  A  Provisional  Text  282  (1976).  In  the  same  vein  is  Jack 

Hirshleifer et al., The Analytics of Uncertainty and Information 10 (1992):  

"In this book we disregard Knight's distinction which has proved to be a sterile one. For our purposes risk 
and uncertainty mean the same thing. It does not matter, we contend, whether an ‘objective’ classification 
is  or  is  not  possible.  For,  we  will  be  dealing  throughout  with  a  ‘subjective’probability  concept  (as 
developed especially by Savage 1954): probability is simply degree of belief. . . . [Because we never know 
true objective probabilities] decision makers are never in Knight's world of risk but instead always in his 
world of uncertainty. That the alternative approach, assigning probabilities on the basis of subjective degree 
of belief, is a workable and fruitful procedure will be shown constructively throughout this book." For the 
purposes of the analysis by Hirshleifer et al., the assignment of subjective probabilities may well be the best 
approach.  But  the  distinction  between  risk  and  uncertainty  is  not  sterile  when  regulators  are  considering 
what to do but lack information about the probabilities associated with various outcomes. 

201 See id. 

43 

can  be  calculated.202  But  none  of  this  makes  for  a  good  objection  to  Knight,  who  was 
concerned with objective probabilities rather than subjective choices.203 Animals, no less 

than  human  beings,  make  choices  from  which  subjective  probabilities  can  be  assigned. 

But the existence of subjective probabilities—from dogs, horses, and elephants—does not 

mean that animals do not ever face genuine uncertainty.  

Suppose  that  the  question  is  the  likelihood  that  at  least  one  hundred  million 

human  beings  will  be  alive  in  10,000  years.  For  most  people,  equipped  with  the 

knowledge that they have, no probability can sensibly be assigned. Perhaps uncertainty is 

not  unbounded;  the  likelihood  can  reasonably  be  described  as  above  0%  and  below 

100%. But beyond that point, there is little to say. Or suppose that I present you with a 

urn, containing  250  balls,  and ask you  to pick  one; if you pick a blue ball, you receive 

$1000, but if you pick a green ball, you have to pay me $1000. Suppose that I refuse to 

disclose the proportion of blue and green balls in the urn—or suppose that the proportion 

has  been  determined  by  a  computer,  which  has  been  programmed  by  someone  that 

neither  you  nor  I  know.  These  examples  suggest  that  it  is  wrong  to  deny  the  possible 
existence of uncertainty, signaled by the absence of objective probabilities.204 

For Friedman and other skeptics about uncertainty, there is an additional problem. 

When  necessary,  human  beings  do  assign  subjective  probabilities  to  future  events.  But 

the  assignment  is  a  function  of  how  the  situation  is  described,  and  formally  identical 

descriptions can produce radically different judgments. There is every reason to believe, 

for  example,  that  people  will  not  give  the  same  answer  to  the  question,  “what  is  the 

likelihood that 80% of people will suffer an adverse effect from a certain risk?” and to the 

question, “what is the likelihood that 20% of people will not suffer an adverse effect from 
a certain risk?”205 The merely semantic reframing will almost certainly affect probability 

                                                 

202  Cf.  Posner,  supra  note,  at  176-84  (discussing  inverse  cost-benefit  analysis,  in  a  way  that  might  be 

taken to suggest the subjective probabilities of regulators). 

203 See Stephen LeRoy and Larry Singell, Knight on Risk and Uncertainty, 95 J Polit Econ 394 (1987). 
For a clear explanation of why uncertainty does exist, see Jon Elster, Explaining Technical Change 193-99 
(1983), and especially p. 199: “One could certainly elicit from a political scientist the subjective probability 
that  he  attaches  to  the  prediction  that  Norway  in  the  year  3000  will  be  a  democracy  rather  than  a 
dictatorship, but would anyone even contemplate acting on the basis of this numerical magnitude?” 

204 See Elster, supra note, at 195-99. 
205 See Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice, 

211 Science 453 (1981). 

44 

judgments.206 In any case probability judgments are notoriously unreliable, based as they 
frequently  are  on  heuristics  and  biases  that  lead  to  severe  and  systematic  errors.207 

Suppose  that  subjective  probability  estimates  are  rooted  in  the  availability  heuristic, 

leading  people  to  exaggerate  risks  for  which  examples  readily  come  to  mind 

(“availability  bias”)  and  also  to  underestimate  risks  for  which  examples  are  cognitive 
unavailable  (“unavailability  bias”).208  Why  should  regulators  believe  that  subjective 

estimates,  subject  as  they  are  framing,  heuristics,  and  biases,  have  any  standing  in  the 

face  of  the  objective  difficulty  or  impossibility  of  making  probability  judgments? 

Suppose that Judge Posner is correct to believe that with respect to global warming, it is 
objectively impossible to assign a probability to the risk of catastrophic harm.209 Even if 

individuals  and  governments  assign  subjective  probabilities,  how  does  their  assignment 

bear on what ought to be done? 

Writing  in  1937,  Keynes,  often  taken  to  be  a  critic  of  the  idea  of  uncertainty, 

clearly  saw  the  distinction  between  objective  probabilities  and  actual  behavior:  “The 

sense in which I am using the term [‘uncertain’ knowledge] is that in which the prospect 

of a European war is uncertain . . . . About these matters there is no scientific basis on 
which to form any calculable probability whatever. We simply do not know.”210 This is 

so even if, as Keynes immediately added, we act “exactly as we should if we had behind 

us  a  good  Benthamite  calculation  of  a  series  of  prospective  advantages  and 
disadvantages, each multiplied by its appropriate probability, waiting to be summed.”211 

Even if subjective expected utilities can be assigned on the basis of behavior, regulators 

(like everyone else) may well be operating in circumstances of genuine uncertainty.  

4.  Objection  4:  Uncertainty  is  too  infrequent  to  be  a  genuine  source  of  concern 

for purposes of policy and law. Perhaps environmental problems rarely involve genuine 

                                                 

206 Id.  
207  For  a  good  overview,  see  Jonathan  Baron,  Thinking  and  Deciding  125-147  (3d  ed.  2000).  The 
relevance of this point to the debate over uncertainty is briefly noted in Elster, supra note, at 199: “There 
are too many well-known mechanisms that distort our judgment, from wishful thinking to rigid cognitive 
structure, for us to be able to attach much weight to the numerical magnitudes that can be elicited by the 
standard method of asking subjects to choose between hypothetical options.” 

208  See  Amos  Tversky  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  Judgment  under  Uncertainty:  Heuristics  and  Biases,  in 
Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases 3, 11 (Daniel Kahneman et al. ed 1982); Timur Kuran 
and Cass R. Sunstein, Availability Cascades and Risk Regulation, 51 Stan L Rev 683 (1999). 

209 Posner, supra note, at 49. 
210 John Maynard Keynes, A Treatise on Probability 214 (1921). 
211 Id. 

45 

uncertainty. Perhaps regulators are usually able to assign probabilities to outcomes; and if 

if not, perhaps they can assign probabilities to probabilities (or, if this proves impossible, 

probabilities to probabilities of probabilities). In many cases regulators might be able to 

specify a range of probabilities—saying, for example, that the probability of catastrophic 
outcomes  from  global  warming  is  above  2%  but  below  30%.212  Many  scientists  and 

economists believe that global warming is not likely to create catastrophic harm, and that 

the real costs, human  and  economic, will  be high but not intolerable. In their view,  the 
worst-case scenarios can be responsibly described as improbable.213  

Perhaps we can agree that pure uncertainty is rare. Perhaps we can agree that at 

worst, environmental problems involve problems of “bounded uncertainty,” in which we 

cannot  assign  probabilities  within  specified  bands.  It  is  possible  to  think,  for  example, 

that the risk of a catastrophic outcome is above 1% but below 10%, without being able to 

assign probabilities within that band. The pervasiveness of uncertainty depends on what 

is  actually  known.  As  I  have  emphasized,  Posner  believes  that  “no  probabilities  can  be 

attached  to  the  catastrophic  global-warming  scenarios,  and  without  an  estimate  of 
probabilities  an  expected  cost  cannot  be  calculated.”214  Note  in  this  regard  that  a  1994 

survey  of  experts  showed  an  extraordinary  range  of  estimated  losses  from  global 
warming,  varying  from  no  economic  loss  to  a  20%  decrease  in  gross  world  product.215 

This finding, it has been suggested, is enough to support the view that uncertainty is real 
and must be taken seriously in environmental policy.216 In my view, uncertainty is both 

real and rare in the environmental domain; but this is an empirical judgment, and it may 

be wrong. 

normative issues. 

5.  On  maximin,  rationality,  and  genuine  uncertainty.  Now  turn  to  the  most 

difficult question: What is the appropriate approach to genuine uncertainty? Is maximin a 

rational  strategy?  I  begin  with  some  points  about  actual  behavior  and  then  turn  to 

                                                 

212  See  Nordhaus  and  Boyer,  supra note,  at 88  (suggesting  a 1.2% probability  of  a  catastrophic  impact 

with 2.5 C warming and of 6.8 percent with 6 C warming). 
213 See id.; Cline, supra note; Mendelsohn, supra note. 
214 See Richard Posner, Catastrophe, supra note, at 49-50. 
215 William Nordhaus, Expert Opinion on Climatic Change, 82 American Scientist 45 (1994). 
216 See Woodward and Bishop, supra note. To be sure, divergence among experts is likely to be smaller 

now than it was in 1994. See Robert Percival et al., supra note, at 1058-1060. 

46 

(a)  Actual  decisions.  As  a  descriptive  matter,  it  is  clear  that  people  sometimes 

show a degree of uncertainty aversion, in the sense that they will avoid gambles to which 
probabilities are not assigned. The relevant work was done by Daniel Ellsberg.217 Assume 

that  people  are  asked  to  choose  among  two  lotteries,  each  involving  an  urn  with  100 

balls. All of the balls are either black or red. For the first lottery, the urn contains an equal 

division  of  black  and  red  balls.  For  the  second  lottery,  the  urn  contains  an  unknown 

proportion of black balls and red balls. People receive a specified amount of money for 

correctly guessing the color of balls randomly chosen from the urn. It turns out that most 
people prefer the first lottery to the second, and thus display aversion to uncertainty.218 

On the assumption of uncertainty aversion, it might be possible to defend maximin as a 
decision rule.219  

Note,  however,  that  uncertainty  aversion  is  bounded.  So  long  as  uncertainty 

aversion  is  not  infinite,  maximin  will  not  always  be  the  preferred  decision  rule.  And 

indeed  it  is  reasonable  to  think  that  most  people  will  reject  maximin  if  the  question  is 

properly framed. To test this possibility, I asked seventy-one University of Chicago law 

students the following problem: 

 
The  government  is  considering  two  environmental  problems.  For  the  first,  the 
government is able to estimate the probability that a bad outcome will occur. It believes 
that there is a 90% chance that 600 people will die (and the death of 500 people is the 
worst-case scenario). It also believes that there is a 10% chance that 400 people will die. 
For  the  second  problem,  the  government  cannot  assign  probabilities  to  the  various 
outcomes. The “worst-case scenario” is that 700 people will die. 
 

Do you think: 

(a) the first problem has higher priority? 
(b) the second problem has higher priority? 
(c) the two problems have equal priority? 

 

 

No fewer than 63% chose (a), with the remainder equally divided between (b) and 

(c).  As  noted  above,  law  students  at  any  particular  institution  may  offer  idiosyncratic 

responses  to  such  questions;  but  within  the  general  population,  it  is  reasonable  to 

                                                 

217 See Daniel Ellsberg, Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms, 75 Q J Econ 643 (1961). 
218 Id. 
219 Chu and Liu, supra note, at 265-66; Woodward and Bishop, supra note, at 496-98. 

47 

conjecture  that  most  people  will  show  no  consistent  preference  for  maximin,  and  that 

they  will  reject  an  approach  that  eliminates  the  worst  worst-case  scenario,  under 

circumstances  of  uncertainty,  in  favor  of  an  approach  that  eliminates  a  highly  probable 

but somewhat less bad worst-case scenario.  

Why  is  this?  The  Principle  of  Insufficient  Reason  says  that  when  people  lack 

information about probabilities (say, 1% to 40%), they should act as if each probability is 
equally  likely.220  Whatever  its  normative  status,221  actual  decisions  may  well  use  that 

principle,  which  fits  well  with  the  results  in  the  experiment  just  described.  Consider 

another  experiment  with  a  larger  group  of  law  students  from  two  institutions  (the 
University of Alabama and the University of Chicago222): 

 
One  thousand  people  are  at  risk  from  an  environmental  hazard.  (a)  If  one 
approach is taken, a minimum of 400 people will die, and a maximum of 500 people will 
die. Regulators are unable to assign probabilities to the various outcomes. (b) If another 
approach is taken, a minimum of 10 people will die, and a maximum of 600 people will 
die.  Regulators  are  unable  to  assign  probabilities  to  the  various  outcomes.  Which 
approach should be chosen? 

 
(a) The first approach 
(b) The second approach 
 
No less than 85.5% of respondents rejected maximin and chose (b). Why did (b) 

seem  better  to  so  many  respondents?  On  a  reasonable  interpretation,  people  begin  by 

presuming  at  least  roughly  equal  probabilities  under  circumstances  of  uncertainty,  and 

conclude that they would much rather go the route that has a much higher expected value, 

given  that  presumption.  This  interpretation  is  supported  by  the  results  of  the  following 
experiment,223  which  asks  people  to  compare  a  choice  under  risk  with  a  choice  under 

uncertainty:  

 
The  government  is  considering  two  environmental  problems.  For  the  first,  the 
government is able to estimate the probability that a bad outcome will occur. It believes 
that there is a 60% chance that 500-600 people will die (and the death of 600 people is 

                                                 

220 See Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa, Games and Decisions 284 (1958). 
221 Id.; Isaac Levi, On Indeterminate Probabilities, 71 J. Phil 391 (1974). 
222  One  hundred  and  seventy-three  law  students  were  surveyed,  seventy-one  from  the  University  of 
Chicago,  one  hundred  and  two  from  the  University  of  Alabama.  Interestingly,  the  answers  from  the  two 
groups were essentially identical. 

223 This experiment was limited to seventy-one University of Chicago law students. 

48 

the worst-case scenario). It also believes that there is a 40% chance that 200-400 people 
will  die.  For  the  second  problem,  the  government  cannot  assign  probabilities  to  the 
various outcomes. The worst-case scenario is that 700 people will die. 

 
Do you think: 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
 
For  this  problem,  maximin  was  also  rejected  by  a  majority  of  respondents,  but 

the first problem has higher priority? 
the second problem has higher priority? 
the two problems have equal priority? 

here  the  margin  was  much  thinner:  52%  favored  (a),  25%  were  undecided,  and  22% 

favored (b). The rejection of maximin is the most striking result here, and it is not entirely 

clear why the choice seemed relatively difficult. But the Principle of Insufficient Reason 

is  consistent  with  that  difficulty.  Under  the  second  problem,  the  expected  number  of 

deaths is 350 is equal probabilities are assigned, a number that is close to the expected 

number of deaths for the first problem; with a small degree of risk aversion, the choice 

between the two problems becomes extremely difficult. 

 
To see the role of the Principle of Insufficient Reason, suppose that people are 

asked to choose between: 

a 99.5% chance of a loss of 200 lives, and a .5% chance of a loss of 2 
lives, with 
an uncertain chance of losing between 2 lives and 205 lives. 

 

For most people, it is reasonable to suppose that a) is much worse than b)—and 

hence that b) will be the overwhelming choice. Here, then, people will select a choice that 

eliminate the worst-case scenario. But compare: 

a risk of 60% of a loss of 200 lives, and 40% of 2 lives, with 
an uncertain chance of losing between 205 lives and 2 lives. 

 

For  most  people,  the  choice  here  is  much  less  clear,  and  it  is  likely  that  many 

people will choose c) and refuse to follow maximin.  It follows that people would have a 

great deal of difficulty in choosing between a 51% risk of a loss of 200 lives, and a 49% 

chance  of  a  loss  of  1  life,  as compared  with  an  uncertain  risk  that  threatens  to  produce 

 
a) 

b) 

 
c) 
d) 

49 

losses  of  between  200  and  1  lives,  with  no  possibility  of  assigning  probabilities  to  the 

various possibilities.  

The precise role of the Principle of Insufficient Reason, and the nature of people’s 

choices under circumstances of uncertainty, remain to be established. The discussion thus 

far should be enough to show that people will often reject maximin and that the Principle 

of  Insufficient  Reason  is  a  starting  point  for  their  intuitions.  The  implication  for 

environmental  protection,  and  for  other  problems  involving  safety  and  health,  is  clear. 

People  will  not  consistently  follow  maximin  under  circumstances  of  uncertainty.  If  the 

worst-case  scenario  is  extremely  vivid,  and  if  it  is  drawn  to  their  attention,  they  might 
neglect  the  issue  of  probability  and  attempt  to  eliminate  it.224  But  under  ordinary 

circumstances, they will select maximin only when the Principle of Insufficient Reason, 

accompanied by a degree of risk aversion, suggests that they should.  

(b) A cost-benefit analysis of maximin? A great deal of work explores the question 
whether  people  should  follow  maximin  under  circumstances  of  uncertainty.225  Some  of 

this work draws on people’s intuitions, in a way that illuminates actual beliefs but may 
tell us little about what rationality requires.226 Those intuitions, of the sort described by 

the experiments above, may be based on some kind of confusion. Other work is highly 
formal,  227  adopting  certain  axioms  and  seeing  whether  maximin  violates  them.  The 
results of this work are not conclusive.228 Certainly maximin has not been ruled out as a 

candidate for rational choice under uncertainty. 

I  cannot  resolve  these  difficult  issues  here,  but  will  rest  content  with  a  general 

suggestion. In deciding whether to follow maximin in the environmental context, a great 

deal should turn on two questions: (a) How bad is the worst-case scenario, compared to 

other  bad  outcomes?  (b)  What,  exactly,  is  lost  by  choosing  maximin?  Of  course  it  is 

possible that choosers, including regulators, will lack the information that would enable 

                                                 

224  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Probability  Neglect:  Emotions,  Worst  Cases,  and  the  Law,  112  Yale  LJ  61 

(2002); Cass R. Sunstein, Terrorism and Probability Neglect, 26 J. Risk and Uncertainty 121 (2003). 

225 An influential paper, suggesting the rationality of either maximin or maximax (maximize the best-case 
scenario),  is  Kenneth  Arrow  and  L.  Hurwicz,  An  Optimality  Criterion  for  Decision-Making  Under 
Uncertainty, in Uncertainty and Expectation in Economics (C.F. Carter and J.L. Ford eds. 1972) 

226 See Harsanyi, supra note. 
227  See  Kenneth  Arrow  and  L.  Hurwicz,  An  Optimality  Criterion  for  Decision-Making  Under 
Uncertainty, in Uncertainty and Expectation in Economics (C.F. Carter and J.L. Ford eds. 1972); Duncan 
Luce and Howard Raiffa, Games and Decisions 286-97 (1958). 

228 See id.  

50 

them to answer these questions. But in the regulatory context, answers to both (a) and (b) 

may  well  be  possible  even  if  it  is  not  possible  to  assign  probabilities  to  the  various 

outcomes  with  any  confidence.  By  emphasizing  the  relative  badness  of  the  worst-case 

scenario, and the extent of the loss from attending to it, I am attempting to build on the 

Rawls/Gardiner suggestion that maximin is the preferred decision rule when little is lost 

from following it. I have objected that this suggestion threatens to trivialize the case for 

maximin;  but  it  is  possible  to  develop  the  underlying  intuition  into  a  far  more  general, 

and useful, method for orienting both private and public choice.  

To see the relevance of the two questions, suppose that you are choosing between 

two options. The first has a best-case outcome of 10 and a worst-case outcome of –5. The 

second has a best-case outcome of 15 and a worst-case outcome of –6. It is impossible to 

assign  probabilities  to  the  various  outcomes.  Maximin  would  favor  the  first  option,  to 

avoid the worse worst-case; but to justify that choice, we have to know something about 

the meaning of the difference s between 10 and 15 on the one hand and –5 and –6 on the 

other. If 15 is much better than 10, and if the difference between –5 and –6 is a matter of 

relative  indifference,  then  the  choice  of  the  first  option  is  hardly  mandated.  But  if  the 

difference  between  –5  and  –6  greatly  matters—if  it  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death—then 

maximin is much more attractive.  

These  points  have  the  important  implication  of  suggesting  the  possibility  of  a 
(rough) cost-benefit analysis229 of maximin under conditions of uncertainty. Sometimes a 

rejection of maximin is compelled by that analysis because the worst-case scenario is not 

much worse than the second worst-case scenario (and hence the benefits of maximin are 
low),and  because  maximin  imposes  extremely  high  costs.230  But  sometimes  the  worst-

                                                 

229 By suggesting this possibility, I do not mean to assign dollar equivalents to the various outcomes or to 
say anything controversial about the ingredients of the analysis. I am referring generally to an all-things-
considered approach to social welfare. 

230 It might be suggested that when people reason in this way, they are implicitly assigning probabilities 
to the relevant events. Suppose that the choice is between (a), with uncertain payoffs of 15 or 5, and (b) 
with uncertain payoffs of 8 or 6; suppose too that 15 is much better than 8 and that 5 is only a little worse 
than  6.  On  the  analysis  in  text,  (a)  should  be  chosen.  But  perhaps  that  judgment  depends  on  an  implicit 
assignment of a significant probability, in case (a), to 15, and of an assignment of some probability of less 
than (say) 99%, in case (b), to 5. Without some such implicit assignment of probabilities, why would (a) be 
preferable?  I  cannot  prove  the  point  here,  but  I  believe  that  this  question,  and  this  counterargument,  are 
based  on  a  denial  of  the possibility  of  acting under  conditions  of  genuine  uncertainty.  If  such  conditions 
exist,  and  if  people  act  under  them,  then  they  might  indeed  be  assigning  implicit  probabilities;  but  they 
might also be acting in terms of the principles described in the text. 

51 

case is the worst by far, and sometimes we lose relatively little by choosing maximin. It is 

typically  thought  necessary  to  assign  probabilities  in  order  to  engage  in  cost-benefit 

balancing; without an understanding of probabilities, such balancing might not seem able 
to  get  off  the  ground.231  But  a  useful  form  of  cost-benefit  balancing  is  possible  even 

without  reliable  information  about  probability.  For  the  balancing  exercise  to  work,  of 

course, it must be possible to produce cardinal rankings among the outcomes—that is, it 

must  be  possible  to  rank  them  not  merely  in  terms  of  their  badness  but  also  in  at  least 

rough terms of how much worse each is than the less-bad others. That approach will not 

work if cardinal rankings are not feasible—as might be the case if (for example) it is not 

easy  to  compare  the  catastrophic  loss  from  global  warming  with  the  loss  from  huge 

expenditures  on  reductions  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  Much  of  the  time,  however, 

cardinal rankings are possible.  

Irreversibility becomes highly relevant as part of this analysis. Recall that some of 

the  costs  of  precautions  are  irreversible.  If  governments  invest  a  great  deal  to  control 

greenhouse  gas  emissions,  they  will  be  forcing  private  and  public  actors  to  incur 

irreversible  costs.  It  follows  that  if  governments  follow  maximin,  they  will  be  limiting 

their own flexibility , expending a great deal even though future information might move 

the  situation  from  uncertainty  to  risk,  as  regulators  learn  more  about  the  problem. 

Suppose that no probability can now be assigned to the catastrophic risk associated with 

abrupt  global  warming,  and  that  for  this  reason  regulators  are  tempted  to  spend  a  great 

deal to eliminate that risk. The relevant expenditures will greatly reduce future flexibility, 

ensuring  sunk  costs  for  a  danger  that  might  turn  out  to  be  quantifiable  or  even  trivial. 

This point is not decisive against large expenditures, but it should be part of the analysis 

of whether worst-case scenarios ought to be eliminated. In this sense, there can be some 

tension  between  an  Irreversible  Harm  Precautionary  Principle  and  a  Catastrophic  Harm 

Precautionary Principle. 

Imagine, then, two polar situations with respect to global warming. First, suppose 

that the catastrophic dangers associated with global warming could be eliminated if every 

nation contributed $10 million to a fund to combat that risk. On reasonable assumptions, 

that  cost  would  be  fully  acceptable.  Second,  suppose  that  the  catastrophic  dangers 

                                                 

231 See Ackerman and Heinzerling, supra note.  

52 

associated  with  global  warming  could  be  eliminated  only  if  every  nation  contributed 

enough resources to reduce standards of living by 50% world-wide, with a corresponding 

increase  in  global  poverty.  If  global  warming  really  does  pose  an  uncertain  danger  of 

total catastrophe, maximin argues in favor of this extraordinary reduction in world-wide 

standards of living. But to incur costs of this magnitude, we might want to insist that the 

danger  of  catastrophe  rise  about  the  minimal  threshold—that  there  be  demonstrable 

probability, and a not-so-low one, that the catastrophic risk will occur.  

To appreciate this point, and the need for an analysis of the effects of following 

maximin, imagine an individual or society lacking the information that would permit the 

assignment  of  probabilities  to  a  series  of  hazards  with  catastrophic  outcomes;  suppose 

that the number of hazards is ten, or a twenty, or a thousand. Suppose too that such an 

individual  or  society  is  able  to  assign  probabilities  (ranging  from  1%  to  90%)  to  an 

equivalent number of other hazards, with outcomes that range from bad to extremely bad, 

but never catastrophic. Suppose finally that every one of these hazards can be eliminated 

at a cost—a cost that is high, but that does not, once incurred in individual cases, inflict 

harms that count as extremely bad or catastrophic. The maximin principle suggests that 

our individual or society should spend a great deal to eliminate each of the ten, or twenty, 

or hundred potentially catastrophic hazards. But once that amount is spent on even one of 

those  hazards,  there  might  be  nothing  left  to  combat  the  extremely  bad  hazards,  even 

those  with  a  90%  chance  of  occurring.  We  could  even  imagine  that  a  poorly  informed 

individual  or  society  would  be  condemned  to  real  poverty  and  distress,  or  even  worse, 

merely  by  virtue  of  following  maximin.  In  these  circumstances,  maximin  should  be 

rejected. 

This  suggestion  derives  indirect  support  from  the  empirical  finding  that  when 

asked to decide on the distribution of goods and services, most people reject the two most 

widely  discussed  principles  in  the  philosophical  literature:  average  utility,  favored  by 

Harsanyi, and Rawls’ difference principle (allowing inequalities only if they work to the 
advantage  to  the  least  well-off).232  Instead  people  choose  average  utility  with  a  floor 

constraint—that is, they favor an approach that maximizes overall well-being, but subject 

                                                 

Theory (1992).  

232Norman  Frohlich  and  Joe A. Oppenheimer, Choosing Justice:  An  Experimental  Approach  to  Ethical 

53 

to  the  constraint  that  no  member  of  society  may  fall  below  a  decent  minimum.233 

Insisting  on  an  absolute  welfare  minimum  to  all,  they  maximize  over  that  floor.  Their 

aversion to especially bad outcomes leads them to a pragmatic threshold in the form of 

the  floor.  So  too,  very  plausibly,  in  the  context  of  precautions  against  risks.  A  sensible 

individual, or society, would not always choose maximin under circumstances of risk or 

uncertainty. Everything depends on what is lost, and what is gained, by eliminating the 

worst-case  scenario;  and  much  of  that  time,  available  information  makes  it  possible  to 

answer those questions at least in general terms. 

Nothing here is meant as a proof that maximin is forbidden, or even not required, 

by rationality. To decide on the relationship between rationality and maximin strategies, 
it is necessary to specify the right account of rationality.234 I am doubtful that any such 

specification  can  establish 

the  status  of  maximin  without  making  contentious 

assumptions.  My  claim  is  instead  that  maximin  makes  most  sense  when  the  worst-case 

scenario, under one course of action, is much worse than the worst-case scenario under 

the  alternative  course  of  action,  and  when  the  choice  of  maximin  does  not  result  in 

extremely significant losses. 

 
G.  Dealing with Catastrophic Risks 
 

The most general conclusion is that a degree of risk aversion should be expected 

in cases of catastrophic risks; for such risks, margins of safety are entirely sensible. For 

this reason, a Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle, of the sort suggested by several 

understandings  of  the  Precautionary  Principle,  is  a  coherent  and  defensible  part  of 
environmental policy.235 Indeed, such a principle might well be the best understanding of 

the Precautionary Principle itself. It has many uses, not only in environmental policy but 

in health and safety regulation as a whole, including the war on terrorism. 

But maximin is not generally a sensible strategy in the environmental context or 

elsewhere.  First,  it  is  senseless  under  circumstances  of  risk,  unless  we  assume  an 

implausibly  high  degree  of  risk  aversion.  Second,  regulators  are  rarely  operating  under 

circumstances  of  pure  uncertainty;  often  rough  probabilities  can  be  ascribed  to  serious 

                                                 

233 Id. 
234 See Luce and Raiffa, supra note, at 286-97. 
235 See notes supra. 

54 

outcomes, and if not, at least rough probabilities can be ascribed to probabilities. Third, 

adoption  of  maximin,  under  circumstances  of  genuine  uncertainty,  is  most  reasonable 

when  the  worst-case  scenario  is  exceptionally  bad  and  when  removal  of  that  scenario 

does not inflict serious losses of its own.  

It follows that a Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle is best understood to 

embody a form of risk aversion for the most dangerous risks. Its central domain involves 

. uncertain dangers of catastrophe when the costs of reducing those dangers are not huge 

and  when  incurring  those  costs  does  not  divert  substantial  resources  from  extremely 

pressing problems. Four qualifications are important: 

1.  The Catastrophic Harm Precautionary Principle must be attentive to the full range of 

social  risks;  it  makes  no  sense  to  take  steps  to  avert  catastrophe  if  those  very  steps 

would create catastrophic risks of their own. If a preventive war, designed to reduce 

the risks of terrorism from one source, would increase those very risks from another 

source,  then  the  Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary  Principle  is  indeterminate.  This 

point  is  a  simple  extension  of  that  made  earlier  with  respect  to  the  unrefined 

Precautionary Principle and the Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle.  

2.  Use  of  the  principle  should  be  closely  attentive  to  the  idea  of  cost-effectiveness, 

which requires regulators to choose the least costly means of achieving their ends. In 

the  context  of  global  warming,  there  are  many  methods  by  which  to  reduce  the 
relevant  risks.236  Both  nations  and  international  institutions  should  choose  those 

methods that minimize costs. The same is true for efforts to combat terrorism.  

3.  Here  as  elsewhere,  distributional  considerations  matter.  The  principle  should  be 

applied in a way that reduces extreme burdens on those least able to bear them. For 

global warming, there is a particular need to ensure that citizens of poor nations are 

not required to pay a great deal to contribute to the solution of a problem for which 
those  in  wealthy  nations  are  most  responsible.237  If  an  antiterrorism  policy  would 

impose  special  burdens  on  members  of  racial  and  religious  minority  groups—

consider  racial  profiling—it  is  worth  considering  other  policies  that  reduce  or 

eliminate those burdens.  

                                                 

236 A good discussion is Nordhaus and Boyer, Warming the World, supra note, at 121-44. 
237 See the overview in R. Percival et al., supra note. 

55 

4.  Costs matter as such. The extent of precautions cannot reasonably be divorced from 

their expense. In cases of the kind I am discussing, where the worst-case scenario is 

truly catastrophic and when probabilities cannot be assigned, a large margin of safety 
makes a great deal of sense.238 

There is a final point. It is possible to combine a concern about catastrophe with a 

focus on irreversible harm, in a way that generates an Irreversible and Catastrophic Harm 

Precautionary Principle. Suppose that by adopting environmental controls at the present 

time, regulators can maintain flexibility to prevent a risk that is not only irreversible but 

potentially catastrophic as well. Suppose too that the likelihood of catastrophe cannot be 

specified with much confidence, or even that it is in the domain of uncertainty rather than 

risk. Risk-neutral, risk-averse, or uncertainty-averse regulators might be willing to pay a 

great  deal  to  maintain  the  flexibility  that  would  permit  them  to  avoid  the  worst-case 

scenarios.  We  have  seen  that  significant  expenditures  can  reduce  flexibility  too;  many 

problems  involve  not  irreversibility,  but  irreversibilities.  At  the  same  time,  the  most 

important irreversibilities may well turn out to be environmental in character. 

This  argument  provides  the  strongest  basis  for  aggressive  measures  to  combat 
global warming.239 The natural objections would either point to the irreversible costs of 

maintaining  flexibility  or  question  the  probability  that  catastrophe  will  actually  ensue. 
The  appropriate  conclusion  rests  on  an  assessment  of  the  empirical  questions,240  but  in 

my view, an appreciation of irreversibility and catastrophe argues for otherwise excessive 
steps to reduce greenhouse gases.241 

 

 
 
 
 
 

                                                 

238 See Woodward and Bishop, supra note, at 505: “If one considers a spectrum of choice problems from 
pure uncertainty to pure risk, almost all of the attention of economics has been on one extreme. . . . This has 
led  to  policy  advice  and  analysis  that  either  implicitly  or  explicitly  requires  policymakers  to  divine 
probability distributions. We argue, however, that there are important cases where probability distributions 
cannot be reasonably formulated and under such conditions dramatically different decision criteria may be 
rational.” 

239 See Posner, supra note, at 161-65. 
240 See Fisher, supra note, for a good discussion.  
241 See id.; William Cline, Climate Change, in Global Crises, Global Solutions, supra note, at 13, 15-21. 

56 

IV.  Rival Rationality Revisited 
 

When  it  comes  to  risk,  why  do  experts  disagree  with  ordinary  people?  Many 

people  think  that  the  reason  lies  in  the  fact  that  ordinary  people  have  a  “rival 
rationality.”242 On this view, experts are concerned with statistics, and, above all, with the 
number  of  lives  at  stake.243  By  contrast,  ordinary  people  are  concerned  with  a  range  of 

qualitative factors that make certain risks a special cause of concern. Irreversibility and 
catastrophe  are  said  to  loom  especially  large  in  ordinary  people’s  reactions.244  Where 

experts  simply  calculate  expected  values,  ordinary  people,  and  lay  rationality,  show 

special  aversion  to  potentially  irreversible  and  catastrophic  harm.  If  this  is  so,  ordinary 

people  display  “rival  rationalities,”  and  each  “side  must  respect  the  insights  and 
intelligence of the other.”245  

According to a competing view, the rival rationality of ordinary people is mostly a 
product  of  cognitive  illusions,  ignorance,  and  confusion.246  For  the  critics,  ordinary 

people are also concerned with the central question, which is the number of lives at stake. 

Unfortunately, they are unable to answer that question well. When ordinary people show 

a  concern  about  irreversible  and  catastrophic  harms,  it  is  because  they  fear  that  many 

lives are at risk, no less and no more. 

The discussion thus far suggests a possible rapprochement between the apparently 

rival  rationalities.  Sensible  experts  do  not  and  should  not  believe  that  there  is  any 

particular  magic  in  irreversibility,  and  they  do  and  should  insist  that  the  line  between 

catastrophic and non-catastrophic harm is one of degree. But they should also agree that 

irreversibility  matters,  in  the  sense  that  it  makes  sense  to  spend  resources  to  maintain 

                                                 

242. See SLOVIC, supra note, at 220-31. 
243. See id. at 223. 
244. See  Clayton  P.  Gillette  &  James  E.  Krier,  Risk,  Courts,  and  Agencies,  138  U.  Pa.  L.  Rev.  1027, 
1061-1085  (1990).  Note  that  the  evidence  describe  above  suggests  that  in  certain  settings,  potentially 
catastrophic  outcomes  will  receive  less,  not  more,  attention  than  their  expected  value,  perhaps  because 
people treat very low-probability risks (eg, 1 in 1 million) as if they were zero. The framing of the question 
undoubtedly matters a great deal here. Probably the best generalization is that people sometimes give low 
probability risks of catastrophe more attention than its expected value and sometimes give them more less. 
See Gary H. McClelland et al., supra note. I suspect that in some of the relevant studies, the evidence of 
grave  concern  for  catastrophic  harms  stems  from  the  affect  heuristic,  through  which  a  general  affective 
reaction  to  a  risk—often  a  negative  one—leads  people  to  show  concern  about  all  aspects  of  the  relevant 
risk.  See  Paul  Slovic  et  al.,  The  Affect  Heuristic,  in  Heuristics  and  Biases:  The  Psychology  of  Intuitive 
Judgment 397 (Thomas Gilovich et al. eds 2002). 

245. SLOVIC, supra note, at 231. 
246 See Howard Margolis, Dealing With Risk (1995). 

57 

flexibility  for  the  future.  Insofar  as  the  National  Environmental  Policy  Act247  instructs 

agencies to spend time to acquire relevant information before ensuring irreversible losses, 

it is on firm ground. Experts agree that any cost-benefit analysis that ignores option value 

is  missing  an  important  variable—a  standard  point  in  finance  though  not  yet  in 
environmental  protection.248  In  this  sense,  ordinary  people  are  correct  to  see  the 

importance  of  irreversibility,  and  to  emphasize  the  importance,  some  of  the  time,  of 

adopting a strategy of “act, and then learn.” 

What of catastrophic risks? Experts may have little to say on the question whether 

it is worse to create a 1/100 risk that 100,000 people will die, or a 1/100,000 risk that 1 

million people will die. But they should agree that when regulators are unable to assign 

probabilities to catastrophic risks, it is worth doing a great deal to avoid those risks—or at 

least to spend resources while more information is acquired. Experts cannot rule out the 

choice  of  maximin  under  circumstances  of  uncertainty.  At  the  very  least,  experts  know 

that elimination of the worst-case scenario is sometimes justified by a kind of cost-benefit 

analysis,  one  that  pays  attention  to  the  relative  egregiousness  of  the  worst  case  and  the 

costs of eliminating it. Sensible experts are interested not only in the expected value of 

catastrophic  risks,  but  also  in  producing  strategies  for  eliminating  them  when 

probabilities  cannot  be  confidently  assigned.  For  these  reasons,  an  understanding  of 

irreversibility and catastrophe help not only to refine but also to vindicate intuitions that 

have been found to play a significant role in ordinary risk perceptions. 

 

Conclusion 

 
The ideas of irreversibility and catastrophe have had a major impact on domestic 

and  international  law,  and  they  play  a  large  role  in  private  and  public  decisions.  My 

major goal in this Article is to unpack these ideas and to bring them to bear on law and 

policy. I have suggested the possibility of replacing the Precautionary Principle, which is 

incoherent, with more refined principles that embody an understanding of the distinctive 

problem  of  irreversible  losses  and  of  the  need  to  attend  to  low-probability  risks  of 

disaster.  

                                                 

247 42 USC 102 (C)(5). 
248 See Dixit and Pindyck, supra note, at 4-7. 

58 

We have seen that an Irreversible Harm Precautionary Principle is both plausible 

and coherent. Drawing on the idea of real options, it suggests that regulators, including 

those  who  make  environmental  policy,  should  find  it  worthwhile  to  invest  resources  to 

preserve flexibility for the future. In the context of global warming, the Irreversible Harm 

Precautionary  Principle  argues  for  substantial  current  investments,  above  all  because 

emissions  of  carbon  dioxide  stay  in  the  atmosphere  for  an  extremely  long  time.  The 

difficulty here is that emissions reductions also impose irreversible costs. An emphasis on 

irreversibility  does  not  always  favor  aggressive  environmental  regulation,  or  anything 

like an attitude of “act, then learn.” It is even possible to imagine an Irreversible Harm 
Precautionary  Principle  that  in  many  cases  argues  for  a  plan  of  “wait  and  learn.”249 

Everything  depends  on  the  magnitude  and  likelihood  of  the  full  range  of  irreversible 

losses.  In  the  context  of  global  warming,  the  best  approach  is  probably  a  world-wide 

agreement to cap greenhouse emissions, with the size of the cap decreasing over time as 
the expense of controls diminish.250 

If expected values matter, then societies should not ignore low probability risks of 

catastrophe. A minimal response would be a Catastrophe Harm Precautionary Principle, 

one  that  attempts  to  counteract  the  serious  risk  that  both  individuals  and  societies  will 
treat small risks as if there were zero.251 The argument for this principle is strengthened 

by  the  fact  that  a  catastrophic  harm  typically  has  secondary  effects  that  ensure  adverse 
effects that go far beyond a simple multiple of the number of people who are killed.252 A 

less minimal approach would build a degree of risk aversion into the Catastrophe Harm 

Precautionary  Principle,  so  as  to  treat  catastrophic  harms  as  worth  more  than  their 

expected value. A much more aggressive approach would be to adopt maximin, by which 

regulators identify the worst-case scenario and attempt to eliminate it. I have argued that 

for  most  environmental  problems,  this  approach  is  senseless.  Under  circumstances  of 

risk,  maximin  is  far  too  cautious,  and  it  would  inflict  serious  harms—often  including 

environmental harms—for no sufficient reason. Usually environmental problems involve 

                                                 

249 See Mendelsohn, supra note, at 45. 
250 See Nordhaus and Boyer, supra note, at 121-44. 
251 On some of the cognitive mechanisms here, see Bazerman, Predictable Surprises, supra note; on the 

need to attend to low-probability risks, see Posner, supra note, at 245-65. 

252 See The Social Amplification of Risk (Nick Pidgeon et al. eds, 2003). 

59 

risk, in the sense that a range of probabilities can be assigned, or at least in the sense that 

probabilities can be assigned to probabilities.  

As  a  matter  of  theory,  pure  uncertainty  cannot  be  ruled  out  of  bounds.  The  fact 

that people assign probabilities to uncertain outcomes does not negate the possibility of 

(objective) uncertainty. Under circumstances of uncertainty, maximin has some appeal if 

the worst-case scenario is truly catastrophic. And  if it is not terribly costly to eliminate 

that  scenario,  regulators  should  certainly  do  so.  But  maximin  can  be  an  unappealing 

strategy, certainly under risk, and also when the worst-case scenario is not much worse 

than  the  second-worst  case  scenario  and  when  the  costs  of  eliminating  the  worst-case 

scenario are extremely high. To operate sensibly, precautionary steps must be attentive to 

the full range of consequences, not simply to a subset of them. But a Catastrophic Harm 

Precautionary  Principle,  applied  with  a  wide  viewscreen,  has  an  important  role  in 
environmental  law  as  well  as  ordinary  life,253  and  it  is  a  strong  candidate  for  replacing 

and refining any more general Precautionary Principle.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readers with comments should address them to: 
 
Professor Cass R. Sunstein 
University of Chicago Law School 
1111 East 60th Street 
Chicago, IL  60637 
 

csunstei@uchicago.edu 

                                                 

253 See William Cline, Climate Change, in Global Crises, Global Solutions, supra note, at 13, 18-19. 

60 

Chicago Working Papers in Law and Economics 
(Second Series) 

William M. Landes, Copyright Protection of Letters, Diaries and Other Unpublished Works: An 
Economic Approach (July 1991) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Path to The T. J. Hooper: The Theory and History of Custom in the Law of 
Tort (August 1991) 
Cass R. Sunstein, On Property and Constitutionalism (September 1991) 
Richard A. Posner, Blackmail, Privacy, and Freedom of Contract (February 1992) 
Randal C. Picker, Security Interests, Misbehavior, and Common Pools (February 1992) 
Tomas J. Philipson & Richard A. Posner, Optimal Regulation of AIDS (April 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, Revisiting Auctions in Chapter 11 (April 1992) 
William M. Landes, Sequential versus Unitary Trials: An Economic Analysis (July 1992) 
William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, The Influence of Economics on Law: A Quantitative Study 
(August 1992) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Welfare Economics of Immigration Law: A Theoretical Survey With An 
Analysis of U.S. Policy (September 1992) 
Douglas G. Baird, 1992 Katz Lecture: Reconstructing Contracts (November 1992) 
Gary S. Becker, The Economic Way of Looking at Life (January 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Credibly Committing to Efficiency Wages: Cotton Spinning Cartels in Imperial 
Japan (March 1993) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Endogenous Preferences, Environmental Law (April 1993) 
Richard A. Posner, What Do Judges and Justices Maximize? (The Same Thing Everyone Else Does) 
(April 1993) 
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Randal C. Picker, Bankruptcy Rules, Managerial Entrenchment, and 
Firm‐Specific Human Capital (August 1993) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Explicit Reasons for Implicit Contracts: The Legal Logic to the Japanese Main 
Bank System (August 1993) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Anticipatory Adjudication 
(September 1993) 
Kenneth W. Dam, The Economic Underpinnings of Patent Law (September 1993) 
Alan O. Sykes, An Introduction to Regression Analysis (October 1993) 
Richard A. Epstein, The Ubiquity of the Benefit Principle (March 1994) 
Randal C. Picker, An Introduction to Game Theory and the Law (June 1994) 
William M. Landes, Counterclaims: An Economic Analysis (June 1994) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, The Market for Children: Evidence from Early Modern Japan (August 1994) 
Robert H. Gertner and Geoffrey P. Miller, Settlement Escrows (August 1994) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Some Economic Considerations in the Intellectual Property Protection of 
Software (August 1994) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Rules and Rulelessness, (October 1994) 
David Friedman, More Justice for Less Money: A Step Beyond Cimino (December 1994) 
Daniel Shaviro, Budget Deficits and the Intergenerational Distribution of Lifetime Consumption 
(January 1995) 
Douglas G. Baird, The Law and Economics of Contract Damages (February 1995) 
Daniel Kessler, Thomas Meites, and Geoffrey P. Miller, Explaining Deviations from the Fifty 
Percent Rule: A Multimodal Approach to the Selection of Cases for Litigation (March 1995) 
Geoffrey P. Miller, Das Kapital: Solvency Regulation of the American Business Enterprise (April 
1995) 
Richard Craswell, Freedom of Contract (August 1995) 
J. Mark Ramseyer, Public Choice (November 1995) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property in an Age of Software and Biotechnology (November 1995) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social Norms and Social Roles (January 1996) 

 
1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 

10. 

11. 
12. 
13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

27. 
28. 
29. 

30. 
31. 

32. 

33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 

61 

37. 

38. 

39. 
40. 

41. 

42. 
43. 

44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 

50. 

51. 

52. 

54. 

55. 

56. 

57. 
58. 

59. 
60. 

61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 

66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 

70. 

53.  

J. Mark Ramseyer and Eric B. Rasmusen, Judicial Independence in Civil Law Regimes: 
Econometrics from Japan (January 1996) 
Richard A. Epstein, Transaction Costs and Property Rights: Or Do Good Fences Make Good 
Neighbors? (March 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost‐Benefit State (May 1996) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, The Economics of Legal Disputes Over the Ownership 
of Works of Art and Other Collectibles (July 1996) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and David B. Mustard, Crime, Deterrence, and Right‐to‐Carry Concealed 
Handguns (August 1996) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Health‐Health Tradeoffs (September 1996) 
G. Baird, The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: An Overview of the Law and Economics of Financially 
Distressed Firms (March 1997) 
Richard A. Posner, Community, Wealth, and Equality (March 1997) 
William M. Landes, The Art of Law and Economics: An Autobiographical Essay (March 1997) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Behavioral Analysis of Law (April 1997) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and Kermit Daniel, Term Limits and Electoral Competitiveness: Evidence from 
California’s State Legislative Races (May 1997) 
Randal C. Picker, Simple Games in a Complex World: A Generative Approach to the Adoption of 
Norms (June 1997) 
Richard A. Epstein, Contracts Small and Contracts Large: Contract Law through the Lens of 
Laissez‐Faire (August 1997)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, and David Schkade, Assessing Punitive Damages (with Notes 
on Cognition and Valuation in Law) (December 1997)  
William M. Landes, Lawrence Lessig, and Michael E. Solimine, Judicial Influence: A Citation 
Analysis of Federal Courts of Appeals Judges (January 1998)  
John R. Lott, Jr., A Simple Explanation for Why Campaign Expenditures are Increasing: The 
Government is Getting Bigger (February 1998)  
Richard A. Posner, Values and Consequences: An Introduction to Economic Analysis of Law 
(March 1998)  
Denise DiPasquale and Edward L. Glaeser, Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better 
Citizens? (April 1998)  
Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler, A Behavioral Approach to Law and 
Economics (May 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Does a Helping Hand Put Others At Risk?: Affirmative Action, Police 
Departments, and Crime (May 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Second‐Order Decisions (June 1998) 
Jonathan M. Karpoff and John R. Lott, Jr., Punitive Damages: Their Determinants, Effects on Firm 
Value, and the Impact of Supreme Court and Congressional Attempts to Limit Awards (July 1998) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Self‐Help in the Digital Jungle (August 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., How Dramatically Did Women’s Suffrage Change the Size and Scope of 
Government? (September 1998) 
Kevin A. Kordana and Eric A. Posner, A Positive Theory of Chapter 11 (October 1998) 
David A. Weisbach, Line Drawing, Doctrine, and Efficiency in the Tax Law (November 1998) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Customary International Law (November 1998) 
John R. Lott, Jr., Public Schooling, Indoctrination, and Totalitarianism (December 1998) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Private Broadcasters and the Public Interest: Notes Toward A “Third Way” 
(January 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to the Law of Evidence (February 1999) 
Yannis Bakos, Erik Brynjolfsson, Douglas Lichtman, Shared Information Goods (February 1999) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Intellectual Property and the Academic Enterprise (February 1999) 
Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Status Signaling and the Law, with Particular 
Application to Sexual Harassment (March 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Must Formalism Be Defended Empirically? (March 1999) 

62 

71. 

72. 
73. 

74. 

75. 
76. 

77. 

78. 

79. 
80. 
81. 

82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 

86. 

89. 

90. 

91. 
92. 
93. 

94. 
95. 

96. 

97. 
98. 
99. 

100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 

Jonathan M. Karpoff, John R. Lott, Jr., and Graeme Rankine, Environmental Violations, Legal 
Penalties, and Reputation Costs (March 1999) 
Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Rethinking Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 1999) 
John R. Lott, Jr. and William M. Landes, Multiple Victim Public Shooting, Bombings, and Right‐to‐
Carry Concealed Handgun Laws: Contrasting Private and Public Law Enforcement (April 1999)  
Lisa Bernstein, The Questionable Empirical Basis of Article 2’s Incorporation Strategy: A 
Preliminary Study (May 1999) 
Richard A. Epstein, Deconstructing Privacy: and Putting It Back Together Again (May 1999) 
William M. Landes, Winning the Art Lottery: The Economic Returns to the Ganz Collection (May 
1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Daniel Kahneman, Do People Want Optimal Deterrence? 
(June 1999) 
Tomas J. Philipson and Richard A. Posner, The Long‐Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of 
Technological Change (June 1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Ironing Out the Flat Tax (August 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of Contract Law under Conditions of Radical Judicial Error (August 1999) 
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, and Daniel Kahneman, Are Juries Less Erratic than Individuals? 
Deliberation, Polarization, and Punitive Damages (September 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation Canons (September 1999) 

Richard A. Posner, The Theory and Practice of Citations Analysis, with Special Reference to Law 

and Economics (September 1999) 

Randal C. Picker, Regulating Network Industries: A Look at Intel (October 1999) 

Cass R. Sunstein, Cognition and Cost‐Benefit Analysis (October 1999) 

Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Optimal Timing and Legal Decisionmaking: The Case 

of the Liquidation Decision in Bankruptcy (October 1999) 

87. 

Gertrud M. Fremling and Richard A. Posner, Market Signaling of Personal Characteristics 

(November 1999) 

88. 

Matthew D. Adler and Eric A. Posner, Implementing Cost‐Benefit Analysis When Preferences Are 

Distorted (November 1999) 
Richard A. Posner, Orwell versus Huxley: Economics, Technology, Privacy, and Satire (November 
1999) 
David A. Weisbach, Should the Tax Law Require Current Accrual of Interest on Derivative 
Financial Instruments? (December 1999) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Law of Group Polarization (December 1999) 
Eric A. Posner, Agency Models in Law and Economics (January 2000) 
Karen Eggleston, Eric A. Posner, and Richard Zeckhauser, Simplicity and Complexity in Contracts 
(January 2000)  
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Boyd’s Legacy and Blackstone’s Ghost (February 2000)  
David Schkade, Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, Deliberating about Dollars: The Severity Shift 
(February 2000) 
Richard A. Posner and Eric B. Rasmusen, Creating and Enforcing Norms, with Special Reference to 
Sanctions (March 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Property Rights in Emerging Platform Technologies (April 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein and Edna Ullmann‐Margalit, Solidarity in Consumption (May 2000) 
David A. Weisbach, An Economic Analysis of Anti‐Tax Avoidance Laws (May 2000, revised May 
2002)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Human Behavior and the Law of Work (June 2000)  
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Harmless Error (June 2000) 
Robert H. Frank and Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and Relative Position (August 2000)  
Eric A. Posner, Law and the Emotions (September 2000)  
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Default Principles (October 2000)  

63 

105. 

106. 
107. 

108. 

109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 

113. 

114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 
118. 
119. 

120. 
121. 

122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 

126. 
127. 
128.   
129. 

130. 

131.   

132. 
133. 

134. 

135. 
136. 

137. 

138. 
139. 

140. 

Jack Goldsmith and Alan Sykes,  The Dormant Commerce Clause and the Internet (November 
2000) 
Richard A. Posner, Antitrust in the New Economy (November 2000) 
Douglas Lichtman, Scott Baker, and Kate Kraus, Strategic Disclosure in the Patent System 
(November 2000) 
Jack L. Goldsmith and Eric A. Posner, Moral and Legal Rhetoric in International Relations:  A 
Rational Choice Perspective (November 2000) 
William Meadow and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Experts (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Conjunction and Aggregation (December 2000) 
Saul Levmore, Puzzling Stock Options and Compensation Norms (December 2000) 
Richard A. Epstein and Alan O. Sykes, The Assault on Managed Care:  Vicarious Liability, Class 
Actions and the Patient’s Bill of Rights (December 2000) 
William M. Landes, Copyright, Borrowed Images and Appropriation Art:  An Economic Approach 
(December 2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Switching the Default Rule (January 2001) 
George G. Triantis, Financial Contract Design in the World of Venture Capital (January 2001) 
Jack Goldsmith, Statutory Foreign Affairs Preemption (February 2001) 
Richard Hynes and Eric A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Consumer Finance (February 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Academic Fads and Fashions (with Special Reference to Law) (March 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Controlling Agencies with Cost‐Benefit Analysis:  A Positive Political Theory 
Perspective (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird, Does Bogart Still Get Scale?  Rights of Publicity in the Digital Age (April 2001) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Control Rights, Priority Rights and the Conceptual 
Foundations of Corporate Reorganization (April 2001) 
David A. Weisbach, Ten Truths about Tax Shelters (May 2001) 
William M. Landes, What Has the Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990 Accomplished? (May 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Social and Economic Rights?  Lessons from South Africa (May 2001) 
Christopher Avery, Christine Jolls, Richard A. Posner, and Alvin E. Roth, The Market for Federal 
Judicial Law Clerks (June 2001)  
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Bankruptcy Decision Making (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Regulating Risks after ATA (June 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Laws of Fear (June 2001) 
Richard A. Epstein, In and Out of Public Solution:  The Hidden Perils of Property Transfer (July 
2001) 
Randal C. Picker, Pursuing a Remedy in Microsoft:  The Declining Need for Centralized 
Coordination in a Networked World (July 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, and Ilana Ritov, Predictably Incoherent 
Judgments (July 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Courts Should Not Enforce Government Contracts (August 2001) 
Lisa Bernstein, Private Commercial Law in the Cotton Industry:  Creating Cooperation through 
Rules, Norms, and Institutions (August 2001) 
Richard  A.  Epstein,  The  Allocation  of  the  Commons:  Parking  and  Stopping  on  the  Commons 
(August 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Arithmetic of Arsenic (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner, Richard Hynes, and Anup Malani, The Political Economy of Property Exemption 
Laws (September 2001) 
Eric A. Posner and George G. Triantis, Covenants Not to Compete from an Incomplete Contracts 
Perspective (September 2001) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Probability Neglect:  Emotions, Worst Cases, and Law (November 2001) 
Randall S. Kroszner and Philip E. Strahan, Throwing Good Money after Bad? Board Connections 
and Conflicts in Bank Lending (December 2001) 
Alan O. Sykes, TRIPs, Pharmaceuticals, Developing Countries, and the Doha “Solution” (February 
2002) 

 

 

64 

141. 
142. 

143. 

144. 

145. 
146. 

147. 

148. 

149. 
150. 

151. 
152. 

153. 

154. 
155. 

156. 
157. 
158. 

159. 

160. 
161 

162. 

163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 

170. 

171. 
172. 
173. 
174. 

175. 

Edna Ullmann‐Margalit and Cass R. Sunstein, Inequality and Indignation (February 2002) 
Daniel N. Shaviro and David A. Weisbach, The Fifth Circuit Gets It Wrong in Compaq v. 
Commissioner (February 2002) (Published in Tax Notes, January 28, 2002) 
Warren F. Schwartz and Alan O. Sykes, The Economic Structure of Renegotiation and Dispute 
Resolution in the WTO/GATT System (March 2002, Journal of Legal Studies 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, HIPAA on Privacy:  Its Unintended and Intended Consequences (March 2002, 
forthcoming Cato Journal, summer 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Thinking Outside the Little Boxes (March 2002, Texas Law Review) 
Eric A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Contract Law after Three Decades:  Success or Failure (March 
2002) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright as Entry Policy:  The Case of Digital Distribution (April 2002, The 
Antitrust Bulletin) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxes and Torts in the Redistribution of Income (April 2002, Coase Lecture 
February 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Beyond the Precautionary Principle (April 2002) 
Robert W. Hahn and Cass R. Sunstein, A New Executive Order for Improving Federal Regulation?  
Deeper and Wider Cost‐Benefit Analysis (April 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Copyright as a Rule of Evidence (May 2002, updated January 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Steady the Course: Property Rights in Genetic Material (May 2002; revised 
March 2003) 
Jack Goldsmith and Cass R. Sunstein, Military Tribunals and Legal Culture: What a Difference 
Sixty Years Makes (June 2002) 
William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner, Indefinitely Renewable Copyright (July 2002) 
Anne Gron and Alan O. Sykes, Terrorism and Insurance Markets: A Role for the Government as 
Insurer? (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Interpretation and Institutions (July 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, The Rights of Animals: A Very Short Primer (August 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Avoiding Absurdity? A New Canon in Regulatory Law (with Notes on 
Interpretive Theory) (August 2002) 
Randal C. Picker, From Edison to the Broadcast Flag: Mechanisms of Consent and Refusal and the 
Propertization of Copyright (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, A Theory of the Laws of War (September 2002) 
Eric A. Posner, Probability Errors: Some Positive and Normative Implications for Tort and Contract 
Law (September 2002) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, Charismatic Code, Social Norms, and the Emergence of Cooperation on the 
File‐Swapping Networks (September 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Does the X‐Tax Mark the Spot? (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Conformity and Dissent (September 2002) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Hazardous Heuristics (October 2002) 
Douglas Lichtman, Uncertainty and the Standard for Preliminary Relief (October 2002) 
Edward T. Swaine, Rational Custom (November 2002) 
Julie Roin, Truth in Government: Beyond the Tax Expenditure Budget (November 2002) 
Avraham D. Tabbach, Criminal Behavior: Sanctions and Income Taxation: An Economic Analysis 
(November 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, In Defense of “Old” Public Health: The Legal Framework for the Regulation of 
Public Health (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Animals as Objects, or Subjects, of Rights (December 2002) 
David A. Weisbach, Taxation and Risk‐Taking with Multiple Tax Rates (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, The End of Bankruptcy (December 2002) 
Richard A. Epstein, Into the Frying Pan: Standing and Privity under the Telecommunications Act of 
1996 and Beyond (December 2002) 
Douglas G. Baird, In Coase’s Footsteps (January 2003) 

65 

176. 

177. 

178. 

179. 

180. 
181. 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 

187. 
188. 
189. 
190. 
191.  
192. 
193. 
194. 

195. 

196. 

197. 

198. 

199. 

200. 
201. 
202. 
203. 
204. 

205. 
206. 
207. 

208. 

209. 

210. 
211. 
212. 

David A. Weisbach, Measurement and Tax Depreciation Policy: The Case of Short‐Term Assets 
(January 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, Understanding Statutory Bundles: Does the Sherman Act Come with the 1996 
Telecommunications Act? (January 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman and Randal C. Picker, Entry Policy in Local Telecommunications: Iowa Utilities 
and Verizon (January 2003) 
William Landes and Douglas Lichtman, Indirect Liability for Copyright Infringement: An 
Economic Perspective (February 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Moral Heuristics (March 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, Regulation by Networks (March 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Class Actions: Aggregation, Amplification and Distortion (April 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, The “Necessary” History of Property and Liberty (April 2003) 
Eric A. Posner, Transfer Regulations and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis (April 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler, Libertarian Paternalizm Is Not an Oxymoron (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of WTO Rules on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (May 
2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Safeguards Mess: A Critique of WTO Jurisprudence (May 2003) 
Alan O. Sykes, International Trade and Human Rights: An Economic Perspective (May 2003) 
Saul Levmore and Kyle Logue, Insuring against Terrorism—and Crime (June 2003) 
Richard A. Epstein, Trade Secrets as Private Property: Their Constitutional Protection (June 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Lives, Life‐Years, and Willingness to Pay (June 2003) 
Amitai Aviram, The Paradox of Spontaneous Formation of Private Legal Systems (July 2003) 
Robert Cooter and Ariel Porat, Decreasing Liability Contracts (July 2003) 
David A. Weisbach and Jacob Nussim, The Integration of Tax and Spending Programs (September 
2003) 
William L. Meadow, Anthony Bell, and Cass R. Sunstein, Statistics, Not Memories: What Was the 
Standard of Care for Administering Antenatal Steroids to Women in Preterm Labor between 1985 
and 2000? (September 2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, What Did Lawrence Hold? Of Autonomy, Desuetude, Sexuality, and Marriage 
(September 2003) 
Randal C. Picker, The Digital Video Recorder: Unbundling Advertising and Content (September 
2003) 
Cass R. Sunstein, David Schkade, and Lisa Michelle Ellman, Ideological Voting on Federal Courts 
of Appeals: A Preliminary Investigation (September 2003)  
Avraham D. Tabbach, The Effects of Taxation on Income Producing Crimes with Variable Leisure 
Time (October 2003) 
Douglas Lichtman, Rethinking Prosecution History Estoppel (October 2003) 
Douglas G. Baird and Robert K. Rasmussen, Chapter 11 at Twilight (October 2003) 
David A. Weisbach, Corporate Tax Avoidance (January 2004) 
David A. Weisbach, The (Non)Taxation of Risk (January 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Liberty versus Property? Cracks in the Foundations of Copyright Law (April 
2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy (January 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and John C. Yoo, A Theory of International Adjudication (February 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Are Poor People Worth Less Than Rich People? Disaggregating the Value of 
Statistical Lives (February 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein, Disparities and Discrimination in Health Care Coverage; A Critique of the 
Institute of Medicine Study (March 2004) 
Richard A. Epstein and Bruce N. Kuhlik, Navigating the Anticommons for Pharmaceutical Patents: 
Steady the Course on Hatch‐Waxman (March 2004) 
Richard A. Esptein, The Optimal Complexity of Legal Rules (April 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Alan O. Sykes, Optimal War and Jus Ad Bellum (April 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Persistent Puzzles of Safeguards: Lessons from the Steel Dispute (May 2004) 

66 

213. 

214. 

215. 

216. 
217. 
218. 

219. 

220.  

221. 
222. 
223. 
224. 

225. 
226. 
227. 
228. 
229. 
230. 
231. 
232. 
233. 
234. 
235. 

236. 

237. 
238. 

239. 

240. 
241. 

242. 

Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Labor 
within and between Law Firms (April 2004) 
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard, Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of 
Knowledge: Theory and Evidence from the Legal Services Industry (April 2004) 
James C. Spindler, Conflict or Credibility: Analyst Conflicts of Interest and the Market for 
Underwriting Business (July 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, The Economics of Public International Law (July 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman and Eric Posner, Holding Internet Service Providers Accountable (July 2004) 
Shlomo Benartzi, Richard H. Thaler, Stephen P. Utkus, and Cass R. Sunstein, Company Stock, 
Market Rationality, and Legal Reform (July 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Group Judgments: Deliberation, Statistical Means, and Information Markets 
(August 2004, revised October 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Precautions against What? The Availability Heuristic and Cross‐Cultural Risk 
Perceptions (August 2004) 
M. Todd Henderson and James C. Spindler, Corporate Herroin: A Defense of Perks (August 2004) 
Eric A. Posner and Cass R. Sunstein, Dollars and Death (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Cyber Security: Of Heterogenity and Autarky (August 2004) 
Randal C. Picker, Unbundling Scope‐of‐Permission Goods: When Should We Invest in Reducing 
Entry Barriers? (September 2004) 
Christine Jolls and Cass R. Sunstein, Debiasing through Law (September 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of the Use of Citations in the Law (2000) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Cost‐Benefit Analysis and the Environment (October 2004) 
Kenneth W. Dam, Cordell Hull, the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act, and the WTO (October 2004) 
Richard A. Posner, The Law and Economics of Contract Interpretation (November 2004) 
Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, A Social Networks Theory of Privacy (December 2004) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Minimalism at War (December 2004) 
Douglas Lichtman, How the Law Responds to Self‐Help (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, The Decline of the International Court of Justice (December 2004) 
Eric A. Posner, Is the International Court of Justice Biased? (December 2004) 
Alan O. Sykes, Public vs. Private Enforcement of International Economic Law: Of Standing and 
Remedy (February 2005) 
Douglas G. Baird and Edward R. Morrison, Serial Entrepreneurs and Small Business Bankruptcies 
(March 2005) 
Eric A. Posner, There Are No Penalty Default Rules in Contract Law (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Copyright and the DMCA: Market Locks and Technological Contracts (March 
2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein and Adrian Vermeule, Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? The Relevance of 
Life‐Life Tradeoffs (March 2005) 
Alan O. Sykes, Trade Remedy Laws (March 2005) 
Randal C. Picker, Rewinding Sony: The Evolving Product, Phoning Home, and the Duty of 
Ongoing Design (March 2005) 
Cass R. Sunstein, Irreversible and Catastrophic (April 2005) 
 

67 

