University of Chicago Law School 
University of Chicago Law School 
Chicago Unbound 
Chicago Unbound 

Journal Articles 

2005 

Environmental Law 
Environmental Law 

Cass R. Sunstein 

Faculty Scholarship 

Irreversible and Catastrophic: Global Warming, Terrorism, and 
Irreversible and Catastrophic: Global Warming, Terrorism, and 

Other Problems Eleventh Annual Lloyd K. Garrison Lecture on 
Other Problems Eleventh Annual Lloyd K. Garrison Lecture on 

Follow this and additional works at: https://chicagounbound.uchicago.edu/journal_articles 

 Part of the Law Commons 

Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Cass R. Sunstein, "Irreversible and Catastrophic: Global Warming, Terrorism, and Other Problems Eleventh 
Annual Lloyd K. Garrison Lecture on Environmental Law," 23 Pace Environmental Law Review 3 (2005). 

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty Scholarship at Chicago Unbound. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in Journal Articles by an authorized administrator of Chicago Unbound. For more 
information, please contact unbound@law.uchicago.edu. 

PACE  ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW  REVIEW

Volume  23 

Winter 2005-2006 

Number  1

ELEVENTH  ANNUAL  LLOYD  K.  GARRISON
LECTURE  ON  ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW

Irreversible and Catastrophic: Global
Warming, Terrorism, and Other Problems,

CASS  R.  SUNSTEIN*

Thank you very much.  It's  a pleasure  to be here.  I  had a fan-
tastic  afternoon  on  the  premises.  I'm  really  grateful  for  the
warmth  and  the  substantive  conversations.

What  I'm  going  to  be  focusing  these  comments  on  is  some-
thing called the precautionary  principle.  And if you  haven't heard
of  the  precautionary  principle,  you  will  before  long.  The  precau-
tionary  principle  is  very  popular  in  Europe.  It  is  an  idea  for  or-
ganizing  environmental  protection  and  regulation  of  risk  in
general.  The  United  States  in  the last few  years  has  fought  hard
against  the precautionary  principle  on  grounds  that  are  occasion-
ally  obscure.  But  one  thing  that  we  can  say  is  that  the  United
States,  in the last few years,  has  in one  sense firmly endorsed  the
precautionary  principle.  In  defending  the  Iraq  War  and  many
measures  to  fight  against  terrorism,  the  United  States  empha-
sized  that  you  don't  need  certainty  that  harm  will  occur;  you

1.  This is  a  lightly  edited transcript  of the  lecture  Professor  Sunstein  delivered
at Pace  University School  of Law on April 25,  2005.  The lecture drew heavily on three
works:  Cass  Sunstein,  Irreversible and  Catastrophic, CORNELL  L.  REV.  (forthcoming
2006);  CAss  SUNSTEIN,  LAws  OF  FEAR:  BEYOND  THE  PRECAUTIONARY  PRINCIPLE (2005);
and  Cass  Sunstein,  Beyond  the  Precautionary Principle, 151  U.  PA.  L.  REV.  1003
(2003)  [hereinafter  Beyond the Precautionary Principle].

*  Karl  N.  Llewellyn  Distinguished  Service  Professor  of Jurisprudence,  Univer-

sity  of Chicago  Law  School  and Department  of Political  Science.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 3 2005-2006

4 

PACE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23

should  take  preventive  action  because  of the  risk that  harm  will
occur.  The  basic  idea  behind  the  precautionary  principle  is  that
we  should  build  a  margin  of  safety  into  our  decisions-an  idea
that  environmentalists  in  Europe  emphasize  in  thinking  about
global warming,  in  thinking  about  destruction  of the  ozone  layer,
in  thinking  about clean  air and  clean  water  in  general.2  With re-
spect  to  terrorism,  the  Iraq  War  was  explicitly  defended  on  the
grounds  that we  need  a  margin  of safety  in  all  decision-making.
The White  House  did  not believe  that Saddam  Hussein  definitely
had weapons  of mass  destruction.  It  thought that there was some
probability  that  he  had  weapons  of  mass  destruction,  and  that
that was  enough  to justify  action.

I'm  going  to  be  making  three  suggestions  here.  The  first  is
that  the  precautionary  principle  is  incoherent.  Risks  are  on  all
sides  of social  situations.  It's just  not possible to  take precautions
against  all  of them  at the  same  time.  So  what  Europe  celebrates
is an unfortunate basis for  environmental  and other decision-mak-
ing,  because  it 
leads  to  paralysis  and  not  to  environmental
protection.

My  second  claim is  that  the precautionary  principle  gives  the
misleading  appearance  of helpfulness  just because  of the way the
human mind  works.  When  we think about risks-and  maybe  this
will resonate  with  your  experience  in the last six  months and pos-
sibly  in  the next  six  months-when  we think about  risks,  human
minds  tend  to  single  out one  or two from  the  background  and fix-
ate  on them  without  thinking about  the extent  to which  efforts  to
reduce  the risks  on  which we're  fixating  may  give  rise  to  risks  of
their  own.  So  if  you  think,  I'm  nervous  about  going  into  a  bad
neighborhood  at night, I  think I'll  stay home, it  may be  that  stay-
ing home  introduces  its  own risks with respect  to health  or other-
wise.  So  what  I'm  going  to  suggest  is  that  the  precautionary
principle,  which  is  incoherent,  gives  the  appearance  of coherence
and  usefulness  because  human  minds  select  some  of the universe
of relevant  risks.

Those  are  negative  claims.  Those  are  points  against  our
friends  in  Europe.  The  third  claim  is  an  effort  to  rescue  the  pre-

2.  See,  e.g.,  INDOR  GOKLANY,  THE  PRECAUTIONARY  PRINCIPLE:  A  CRITICAL  AP-
PRAISAL  OF  ENVIRONMENTAL  RISK ASSESSMENT  5  (2001)  ("'In order  to protect  the  envi-
ronment,  the  precautionary  approach  shall  be  widely  applied  by  States  according  to
their  capabilities'"  (quoting  U.N.  Conference  on  Environment  & Development  (UN-
CED),  June 3-14,  1992,  Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, Principle
15,  U.N.  Doc. A/CONF.151/26  (Aug.  12,  1992)  [hereinafter  Principle 15])).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 4 2005-2006

2005-2006]

IRREVERSIBLE  AND  CATASTROPHIC

cautionary  principle  by  suggesting  that  if  we  focus  on  a  subset of
risks,  including  environmental  risks,  we  can  make  progress  to-
ward  a more  sensible  way  of orienting  our  laws  and policies.  And
the  subset that  I'm going to  identify includes  those  risks  that are
irreversible  and  catastrophic.  Hence  my  title,  Irreversible and
Catastrophic-my cheerful  title-the thought being that irreversi-
ble  and catastrophic  risks are ones  against which we  ought to take
precautions,  and  those  are  the  ones  for  which  the  precautionary
principle  is  sensible.  The  rest is just going to be  footnotes.  But in
law-professor  fashion,  there  are  going  to  be  a  lot  of footnotes  and
they're  going to  be  pretty  long.  So  here  goes.

Footnote  one:  What is the precautionary  principle  with which
I  started?  There  are  some  versions  that  are  weak  and  there  are
some  versions  that are  strong.  The weak  version  suggests  that a
lack  of decisive  evidence  of harm  ought  not to be  a  ground  for re-
fusing  to regulate.  Think for  example  about  smoking  and  tobacco
regulation  in  the  1960s.  Then,  we  didn't  have  decisive  evidence
that smoking was going to cause  cancer,  but sensible  people didn't
smoke  on  the  ground  that  they  were  going  to  build  a  margin  of
safety into  their decision by saying, The fact that there isn't defin-
itive  evidence  isn't  a  reason  to  refrain  from  precaution.  So  the
1992  Rio  Declaration  involving  climate  change  says, "'lack  of full
scientific  certainty  shall  not  be  used  as  a  reason  for  postponing
cost-effective  measures  to  prevent  environmental  degradation."' 3
Think  for  example  about global warming  or air pollution  or water
pollution,  where we  don't have  a full  sense of how  large  the harm
is.

The ministerial  declaration  of an international  conference  on
the  protection  of  the  North  Sea  is  in  the  same  weak  vein:  "'[A]
precautionary  principle  is necessary  which  may  require  action  to
control inputs  of [dangerous]  substances  even  before  a causal  link
has  been  established  by  absolutely  clear  scientific  evidence."' 4
Straightforward  and  sensible.

Here's  a  stronger  version,  from  a group  of environmentalists
in the  1990s:  "When an  activity raises  threats  of harm  to human

3.  BJORN  LOMBORG,  THE  SKEPTICAL ENVIRONMENTALIST:  MEASURING  THE  REAL
STATE  OF  THE  WORLD  348  (Hugh  Matthews  trans.,  Cambridge  Univ.  Press  2001)
(quoting Principle 15, supra note  2).

4.  Julian  Morris,  Defining the Precautionary Principle, in RETHINKING  RISK AND
THE  PRECAUTIONARY  PRINCIPLE  1,  3 (Julian Morris ed.,  2000) (quoting Second Interna-
tional  Conference  on  the  Protection  of the  North  Sea  (SICPNS), Ministerial Declara-
tion (1987)).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 5 2005-2006

6 

PACE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23

health  or  the  environment,  precautionary  measures  should  be
taken,  even  if  some  cause  and  effect  relationships  are  not  fully
established  scientifically.  In this context, the  proponent of the ac-
tivity, rather than the public, should bear the burden  of proof."5  It
should  be  clear  that that's  a  stronger  version  because  it  puts  the
burden  of proof on  those  who  want  to  expose  people  to  risk.  This
version doesn't merely say lack of certainty of harm is  not a reason
for  refraining  from  regulation.  So  the  proponent  of  an  activity
bears  the  burden  of proof.

In Europe, it's  sometimes said that a margin  of safety must be
built  into  all  decision-making. 6  And  think  of  that  as  the  strong
version  of the  precautionary  principle-a  margin  of  safety  in  all
decision-making.  So,  in  one  European  understanding,  "[A]ction
should  be  taken  to  correct  a  problem  as  soon  as  there  is  evidence
that harm  may  occur..  . ."7  The possibility  that harm may  occur
is  a justification  for  corrective  action.

And,  "The precautionary  principle  mandates  where  there  is a
risk of significant  damage to  others or to  future  generations,  then
decisions  should  be made  so  as  to prevent  such activities  from be-
ing  conducted  unless  and  until scientific  evidence  shows  that the
damage  will not occur."8  That doesn't build  a margin  of safety.  It
doesn't  just  shift  the  burden  of  proof.  It  says  that  it  must  be
shown  by  a  proponent  of action  that  damage  will  not occur.

The  weak  version-that  is  the  version  that  says  lack  of full
scientific  certainty  isn't  a  reason  to  refrain  from  action-is  fine
and  good.  I  don't  have  anything  to  say  against  that.  What  I'm
going to try to criticize  as incoherent  is  the  strong version, that is,
the version that requires  a demonstration of absolute safety by the
proponents  of the  activity.

Now,  to  get  at  the problem  we  need  some  examples.  And  let
me  just give  four  in  which  the  precautionary  principle  has  been
invoked,  both  in the  United  States  and  in  Europe,  as  a  basis  for
thinking  about  environmental  protection.  One  example,  obvi-

5.  Id.  at  5  (citation  omitted).  A  strong  version  is  defended  in  Carolyn  Raffen-
sperger  & Peter  L.  deFur,  Implementing the  Precautionary Principle: Rigorous Sci-
ence and Solid Ethics, 5  HUM.  & ECOLOGICAL  RISK  ASSESSMENT  933  (1999).

6.  See  LOMBORG,  supra note  3,  at 349.
7.  Beyond  the  Precautionary Principle, supra  note  1,  at  1013  (quoting  Paul
McFedries,  Precautionary  Principle,  WordSpy,  Jan.  23,  2002,  at  http://www.
logophilia.conWordSpy/precautionaryprinciple.asp).

8.  The  Cloning of Humans  and  Genetic Modifications: Hearing Before  the  S.
Comm.  on Appropriations, 107th  Cong.  (2002)  (statement of Dr.  Brent  Blackwelder,
President,  Friends  of the  Earth).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 6 2005-2006

2005-20061

IRREVERSIBLE  AND  CATASTROPHIC

ously,  is  genetic  engineering  of organisms.  Many  people  who  like
the  precautionary  principle  (especially  in  Europe,  and  there's  a
movement  to  this  effect  in  the  United  States),  say  that  genetic
modifications  of organisms  give rise to risks. 9  We  don't know their
magnitude.  In the view  of some  people, we  should  take a  precau-
tionary  approach  and  not  allow  genetic  engineering. 10

Nuclear  power  is  another  one,  where  the  halting  of nuclear
power  plants in the United  States  in the last couple  of decades  has
been  driven  in  part  by  a  precautionary  idea  that  nuclear  power
gives  rise  to  serious  risks.1 1

Global warming is  an area where  the United States'  perceived
intransigence  has  been  criticized  in  Europe  for  failing  to  be  pre-
cautionary.  It's  not clear that  global warming  will  occur  in  a way
that's  extremely  damaging, or  at least some  people  so  think.  And
that, Europeans  say, is not a reason  for refraining from  action; the
fact  that  it's  a  possible  risk  means  that  we  should  take  very  ag-
gressive  regulatory  action. 12

The  Bush  Administration's  most  controversial  early  decision,
see  if you  remember  this,  involved  arsenic  in  drinking  water,  in
which  the  Bush  Administration  suspended  the  Clinton  Adminis-
tration's  proposal,  which  was  to  reduce  arsenic  levels  from  fifty
parts  per billion  to ten  parts  per  billion. 13

In  all four  of those  areas,  the precautionary  principle  is  said
to require  aggressive protection.  What I'm going  to try to argue  is
that that's just not  so, that for  each  of these  problems  the precau-
tionary principle  forbids the very steps that it  requires.  Let's  go at
it  first  by  thinking  about genetic  engineering  of food  and arsenic.
Genetic  engineering  of  food,  it's  true,  gives  rise  to  risk;  and  the
precautionary  principle  calls  for  precautions  against  risk.  The
problem  is,  if we  don't  allow  genetic  engineering  of food,  we  will
give rise to risks of starvation; because  there's some  hope,  specula-

9.  See  Benoit Morel  et al., Pesticide Resistance, the Precautionary Principle, and
the Regulation of Bt Corn: Real  Option and Rational Option Approaches to Decision-
making, in BATTLING  RESISTANCE  To  ANTIBIOTICS  AND  PESTICIDES  184,  185  (Ramanan
Laxminarayan  ed.,  2003).

10.  See  GOKLANY,  supra note  2,  at 55.
11.  Energy  Information  Administration,  Nuclear  Power,  http://www.eia.doe.gov/
(last  visited  Sept.  29,  2005)  ("No
cneaf/nuclear/page/nuc-generation/newnuc2.html 
new  commercial reactors  have  come on  line in  the United  States  since  Watts Bar 1 in
1996.").

12.  See, e.g.,  Graciela  Chichilnisky & Geoffrey  Heal, Global Environmental Risks,

7  J.  ECON.  PERSPS.  65,  76  (1993).

2261,  2269,  2298  (2002).

13.  See  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  The Arithmetic of Arsenic, 90  GEO.  L.  J.  2255,  2257,

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 7 2005-2006

8 

PACE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23

tive  to  be  sure,  that  genetic  engineering  of food  can  deliver  safe
and  nutritious  and inexpensive  food to  countries  where  this  is  lit-
erally lifesaving. 14  A ban on genetic engineering of food is  literally
dangerous  to  people  who  have  a  great  deal  to  gain  from  genetic
modification.  So my suggestion is  that the precautionary  principle
forbids  genetic  modification  of  food  because  it  gives  rise  to  risk,
but the  precautionary  principle  also  forbids  forbidding  of genetic
engineering  of food  because forbidding  genetic  engineering  of food
gives  rise  to  risk.

Let's  explore  another  example:  arsenic.  The  former  head  of
the  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  Administrator  Christine
Whitman, said in the early days  of trying to defend  the suspension
of regulation, that there's  something we're worried  about, which is
the expense  of the rule that costs $210  million, and for some  water
systems  that  burden  is  going  to  be  very  hard.1 5  And  for  some
users  of water  that's  going  to  be  very  expensive-up  to  $400  per
year  or  more.16  And  what  we're  worried  about  is they're  going  to
stop  relying  on  their  water  companies  and  they're  going  to  start
using wells, local  wells.' 7  What worries  us  about those local  wells
is  that  they  are  contaminated.' 8  What  Administrator  Whitman
argued,  and  it  wasn't  an  implausible  worry  (it  may  have  been
wrong,  but it  wasn't implausible),  was  that the arsenic  regulation
would  give  rise  to  risks  of its  own  in the form  of increased  use  of
highly  contaminated,  dirty  well  water.

Now,  mind  you,  for  the  purposes  of the  precautionary  princi-
ple,  the mere  fact  that the Administrator  has  legitimate  concerns
should  be  decisive.  Remember?  The  burden  of proof switches-
the possibility  that harm may  occur is  the reason  for the invoking
of the  principle.  The  arsenic  regulation  stands  both  mandated
and  condemned  by  the  precautionary  principle.  Mandated,  be-
cause  there's  a  risk  of cancer  from  levels  of  arsenic  in  drinking
water  that  President  Bush  was  thinking  of  allowing.19  But  the

14.  See  Chantal  Pohl  Nielson  & Kym  Anderson,  Golden Rice  and the  Looming
GMO Trade Debate: Implications for the Poor 19 (Ctr. for  Int'l Econ. Stud.,  Discussion
Paper  No.  0322,  2003),  available at http://adelaide.edu/au/cies/papers/0322.pdf.

15.  See  Sunstein,  supra note  13,  at 2294-95.
16.  See  id. at  2294.
17.  See News Hour with Jim Lehrer: Interview with Christine Whitman (PBS tele-
vision  broadcast  Apr.  17,  2001),  available  at  http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/
white-house/jan-june0l/whitman_4-17.html.

18.  See  id.
19.  Cat  Lazaroff, Bush Administration Throws Out New Arsenic Standard, ENV'T

NEWS  SERVICE,  Mar.  20,  2001,  http://ens-newswire.com/ens/mar2001/2001-03-20-
06.asp.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 8 2005-2006

2005-2006]

IRREVERSIBLE  AND  CATASTROPHIC

precautionary  principle  also  forbids  the very regulation  because  it
gives  rise  to  substitute  risks.

Think  for  a  moment,  if  you  would,  about  nuclear  power  and
global  warming,  my  other  two  examples.  Nuclear  power  seems
condemned by the precautionary  principle.  But its proponents  say
the  following:  If  you're  really  worried  about  air  pollution  and
global  warming,  you  ought  to  rely  on  nuclear  power,  which  is
much  better  than  fossil  fuels  which  come  from  coal-fired  power
plants. 20  So they  say that aggressive  regulation  of nuclear  power
runs  afoul  of the  precautionary  principle  because  it  gives  rise  to
risks  in  the form  of increased  reliance  on  coal-fired  power  plants,
which make  the air dirty and which  contribute  to global warming.
Forbidding  nuclear  power  seems  required  by  the  precautionary
principle,  and in a way  it  is.  But forbidding  nuclear  power is  also
unacceptable  under the precautionary  principle because  if you  for-
bid  nuclear  power,  you're  going  to  increase  reliance  on  coal-fired
power  plants.

What  I'm  saying  with  these  examples-genetic  modification,
nuclear  power,  and  arsenic-is  that risks  are  on  all sides  of social
situations.  Not just one.  If you  push against one  risk, it's inevita-
ble that you'll  be giving rise to  another risk.  This  should be  famil-
iar  in  everyday  life.  Think,  for  example,  of  that  risk-avoidance
strategy  called  "staying at home  all  day."  Probably  not very good
for  your  health.  Or think, for  example,  of the  strategy  of driving,
rather  than  flying,  for  those  who  fear  the  risks  associated  with
airplanes.  Driving is risky, too.  There  is  no way of avoiding  risks.
What  about  global  warming?  Well,  the  simple  fact  is  that
regulations,  especially  in poor  countries,  that cost  a  lot  to reduce
carbon  dioxide  emissions,  will  increase-significantly-expendi-
tures. 2 1  And  if the  expense  is  high  enough,  those  expenditures
will give  rise to risks,  for example  in the form of dying of too  much
heat-if energy  prices  increase,  you  might  not  be  able  to  afford
fans  or  air-conditioning.  That  last  point  about  global  warming
suggests  that the very  fact  that risk regulation  is often  expensive
creates  risks  of  its  own. 22  And  in  fact,  there  are  studies  sug-

20.  See  Nuclear  Energy  Institute,  Environmental  Preservation,  http://www.nei.

orglindex.asp?catnum=2&catid=38  (last visited  Sept.  29,  2005).

21.  See  Randall  Lutter  &  John  F.  Morrall,  III,  Health-Health Analysis: A  New
Way  to Evaluate Health and Safety  Regulation, 8  J.  RISK  &  UNCERTAINTY  43  (1994).
22.  See  Robert  W.  Hahn  et  al.,  Do Federal Regulations Reduce  Mortality? (AEI-
for  Reg.  Stud.,  2000),  available  at  http://ssrn.com/

Brookings  Joint  Ctr. 
abstract=259786.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 9 2005-2006

10 

PACE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23

gesting  that in  the  United  States,  every  time  the  government  re-
quires  industry  to  spend  $10  million  to  $30  million,  at  least  one
person  dies. 23  The  mechanism  by  which  the  multi-million  dollar
expenditure  produces  death  isn't  agreed  upon, 24  but  think for  ex-
ample  of  the  simple  fact  that  a  very  expensive  regulation  will
probably  increase  unemployment  and therefore  poverty, neither  of
which  is  good  for your  health.  So my  suggestion  is that under  the
precautionary  principle  (which  forbids  government  from  allowing
possible  risk to occur),  any  regulation  of an  environmentally  risky
activity is both required by  the precautionary  principle  and forbid-
den  by  the  precautionary  principle  for  the  simple  reason  that  it
imposes  a possible  risk  of death,  against which  we  ought  to  take
precautions.

So  this  is  why  I  suggest  that  the  precautionary  principle,  in
its  strong forms,  is  incoherent.  It can be  made  sensible  only  if we
single  out  some  subset  of the risks  that  social  situations  present.
But  it's  impossible  to  be  universally  precautionary.  We  can  be
precautionary  with respect  to  some  risks,  but not  with  respect  to
risks  in  general.  And  if this  seems  implausible,  try it.  Try  to  be
precautionary  in general  in the next day or  two.  Chances  are  that
precautions  will  give  rise  to  the  very  risks  that  precautions
induce.

Why  then  are  Europeans  and  many  others  excited  about  the
precautionary  principle?  I  suggest  that the  precautionary  princi-
ple  becomes  operational  because  of the  way  human  minds  work,
and  more  particularly,  because  in  assessing  risks we  tend to  rely
on  something  that  has  an  elaborate  name-but  it's  a  pretty
straightforward  idea-called  the  "availability  heuristic."  The
availability  heuristic  says that  we  assess  risks  by thinking  about
the  ease  with  which  we  can  recall  an  example  in which  the  risk
came  to  fruition. 2 5  So  if we  don't  know  a  lot  about  certain  situa-
tions,  we  ask,  Can  we  think  of  an  example  in  which  the  risk
occurred?

Here's  a  simple  way  of illustrating  the  use of the availability
heuristic:  Suppose that you ask people how many words  on a page,

23.  Michael  Gough,  Ph.D,  "Environmental  Cancer"  Isn't  What  We  Thought  or
Were  Told  (Mar.  6,  1997),  http://cato.org/testimony/ct-mg030697.html  (written testi-
mony  before  Senate  Cancer  Coalition).

24.  See  Lutter  & Morrall, supra note  21,  at 49  tbl.1.
25.  See  Amos  Tversky  &  Daniel  Kahneman,  Judgment  Under  Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases, in  JUDGMENT  UNDER  UNCERTAINTY:  HEURISITCS  AND  BIAsEs  3,
11-14  (Daniel  Kahneman  et  al.  eds.,  1982).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 10 2005-2006

2005-20061

IRREVERSIBLE  AND  CATASTROPHIC

a  random  page,  have  as  the  last three  letters  "ing."  Most  people
tend  to  say  twenty,  twenty-five,  fifteen.  If you  ask  people  how
many words  on this page have  as the second-to-last  letter "n," peo-
ple  say  four,  five.  The  reason  is  that  it's  easy  to  think  of  "ing"
words,  but not  easy to  think  of words  that have  as  the second-to-
last letter "n."  So,  too, in thinking about whether  something  gives
rise  to  risks:  Available  instances  often  drive  judgments.

An  example  is  a  recent  cross-national  study  of risk from  ter-
rorism  and  risk  from  SARS,  the  illness that  struck  Canada,  and
China  much worse, in the last few  years. 26  The  studies  found that
Americans  believed  that  the  terrorism  risk  is  much  higher  than
the  SARS  risk, and  Canadians  just  the  opposite.2 7  The  disparity
was  so large that it  couldn't easily be justified by reference  to real-
ity.28  It's just that Americans  have  an  acute  sense,  because  of the
September  11th attacks,  of the risk of terrorism,  and the  sense  of
the risk is  probably  wildly inflated.  People  tend to think that the
chance  that  they,  themselves,  will  die  in  a  terrorist  attack  next
year  is  about  8  percent-far  too  high2 9-whereas  we  don't  have
experiences  with  SARS.  So  the  fact  that  terrorism  is  available
cognitively  and  comes  to  our  minds,  and  SARS  doesn't,  helps  to
drive judgments.

A  study  of risk  perceptions,  in  the  sense  of  public  concerns
about  risks  in the  United  States  for  the  past  thirty  years  or  so,
showed-and  this  is  a  happy  fact-that  our  concern  about  risks
basically  tracks  fluctuations  in  real  risks.30  So  as  certain  risks
increase,  people  are  more  worried,  and  as  other  risks  decrease,
people are less worried.  But there was  one exception to this happy
finding,  which  is  panic  bred  by  vivid  illustrations  in  which  harm
came  to  fruition.3 1  So  the  mistakes,  in which  people  had  an  un-
justly  inflated  sense  of  risk,  came  from  fear  of  suicide,  fear  of
herpes,  and fear of AIDS, in contexts in which  the vivid new exam-
ple  made people  far  more  scared than reality warranted. 3 2  So  the
conclusion  is  when  people  got  it  wrong,  it  was  because  a  particu-
larly  vivid case  received  considerable  media  attention. 3 3

26.  See generally Neil Feigenson  et al., Perceptions of Terrorism and Disease Risk:

A  Cross-National Comparison, 69  Mo.  L.  REV.  991  (2004).

27.  See  id.  at  996.
28.  See  id.  at  1008.
29.  See  id.  at  996.
30.  Id.
31.  Id.
32.  See  Feigenson  et  al.,  supra note  26,  at  996.
33.  Id.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 11 2005-2006

12 

PACE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23

A study of Kenya  and  Malawi  tried to figure  out when  people
are  worried  about  and  taking  precautions  against  AIDS.3 4  When
do  they  use  in  their  own  behavior  precautionary  principles  to
guard  against  the  AIDS  risk?  The  answer  was  clear:  Had  they
observed  or  heard  about  an  illness  or  death?35  The  availability
heuristic  drove  people's  risk assessment.

My  suggestion  is,  when  the  United  States  takes  precautions
against  the  risks  posed  by  terrorism,  we're  not  following  the pre-
cautionary  principle  in  the  abstract;  it's  because  that  particular
risk  is  available  to  our  minds.  When  Europeans  are  especially
concerned  about mad-cow  disease or  other risks, it's because  those
are  the  risks  that  are  cognitively  available  to  them.  I  am  sug-
gesting  that  Europe  does  not  in  fact  practice  precaution  in  gen-
eral-that  it's  not  a  possibility. 
It  adopts  a  precautionary
principle  against  a particular  subcategory  of risks  that are readily
available  to  European  thinking, just  because  of their own  recent
experiences.

Okay,  that's  the  end  of  that  footnote,  which  ends  with  the
claim  that  it  is  not  possible  to be  precautionary  in  general-Eu-
rope  isn't.  The  apparent  workability  of the  precautionary  princi-
ple  rests  on  the  fact  that  human  minds  naturally  fixate  on  some
sets  of risks  and  not  on  others.  When  in  the  context  of genetic
modification  of  food,  many  people  are  nervous  about  the  risks
posed  by  genetic  modification-and  it  does  pose  risks-they  are
fixating  on  those,  and  are  ignoring  the risks  posed  by  refusing to
use  a  technology  that  has  a lot  of promise. 36  I'm  not  suggesting
that  we  go  forward  with  genetic  modification  more  than  we  al-
ready have,  or that those  who like it  are right  and those who  don't
like it  are wrong.  I'm only suggesting that the precautionary  prin-
ciple  isn't  a  helpful  entry into  the  debate.

Okay,  now  these  footnotes  have  been  destructive.  Now  we're
going to  try  to  get  constructive.  What  I'm  going  to  try to  do  is to
figure out  a way in which the precautionary  principle can be made

34.  See Jere R. Behrman  et al., Social Networks, HIVIAIDS, and Risk Perceptions
1  (Penn. Inst.  for  Econ.  Res.,  Working  Paper  No.  03-007,  2003),  available at http:l!
ssrn.com/abstract=382844.
35.  See id.  at  18-19.
36.  See  the  discussion  of  risk-related  tradeoffs  in  John  D.  Graham  &  Jonathan
Baert Wiener,  Confronting Risk  Tradeoffs, in  RISK  Vs.  RISK:  TRADEOFFS  IN  PROTECT-
ING  HEALTH  AND  THE  ENVIRONMENT  1,  1-41  (John D.  Graham  & Jonathan  Baert  Wie-
ner  eds.,  1995);  Cass  R.  Sunstein,  Health-Health Tradeoffs,  in  RISK  AND  REASON:
SAFETY,  LAW,  AND  THE  ENVIRONMENT  133,  133-52  (2002);  Nielson  &  Anderson, supra
note  14.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 12 2005-2006

2005-2006]

IRREVERSIBLE  AND  CATASTROPHIC

workable  for  purposes  of  environmental  law  and  environmental
protection,  possibly  with  regulation  in  general,  conceivably  even
for human  life.

A first way  of trying to  get at this might be to  suggest that  in
the  environmental  context  there's  a  distinctive  argument  for  a
precautionary  principle.  Meaning,  there  is  an  argument  that
would  say  that  environmental  risks  in particular  deserve  precau-
tionary thinking, even  if risks in general  don't and can't.  The idea
might  be  that environmental  risks  are  frequently  long-term  risks
and  not short-term  risks-which  is  to say incidents  of their occur-
rence  won't  readily  come  to  mind  like  the  risks  associated  with
workplace  accidents-and  also  that the  risks often  are  faced  by a
lot  of people  at once  in the  form of a  statistical  probability, rather
than  a  concentrated  group  of people  who  are  organized.  In  addi-
tion,  environmental  risks  are  often  faced  by  wildlife  and  animals,
which  don't  have  a  voice  in  environmental  protection.  You  might
say, for these  reasons,  there is a  kind of a built-in  problem, which
is  that  environmental  risks  will  receive  less  attention  than  they
deserve.  It's  possible.

But I  want to try to build  up  a coherent  precautionary  princi-
ple  more  narrowly  by  focusing  on  the  problems  of irreversibility
and  potential  catastrophe.  Let's  notice  that  some  subsets  of the
risks  that the human species  faces  are irreversible  if they come  to
fruition-meaning  that  if they happen,  they happen  permanently
or  they can't  be  stopped  except  at extraordinary  cost.  Extinction
of  species  from  which  human  beings  benefit  or not,  or which  are
important  to human beings for  moral or  other reasons-that's  per-
manent.  It's  an  irreversible  risk.  Genetic  modification  has  three
irreversible  risks  associated  with  it,  one  of which  is  its  effect  on
pest  resistance;  that  may  be  either  literally  irreversible  or  ex-
tremely  costly  to  reverse.3 7  The  risks  associated  with  global
warming have  an  irreversible  feature  in that carbon  dioxide  is in
the  atmosphere  for  a  long,  long  time-hundreds  of years.3 8  So
what we're doing  now will face  future generations;  unless  technol-
ogies  change,  there's  not much  they can  do  about that.

37.  See Justus Wesseler,  Resistance Economics of Transgenic Crops Under Uncer-
tainty: A  Real  Option Approach, in BATTLING  RESISTANCE  TO  ANTIBIOTICS  AND  PESTI-
CIDES,  supra note  9,  at  214,  215-16.

38.  See ARIC Atmosphere, Climate & Environment  Information  Programme,  Car-

bon  Dioxide,  http://www.ace.mmu.ac.uk/Resources/Teaching-PacksfKey-Stage_4/Cli-
mateChange/02t.html  (last visited  Sept. 22,  2005).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 13 2005-2006

14 

PACE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23

It  just  so  happens  that  some  formulations  of the precaution-
ary principle  are  alert to this point.  The United Nations  Economic
Conference  for  Europe  in  1992  said,  "'Where  there  are  threats  of
...  irreversible  damage,  lack of full scientific  certainty shall not be
used  as  a  reason  for postponing  ...  measures  to prevent  environ-
mental  degradation."' 39  The  final  declaration  of the  first  Euro-
pean Seas  at Risk Conference  says that "'if the worst case  scenario
for  a certain  activity is  serious  enough,  then  even  a  small  amount
of doubt  as  to  safety  of that  activity  is  sufficient  to  stop  it  taking
place,"'  with clear  emphasis  in  context  on  the irreversible  nature
of the  worst-case  scenario. 40

One  way  to get  at the  problem  of irreversibility  is  just  to no-
tice that  when  human beings  are  asked  how much they value  en-
vironmental  goods,  they  tend  to  put  their  values  into  three
separate  categories:  (1)  How  much  would  you  value  to  use  the
good?  Call  it  a pristine  area or  a beach.  And  then  there's  a  dollar
amount:  (2)  How  much  would  you  be  willing  to  pay  to  have  an
option  to  use  the  good  in  the  future?  Then  there's  an  amount
that's separate  and  not  identical  to  the amount  that people would
pay  to  use  the  good.  And  (3),  there's  also  an  amount  that people
would  be  willing  to  pay  to  maintain  the  existence  of  the  good.
What  I  want  to  emphasize  here  is  that people  are  willing  to  pay
something to have an  option to prevent a harm that could prove  to
be  irreversible  in the  future.

If we  notice  the existence  of option  value, we  can just  say that
when  a decision,  a regulatory  decision,  involves  uncertainty  about
what  the  future  will  bring,  and  when  it's  possible  to  resolve  the
uncertainty  as time  goes  on,  and when  one  or more  alternatives  is
irreversible,  it  just makes  a lot  of sense  to pay  something  extra  to
protect  against the irreversible  bad  outcome.  So  my suggestion is,
if there's  an irreversible  harm on the  one  side and  a reversible  one
on the other, we  should  pay the extra  amount  to protect ourselves
against  the irreversible  harm.

What  might  this  mean  concretely?  Well,  I've  referred  to
global  warming  as  a  problem  of irreversibility.  People  do dispute
the  nature  of the  threat from  global  warming.  And  so  it's  tempt-
ing to  say  what President  Bush has said,  which is that we  should
wait  to  regulate  until  we  have  more  information.  Often  it  does

39.  GoKLANY,  supra note  2,  at 5  (quoting Principle 15, supra note  2).
40.  See  Richard  B.  Stewart,  Environmental Regulatory Decision Making Under
Uncertainty, in  AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  LAW  AND  ECONOMICS  OF  ENVIRONMENTAL
POLICY:  ISSUES  IN  INSTITUTIONAL  DESIGN  (2002).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 14 2005-2006

2005-20061

IRREVERSIBLE  AND  CATASTROPHIC

make  sense  to  say,  if  you  don't  know  the  magnitude  of the  prob-
lem,  you  should  wait  until  you  have  clearer  information  about  it
before  spending  money to  prevent  it.  But  in  the  context  of global
warming,  there's  a  big  problem  with  waiting,  which  is  the  irre-
versible  effect  of greenhouse  gas  emissions  on  atmospheric  con-
centrations  of those  gases. 4 1  So  if we  make  emission  cuts  now,
we're  essentially  purchasing  an  option  to  enable  global  warming
to  be  stopped  or  slowed  in  the  future  at  a  lower  cost.  The  basic
idea  is  that  because  of the  irreversible  nature  of carbon  dioxide
emissions,  to  expend  resources  now  serves  to  protect  the  future
wealth  by  reducing  their costs.

This  is just to  describe  a narrow  version  of the  precautionary
principle.  Let's  call it  the Irreversible  Harm Precautionary  Princi-
ple,  which  doesn't  run  afoul  of the problem  of incoherence,  which
doesn't  depend  on  any  selectivity  in human  minds,  depending  on
whether  examples  are  evident.  It  just  draws  attention  to  a  dis-
tinctive feature of certain kinds  of risks-environmental  risks  and
some  risks  posed  by  terrorists.

Now  let's  shift from  the  problem  of  irreversible  harm  to  the
problem of catastrophic  harm.  Let's try to  figure  out how  to make
these  go  away, these  harms,  or to protect  the human  race  against
them.  Let's  have  a  little thought  experiment.  And  if  I  had paper
or  a  mind-reading  machine,  or  had  enough  paper  to  pass  out  to
you,  we  actually  could  find  the  answers.  But  think,  if you  will,
about the following problem:  Which do you  think is a higher prior-
ity-a one-in-ten  risk that  2000  people  will  die?  Or a  one-in-one-
million  chance  that 200  million  people  will  die?  Suppose  that the
government  is  deciding between two programs:  one that will  elimi-
nate  a one-in-ten  risk that  2000  people  will  die,  and one  that will
eliminate  the one-in-a-million  risk that 200 million people will die.
Which  should  the  government  choose?  They  cost  the  same.

One  question  you  might  ask yourself,  if you're  the  President
of the United  States is, Which of those should  you give  higher pri-
ority to?  Another  question you  might ask yourself is, What do you
think most  people  would  say  in answering  that question?

I've  now  asked hundreds  of people  that question,  and  the an-
swer  is  clear.  The vast majority  of people  think that  the one-in-a-
million chance  of 200 million  deaths is lower priority.  Most people
think  the  one-in-ten  chance  of 2000  deaths  deserves  more  atten-
tion  than  the  one-in-one-million  chance  of 200  million  deaths.

41.  See  RICHARD  A.  POSNER,  CATASTROPHE  161  (2004).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 15 2005-2006

16 

PACE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23

There  are  a  couple  of ways  to  think  about  this  public  judg-
ment  that  the  higher  probability  of that  outcome  is  worth  more
than the very low probability catastrophe.  The first thing to think
of,  if we're  economists,  involves  expected  value. 4 2  And  let's just
notice  that  the  two  problems  I  gave  have  identical  expected  val-
ues:  200  lives.  Each  involves  200  lives.  So  if human  beings  con-
sider  the  one-in-ten  chance  of 2000  deaths  to  be  higher  priority
than  the tiny  chance  of 200  million  deaths,  there's  possibly  some-
thing  wrong  there.  On  standard  accounts  of  rationality,  they
should  be  treated  the  same.  That's  the  first  cut  of the  problem:
that there  seems  to  be  something  in human  cognition  that  some-
times  treats  tiny probabilities,  even  of extreme  disaster,  as worth
less  than  their  expected  value. 4 3  And  maybe  the  United  States'
caution  about global warming has  something to do with the under-
valuing  of low  risks  of catastrophe.

But  I  think  it's  worse  than  that-that  people's  answers  are
even  worse  than  they  seem.  Think  for  a  moment  what  it  would
mean  for  200  million people  to  die.  Would  that be  a  simple  arith-
metic  multiplier  of 2000  people  dying-is  it  just  a  matter  of ad-
ding  the  right  number  of zeroes?  Probably  it's  a  lot  worse  than
that.  If  200  million Americans  die-and  that's what  I've  given in
the survey-then, our nation  is  devastated.  What  kind  of institu-
tions would we have if two-thirds  of our country is lost? What kind
of  government  could  we  have?  How  many  generations  would  it
take  to  replicate  the  system  we  now  have?  Two  hundred  million
deaths is  a lot worse than  adding the relevant  zeros  to  2000.  And
human  beings  seem  not  easily  to  understand  that fact.

This is just  a suggestion  that catastrophic  risks  deserve  some
kind  of  precautionary  principle,  if  only  to  overcome  the  human
tendency  to treat them  as  worth less  than their  expected value,  if
you  simply  do  the  multiplication;  and  worth  much less  than their
real  expected  value,  if you  consider  the ancillary  effects.  In  some
domains  we want to be risk averse.  That is,  we want  to build  in  a
big  margin  of safety.  And  for  a  risk  of  catastrophic  harm,  that
makes  a  lot  of sense.

I  am  attempting  to  sketch  a  distinctive  precautionary  princi-
ple.  It  has  a  name,  which  won't  surprise  you:  the  Catastrophic
Harm  Precautionary  Principle.  And  the  Catastrophic  Harm  Pre-
cautionary  Principle  is intended  as  a  narrow  replacement  for  the

42.  See  Tversky  & Kahneman,  supra note  25,  at 14-18.
43.  See  Gary  H. McClelland  et al.,  Insurance for Low-Probability Hazards: A  Bi-

modal Response to  Unlikely Events, 7  J.  RISK  &  UNCERTAINTY  95,  95,  102  (1993).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 16 2005-2006

2005-2006]

IRREVERSIBLE  AND  CATASTROPHIC

precautionary  principle.  We  have  to  make  a  few  qualifications.
One  is that  if you  make  efforts  to  reduce  catastrophic  harm, you
might give  rise  to  catastrophic  risk just by  doing  that.  It's  possi-
ble.  And so  the Catastrophic Harm Precautionary  Principle  some-
times  does  run into  the  incoherence  problem.

Example:  the Iraq War.  Put to one side  the question  whether
you're for  it  or  against it.  The  Iraq War was  best defended  on  the
grounds that it  averted  a catastrophic  harm, and best criticized  on
the grounds  that it  gave rise  to a catastrophic  harm in the form of
increased  hatred  of  the  United  States  and  better  resources  and
manpower  for terrorist  activity.  So,  this is just to suggest that the
Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary  Principle  is  coherent,  but  it
can't  work  in  a  case  in  which  its deployment  gives  rise  to  a cata-
strophic  harm  of its  own.

Now  turn  to  global  warming.  Those  who  think we  ought  not
to be  taking very expensive  steps to avert global warming  have, as
the best arrow in their quiver, the suggestion that those very steps
give  rise  to  risk  of  catastrophic  harm.  This  argument  would  be
plausible  if  the cost of reducing  global  warming significantly  were
so  high  that  it  would  produce  mass  unemployment  and  poverty.
But in a  context in which there is  a catastrophic  harm on  one  side
and  no catastrophic  harm introduced by reducing  it,  then we have
an argument  for  the  Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary  Principle.
I  want to be  a  little more  concrete  about  all  this by  introduc-
ing  a  couple  of  suggestions  for  the  use  of the  Catastrophic  Harm
Precautionary  Principle.  The  first  is  that  even  for  the  Cata-
strophic  Harm  Precautionary  Principle,  the  cost  matters.  If  it
costs  a  fortune  to  eliminate  a  catastrophic  harm,  that's  different
from if you can eliminate the catastrophic harm  at essentially  zero
cost.  The  second  thing to  say  about  the  Catastrophic  Harm  Pre-
cautionary  Principle  is,  we  want  to  know  who  is  being  protected
from  catastrophic  harm  and who  is  paying  the  cost of eliminating
catastrophic  harm.  In  the context  of global  warming, it's just  the
case  that  the  United  States  has  probably  relatively  little  to  fear
from global warming.  First, because our economy does  not depend
fundamentally  on  agriculture, 44  and  second  because  we're  rich
and  can  adapt  pretty  well.4 5  So  even  in  the  worst-case  scenarios
for  global  warming,  the  United  States  is  probably  not  at  severe
risk.  Poor  countries,  on  the  other  hand,  for  which  agriculture  is

44.  See WILLIAM  D.  NORDHAUS  &  JOSEPH BOYER,  WARMING  THE  WORLD:  ECONOMIC

MODELS  OF  GLOBAL  WARMING  69-98 (2000).

45.  See  id. at  96-98.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 17 2005-2006

18 

PACE ENVIRONMENTAL  LAW  REVIEW

[Vol.  23

everything,  are  in  very  severe  danger.46  They  have  a  risk of eco-
nomic  devastation,  of very  serious  human  health  problems,  and
they don't  have  the wealth  to respond  to the risk.4 7  Global  warm-
ing is  plausibly seen (it's not typically  analyzed  in these terms, but
it's  plausibly  seen  in  these  terms),  as  a  kind  of  tort  imposed  by
wealthy  countries  on  poor  ones  through  their  global  greenhouse
gas  emissions.  And  that has  to  bear  on  the  analysis  of what  the
obligations  of wealthy  countries  are.

If  we  bear  that  in  mind,  we  are  well  on  the  way  to  develop-
ing-to  tie  all bits  of the argument  together-an  Irreversible  and
Catastrophic  Harm  Precautionary  Principle.  The  principle  could
be  used  for  the  context  of global warming-suggesting  that while
the Kyoto  Protocol  was  imperfect,  other  approaches  would  make
sense  as  a  way  of  combating  global  warming.  Consider  an  ap-
proach  that would  require  general  and  broad  participation  by  In-
dia and  China,  as well  as  by Germany  and Russia  and  the  United
States.  Such  an approach  might give  a permit for  greenhouse  gas
emissions  to  poor  countries  because  they  need  them  in  order  to
have  their  economies  grow.  Poor  countries  would  be  allowed  to
sell  their  emissions  rights  to  the  United  States,  which  has  more
money-and  that  would  be  good  on  distributional  grounds,  be-
cause  it  would help  the poor.  A  sensible  approach  would  have  in-
creasing  intensity  of  reductions  over  time,  so  it  doesn't  cause
massive  poverty  and  unemployment  in  the  short  run,  but  allows
reductions 
to  occur  with  increasing  severity  as  technology
changes.  In the United  States,  we  might have  a  kind  of cap-and-
trade  system,  where  we  cap  our  carbon  dioxide  emissions,  or
greenhouse  contributions  generally,  and  allow trading  internally.
Some  system  of  this  general  kind  would  work;  it  wouldn't
bankrupt  us;  it  would  be  a  response  to  the  tort-like  character  of
the current  situation;  and it  would  adopt not a general idea of pre-
caution,  but  precaution  in  this  particular  context  of catastrophic
and  irreversible  risk.

I'm  just  about  done.  My  first  and  negative  submission  has
been  that the precautionary  principle is incoherent.  It  forbids  the
very steps that it  requires.  My second argument has been that the
precautionary  principle  gives  the  illusion  of  coherence  because
human  minds  naturally  fixate  on  a  subset  of  risks  that  human
beings  encounter,  and  so  the  precautionary  principle  operates

46.  See  id. at 69-98.
47.  See  id.  at 98.

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 18 2005-2006

2005-20061

IRREVERSIBLE  AND  CATASTROPHIC

with disregard for  the other risks  that are inevitably  part of social
situations  and  that  are  sometimes  introduced  by  precautions
themselves.  The  Irreversible  Harm  Precautionary  Principle,
which maybe  underlies  the  Endangered  Species  Act,48  is  coherent.
To  evaluate  it,  we have to know  the magnitude  of the risk that the
Irreversible  Harm Precautionary  Principle is combating.  The Cat-
astrophic  Harm  Precautionary  Principle  is  coherent.  The  major
qualification  is  that we have  to  make  sure that  our steps that  are
reducing  catastrophic  harm  aren't  themselves  introducing  cata-
strophic  harm.

So my  main  suggestion has  been that to operate  sensibly,  any
counsel  for  precaution  has to be  attentive  to the full  range  of con-
sequences,  not simply  to a  subset of them.  But  suitably modified,
a  precautionary  principle  focused  on  irreversibility  and  potential
catastrophe  deserves  a prominent  place  not only  in the  law  of en-
vironmental  protection,  but in the  everyday  life  of human  beings.
Thank  you.

48.  Endangered  Species Act  of 1973,  16  U.S.C.  §§  1531-1543  (2000).

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 19 2005-2006

HeinOnline  -- 23 Pace Envtl. L. Rev. 20 2005-2006

